PEMBROKE PINES, FLORIDA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-60 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2048, passed 8-6-25
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS
CITY COMMISSIONERS
CITY COMMISSIONERS
MAYOR         Angelo Castillo
VICE-MAYOR    Michael A. Hernandez
COMMISSIONER  Maria Rodriguez
COMMISSIONER  Thomas Good, Jr.
COMMISSIONER  Jay D. Schwartz
              
CITY OFFICIALS
CITY MANAGER  Charles F. Dodge
CITY CLERK    Gabriel Fernandez
CITY ATTORNEY Samuel S. Goren
 
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF
PEMBROKE PINES, FLORIDA
Section
ARTICLE I - CREATION AND POWERS
   
1.01   Short Title
   
1.02   Creation and Powers
   
1.03   Extraterritorial Powers
   
1.04   Construction
   
1.05   Seal
   
1.06   Form of Government
   
1.07   Jurisdiction, Extent
   
1.08   Title or Right to Easement to and Jurisdiction over Property is Vested
in Municipality
   
1.09   Fiscal Year
   
1.10   Definitions
ARTICLE II - CORPORATE LIMITS
   
2.01   Description of Corporate Limits
ARTICLE III - LEGISLATURE
   
3.01   City Commission; Powers, Compensation and Qualifications
   
3.02   Commission Members
   
3.03   Nonpartisan Elections
   
3.04   Qualifications, Filing Fees and Oaths
   
3.05   Mayor
   
3.06   Vice-Mayor
   
3.07   Procedure
   
3.08   Compensation and Expenses
   
3.09   Prohibitions
   
3.10   Oath Required
   
3.11   Vacancies; Forfeiture of Office; Filling of Vacancies
   
3.12   Ordinances and Resolutions
   
3.13   Emergency Ordinances
ARTICLE IV - ADMINISTRATION
   
4.01   City Manager
   
4.02   City Manager – Appointment; Removal; Compensation
   
4.03   Acting City Manager
   
4.04   Powers and Duties of City Manager
   
4.05   City Clerk; Deputy City Clerk
   
4.06   Department of Finance
   
4.07   City Attorney
   
4.08   Personnel System
   
4.09   Fire Department
   
4.10   Police Department
   
4.11   Public Services Department
   
4.12   Procurement
   
4.13   Commission Auditor
   
4.14   Annual Written Review of Charter Officers
ARTICLE V - BUDGET
   
5.01   Estimates of Revenues and Expenditures; Information to be Included
   
5.02   Preparation of Proposed Budget
   
5.03   Public Hearing on Budget
   
5.04   Adoption of Budget
   
5.05   Reserved
   
5.06   When Contracts and Expeditures Prohibited
   
5.07   Appropriations to Lapse at End of Year
   
5.08   Capital Improvement Program
   
5.09   Independent Audit
ARTICLE VI - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
   
6.01   Initiative and Referendum
   
6.02   Commencement of Proceedings
   
6.03   Petitions
   
6.04   Procedure for Filing
   
6.05   Referendum Petitions; Suspension of Effect of Ordinance
   
6.06   Action on Petitions
   
6.07   Results of Election
ARTICLE VII - CHARTER REVIEW BOARD
   
7.01   Creation of Board; Membership
   
7.02   Qualifications and Term for the Charter Review Board
   
7.03   Expense Fund
   
7.04   Organization
   
7.05   Forfeiture of Membership Office
   
7.06   Duties and Functions
ARTICLE VIII - GENERAL LIMITATIONS
   
8.01   Printing, Recording and Indexing of Ordinances and Resolutions
   
8.02   Authority to Codify Ordinances
   
8.03   Sale of City Property
   
8.04   Chief of Police or His or Her Designee Shall Attend All Commission
Meetings and Execute Their Commands
   
8.05   Conflicting Charter Amendments
   
8.06   Appropriations to Libraries and Charitable Institutions
   
8.07   No Contract Executed Until Bond Ordinance Effective
   
8.08   Acquisition of Property for Municipal Purposes
ARTICLE IX - TRANSITION SCHEDULE
   
9.01   Reserved
   
9.02   Ordinances Preserved
   
9.03   Rights of Officers and Employees
   
9.04   Pending Matters
   
9.05   Effective Date
   
9.06   Severability of Charter Provisions
ARTICLE I
CREATION AND POWERS
SECTION 1.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This shall be known as the Charter of the City of Pembroke Pines, Broward
County, Florida.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12)
SECTION 1.02 CREATION AND POWERS.
   The City of Pembroke Pines, Florida, is hereby created which shall have all
governmental, corporate and proprietary powers to enable it to conduct
municipal government, perform municipal functions and render municipal services
except as otherwise provided by law.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84)
SECTION 1.03 EXTRATERRITORIAL POWERS.
   Any extraterritorial powers conferred upon the City of Pembroke Pines,
Florida, by special act or Charter shall continue in full force and effect.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84)
SECTION 1.04 CONSTRUCTION.
   The powers of the City shall be construed liberally in favor of the City,
limited only by the Constitution, general law and specific limitations
contained herein.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84)
SECTION 1.05 SEAL.
   The City may adopt and use a common seal and have the power to alter it.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84)
SECTION 1.06 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government of the City is known as the City Commission-Manager.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 1.07 JURISDICTION, EXTENT.
   The jurisdiction and powers of the City extends over all streets, alleys,
sewers, parks, and all lands within its area, whether platted or unplatted, and
to and over all waters, waterways, streams, bays, bayous, submerged land, water
bottoms and wharves, and to and over all persons, property and property rights,
occupations, businesses and professions, whatsoever, within its boundaries. The
jurisdiction and powers of the City, its officers or agents shall also extend
to areas outside of the City’s geographical boundaries when the City, its
officers or agents are in hot pursuit.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84)
SECTION 1.08 TITLE OR RIGHT TO EASEMENT TO AND JURISDICTION OVER PROPERTY IS
VESTED IN MUNICIPALITY.
   The title or right to easements in and jurisdiction over all streets,
thoroughfares, parks, alleys, public locks and sewers within the City, and all
other property and municipal plants of the City, and the title or right to all
property of every kind and nature which the City presently has or may acquire
within or outside the City, or which may vest in it or be dedicated to it for
its use or for the public use, is vested in the municipality.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84)
SECTION 1.09 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of October of each
year and end on the thirtieth day of September of the following year.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84)
SECTION 1.10 DEFINITIONS.
   Definitions as used in this Charter:
   (a)   And means and, and the word “or” means or, in whatever context the
words are used.
   (b)   Charter means a set of written procedures or instructions which
establishes required guidelines for the City Commission when conducting
municipal services for the City of Pembroke Pines.
   (c)   Charter Review Board means an established panel of residents who are
domicile in the City of Pembroke Pines and who exercise the right to review and
make recommendations as necessary to the City Commission with regards to
procedures as outlined in the Charter.
   (d)   Chief of Fire Department or Fire Chief means the officer in command of
the City Fire Department.
   (e)   Chief of Police means the officer in command of the City Police
Department.
   (f)   City Clerk means the City Clerk of the City of Pembroke Pines,
Florida.
   (g)   City Commission or Commission means the City Commission or Acting City
Commission of the City of Pembroke Pines, Florida.
   (h)   City Manager means the person or entity selected to serve either by
the Commission, or as necessary, by the City Manager, in his or her absence to
perform the duties as outlined in the Charter for the position of City Manager.
   (i)   Domicile means the place at which a person is physically present and
that the person regards as home; or the permanent home to which a person
intends to return and remain even if they may reside elsewhere. Incidents of a
domicile shall include, but not be limited to, the place where a person is
registered to vote.
   (j)   Finance Director means the Director of Finance of the City of Pembroke
Pines, Florida.
   (k)   Four-fifths (4/5ths) vote of Commission, wherever indicated, the
necessity of a four-fifths (4/5ths) vote of Commission means that four (4)
members of the Commission must vote in the affirmative.
   (l)   Highway is a public way embracing a right-of- way, street, easement,
boulevard, road, avenue, lane, alley, parkway, court, terrace and place and may
embrace sidewalks if the Commission so prescribes.
   (m)   Local improvement is an improvement defined by this Charter and made
under the provisions thereof.
   (n)   Main sanitary sewer is a conduit on, above, or under the surface of
the ground into which the sewage from a sanitary sewer or system of sanitary
sewers flows or is pumped to be conducted to a place of disposal.
   (o)   Masculine gender extends to and includes the feminine and neuter
gender and vice versa.
   (p)   Municipal general election means the City Election held on the second
Tuesday of March in every even numbered year.
   (q)   Municipality means the municipality of the City of Pembroke Pines as
established by this Charter, unless otherwise indicated.
   (r)   Ordinance means an official, legislative action of the City
Commission, which action is a regulation of a general and permanent nature and
enforceable as a local law.
   (s)   Person includes individuals, children, firms, associations, joint
adventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates,
fiduciaries, corporations and all other groups or combinations.
   (t)   Property owner means the owner or holder of any right, title or
interest in or to real property, either legal or equitable, within the City
limits.
   (u)   Reside means to dwell permanently and continuously for 180 days in the
City of Pembroke Pines unless otherwise specified; manifesting a genuineness of
intent establishing an on-going physical presence at one location together with
indicia that his or her presence is something more than merely temporary or
transitory.
   (v)   Resolution means an expression of the City Commission on matters of
official concern, opinion, or administration, of a temporary character, or a
provision for the disposition of a particular item of the administrative
business of the governing body.
   (w)   Sanitary sewer is an underground conduit or system of conduits for the
passage of sewage and may embrace pumping stations and outlets where deemed
necessary, manholes, lampholes, flush tanks and other necessary appurtenances.
   (x)   Sanitary sewer connection is a conduit constructed for the purpose of
conducting sewage from  buildings or other structures to a sanitary sewer or
main sanitary sewer and shall embrace that part of the sanitary sewer
connection lying within the street, highway, alley, avenue, easement, right-of-
way, park, parkway, court, terrace, place, road or way upon or within which the
sanitary sewer or main sanitary sewer is constructed.
   (y)   Sewer includes both sanitary and storm sewers unless a contrary
intention is shown.
   (z)   Shall denotes an imperative or mandatory obligation.
   (aa)   Sidewalk is a path for pedestrians along a highway.
   (bb)   Singular includes the plural and vice versa.
   (cc)   Storm sewer is a conduit or system of conduits either open or closed
above or below ground for the passage of storm water, and may embrace a pumping
station and outlet where deemed necessary, and may also embrace the building or
culverts over, under, or enclosing of streams where necessary or advisable to
carry off storm water and also the building of manholes, catch basins and other
structures necessary to the proper operation of the sewer.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-84;
Amendment adopted by electorate 3-10-92; Amendment adopted by electorate 9-1-
98; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Amendment adopted by electorate,
11-6-12)
ARTICLE II
CORPORATE LIMITS
SECTION 2.01 DESCRIPTION OF CORPORATE LIMITS.
   The boundaries and corporate limits of the City of Pembroke Pines, Florida,
as now existing are continued and may be amended from time to time as provided
by law.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84)
ARTICLE III
LEGISLATURE
SECTION 3.01 CITY COMMISSION; POWERS, COMPENSATION AND QUALIFICATIONS.
   There shall be a City Commission with all legislative powers of the City
vested therein, consisting of five (5) members, one of whom shall be the Mayor.
The Mayor shall meet the same residence requirements as Commissioners, except
that he/she shall be elected at- large. All qualifications and elections for
the Office of City Commission or Mayor shall be conducted on a nonpartisan
basis.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-84;
Amendment adopted by electorate 9-1-98; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-
06)
SECTION 3.02 COMMISSION MEMBERS.
   (a)   Composition: There shall be a City Commission composed of five (5)
members: one Mayor and four (4) commission members. Each commission member
shall be elected from one of the four (4) districts within the city.
   (b)   Regular elections: The regular election of the City Commission members
shall be held on the second (2nd) Tuesday of March in each even numbered year,
in the manner provided in this Charter and shall be for four (4) year terms.
Regular elections for the Mayor and Commission members representing District 2
and District 3 shall be held in 1996 and every four years thereafter. Regular
elections for Commission members representing District 1 and District 4 shall
be held in 1998 and every four (4) years thereafter.
   (c)   Residency requirements: Each commission member and candidates for City
Commission, must be domiciled for at east one year at the time of qualification
as a candidate within the district from which he or she is seeking election and
shall be elected from the district in which he or she is domiciled by a vote of
only the registered electors residing within that district. If, as the result
of the most recent City redistricting, a candidate is not domiciled for one
year within the district that he or she is seeking to represent, then the
candidate may seek election in the district in which he or she resides at the
time of qualification. The candidate receiving the greatest number of votes in
a district shall be elected. The Mayor shall be domiciled anywhere within the
City and be elected at-large. In the event no one qualifies for election for
any designated district, a vacancy shall be declared and filled in accordance
with Section
3.11 of the Charter.
   (d)   Composition of districts: The City of Pembroke Pines shall be divided
into four (4) election districts. The geographic boundaries of the four (4)
election districts shall be composed of roughly equal populations, and shall be
compact, proportional and logically related to the natural boundaries of the
neighborhoods within the City. The principles of nondiscrimination and one
person/one vote shall be strictly adhered to. The boundaries of the districts
within the limits of the City as now existing are continued and may be amended
as provided in Section
3.02(e) of the Charter.
   (e)   Redistricting: Following the decennial census in 2010, and every ten
(10) years thereafter, or sooner if it is determined by the Commission that
districts shall have become unbalanced due to population shifts, the City
Commission shall contract with an accredited four (4) year college or
university located within the State of Florida for the purpose of identifying
and designating the four (4) election districts within the City of Pembroke
Pines. The City Commission shall adopt the redistricting plan as designated,
provided that the plan incorporates the principles of nondiscrimination and
fairness set forth above. In the event an elected commission member no longer
resides in the district from which he or she is elected as a direct result of
the revisions to district boundaries in accordance with this section, that
Commission member shall complete his or her term. Nothing contained within this
section shall be construed to alter residence requirements for any candidate
including incumbents, during subsequent regular elections. (Adopted by
electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-84; Amendment
adopted by electorate, 3-11-86; Amendment adopted by electorate, 9-1-98;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-
6-12; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-4-14)
SECTION 3.03 NONPARTISAN ELECTIONS.
   All qualifications and elections for the Office of City Commission or Mayor
shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis.
(Adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 3.04 QUALIFICATIONS, FILING FEES AND OATHS.
   (a)   A candidate for any elective position in the City government shall
designate the office for which he/she has qualified and pay to the City Clerk a
filing fee in an amount equal to three (3) percent of the annual salary of the
office.
   (b)   A candidate for the office of Mayor shall file with the City Clerk a
written notice of candidacy which shall designate that the candidate is a
qualified elector of the City and a resident of the City for at least one (1)
year immediately and continuously prior to qualifying for elective office.
   (c)   Candidates for City Commission districts shall file with the City
Clerk a written notice of candidacy, which shall designate in which election
district of the City that candidate resides. A candidate for one (1) of the
four (4) Commission seats in the City shall be a qualified elector of the City
and a resident of the City residing within their designated election district
for at least one (1) year immediately and continuously prior to qualifying for
elective office.
   (d)   The City, where not inconsistent with this Charter, shall adopt that
form and manner of conducting election as shall be provided by the laws of the
State of Florida.
(Adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12)
SECTION 3.05 MAYOR.
   The election for Mayor shall be held on the second (2nd) Tuesday of March in
even numbered years and beginning March, 1984, the Mayor’s term shall be for a
four (4) year term. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Commission,
shall be recognized by the Governor for the purposes of military law, for
serving of process, execution of contract, deeds, and other documents, and is
the City official designated to represent the City in all agreements with other
governmental entities, but shall have no administrative duties except as
required to carry out responsibility herein. The Mayor shall be a member of the
City Commission, shall vote and have the right to debate on all issues coming
before the Commission. He shall have the duties, powers, privileges and
obligations possessed and imposed on a City Commission member.
   (a)   In the event of the death, resignation, or removal of the Mayor, the
Vice Mayor shall vacate the office of Commission member and shall serve as
interim Mayor until a successor is determined in accordance with the provisions
of Section
3.11 of the City’s Charter.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-8-88;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 3-10-92; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-
7-06)
SECTION 3.06 VICE MAYOR.
   The City Commission, at the first regularly scheduled meeting in April of
each year, shall elect, by majority vote, the Vice Mayor. The Vice Mayor shall
have the privileges, powers and duties of the Mayor in the Mayor’s absence or
disability.
   A vacancy on the Commission created by the death, resignation, removal or
the elevation of the Vice Mayor to Mayor shall be filled in accordance with the
provisions of Section
3.11 of the City’s Charter.
(Amendment adopted by electorate, 3-11-86; Amendment adopted by electorate, 3-
10-92; Amendment adopted by electorate, 9-1-98; Amendment adopted by
electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 3.07 PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Organizational. At the first regular Commission meeting following the
certification of the election results pursuant to the Florida election Code, as
may be amended from time to time, the Commission shall meet in the City Hall to
hold an organizational meeting, at which time and place all newly elected
officials shall take an oath of office and assume the duties of their office.
   (b)   Regular meetings. The Commission shall meet regularly at least twice
in every month at such times and places as the Commission may prescribe by
ordinance. The Commission may, by majority vote, declare some meetings during a
fiscal year to be unessential to conduct the public business of the City.
   (c)   Special meetings. Except for Emergency Meetings, Special Meetings may
be held on the call of the Mayor or any request of a majority of the members
and, whenever practicable, upon no less than forty- eight (48) hours’ notice to
each member and the public.
   (d)   Rules. The Commission shall determine its own rules and order of
business.
   (e)   Voting. Voting, on ordinances and resolutions, shall be by roll call
on final action and shall be recorded in the journal. A majority of the
Commission shall constitute a quorum. No action of the Commission except as
otherwise provided in the preceding sentence shall be valid or binding unless
adopted by the affirmative vote of three (3) members of the Commission.
   (f)   Journal. The ayes and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all
ordinances and resolutions and entered on the journal of the proceedings of the
Commission.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84;Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-84;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 9-1-98; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-5-
02; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Amendment adopted by electorate,
11-6-12)
SECTION 3.08 COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES.
   The Commission may determine the annual salary of the Commission members by
ordinance, but no ordinance increasing such salary shall become effective until
the date of a commencement of the terms of the Commission members elected at
the next regular election, provided that such election follows the adoption of
such ordinance by at least six months. Any increase in compensation to
Commission members or the Mayor shall be subject to a limitation whereby such
compensation shall not be increased by more than twenty-five (25) percent in
one calendar year. Nothing in this paragraph shall limit the right of any
Commission member or the Mayor to be reimbursed for expenses actually incurred
by him, with Commission approval, while performing duties on behalf of the
City.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 3.09 PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   Appointment and removals. Neither the Commission nor any of its
members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any City
administrative officers or employees whom the City Manager or any of his
subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the Commission may express its views
and fully and freely discuss with the City Manager anything pertaining to
appointment and removal of such officers and employees.
   (b)   Interference with administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries
and investigations, the Commission or its members shall deal with City officers
and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the City
Manager solely through the City Manager, and neither the Commission nor its
members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or
privately. Nothing in the foregoing is to be construed to prohibit individual
members of the Commission from closely scrutinizing by question and personal
observation, all aspects of City government operations so as to obtain
independent information to assist the members in the formulation of sound
policies to be considered by the Commission. It is the express intent of this
provision, however, that such inquiry shall not interfere directly with the
ordinary municipal operations of the City, and that recommendations for change
or improvement in City government operations be made through the City Manager.
   (c)   Holding other office. No former elected City official shall hold any
compensated appointed City office or employment until one (1) year after the
expiration of the term for which he was elected. (Adopted by electorate, 3-13-
84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Am. Ord. 2032, passed 11-6-24)
SECTION 3.10 OATH REQUIRED.
   Every officer of the City, whether elected or appointed under the provisions
of this Charter, or under any ordinance of the City, shall, before assuming the
duties of his office, take and subscribe, before some judicial officer, duly
qualified elected official or notary of this State, the following oath:
   “I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support, protect, and defend
the constitution and government of the United States and of the State of
Florida and the Charter and ordinances of the City of Pembroke Pines; that I am
duly qualified to hold office under the constitution of the State; and that I
will well and faithfully perform the duties of (title of office) on which I am
now about to enter. So help me God.”
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12)
SECTION 3.11 VACANCIES; FORFEITURE OF OFFICE; FILLING OF VACANCIES.
   a.   Vacancies. The office of a Commission member shall become vacant upon
death, the effective date of a resignation, the date of removal from office in
any manner authorized by law, or the effective date of
a forfeiture of office, such forfeiture to be declared by the remaining members
of the Commission.
   b.   Forfeiture of office. A Commissioner shall forfeit his office if said
person, (a) lacks any qualifications for the office prescribed by this Charter
or other applicable law including § 100.361, Florida Statutes, (1989) as may be
amended from time to time; or (b) is convicted of a felony while in office, or
(c) fails to attend four consecutive regular meetings of the Commission, unless
such absences are each excused by motion setting forth the reason for the
absence duly entered upon the minutes or (d) having been elected or appointed
from an election district fails to reside within the election district from
which he was elected or appointed for any reason other than redistricting.
   c.   Forfeiture hearing. A member charged with conduct constituting grounds
for forfeiture of his office shall be entitled to a Public Hearing on demand
and notice of such hearing shall be published in one or more newspapers of
general circulation in the City at least one week in advance of the hearing.
   d.   Filling of vacancies. Unless otherwise provided by law, if a vacancy
occurs on the City Commission, the remaining members of the City Commission
shall, by majority vote, appoint a qualified individual to fill the vacancy on
an interim basis as soon as practicable after the date of the vacancy. The City
Commission shall adopt a resolution setting forth the process of appointing an
interim member of the City Commission pursuant to this section.
      (1)   Appointment. If there are less than one hundred eighty (180) days
before the next municipal general election, then the interim Commission member
appointed to fill the vacancy shall serve until the next municipal general
election. If there are more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the next
municipal general election, then the City Commission shall conduct a special
election to fill the vacancy. The special election shall take place as soon as
practicable as permitted by applicable general law and special acts. The
qualifying period for any special election conducted pursuant to this section
shall be scheduled to occur in a time frame before the election date comparable
to the time frame provided for qualifying periods before municipal general
elections under applicable special acts, and for the same number of days as
qualifying periods for regular municipal general election under applicable
special acts. The individual elected to fill the vacancy at either the next
municipal general election or a special election called for that purpose shall
only serve the unexpired term of the City Commission member whose position
became vacant.
      (2)   In the event of a vacancy in the position of Mayor, the Vice Mayor
shall forthwith commence to serve as acting Mayor until the Mayor’s position is
filled pursuant to this section. When the Vice Mayor becomes acting Mayor, the
remaining members of the City Commission shall appoint a qualified individual
from the Vice Mayor's district to serve as interim Commissioner as soon as
practicable after the vacancy in the office of the Mayor. Once the vacancy in
the position of Mayor is filled, the Vice Mayor shall return to his or her
district position and the individual appointed to serve as interim Commissioner
shall be removed from office. The Vice Mayor-designate shall serve as Vice
Mayor when the Vice Mayor becomes acting Mayor.
      (3)   In the event of the death, resignation, or removal of the Vice
Mayor, the Commission shall, by majority vote, elect one (1) of the
Commissioners to serve as Vice Mayor.
   e.   Extraordinary vacancies. In the event that a majority of the members of
the Council are removed by death, disability, law or forfeiture of office, the
governor shall make interim Commission appointments and the Commission shall
call a special election as provided in d. above. (Adopted by electorate, 3-13-
84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 3-13-90; Amendment adopted by electorate,
3-10-92; Amendment adopted by electorate, 9-1-98; Amendment adopted by
electorate, 11-7-06; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12; Amendment
adopted by electorate, 3-11-25)
SECTION 3.12 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   (1)   Form. Each ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing and
shall embrace one subject and matters properly connected therewith. The subject
shall be clearly stated in the title. No ordinance shall be revised or amended
by reference to its title only. Ordinances to revise or amend shall set out in
full the revised or amended act, section, subsection, or paragraph of a section
or subsection.
   (2)   Procedure. The procedure for the adoption of ordinances shall be as
set forth in Section 166.041, F.S., as may be amended from time to time.
   (3)   Action requiring an ordinance. In addition to other acts required by
law or by specific provision of this Charter to be done by ordinance, those
acts of the City Commission shall be by ordinance which:
      (a)   Establish, alter, or abolish any city department or agency.
      (b)   Establish a rule or regulation the violation of which carries a
penalty.
      (c)   Levy taxes authorized by general law.
      (d)   Grant, renew or extend a franchise.
      (e)   Authorize the borrowing of money not inconsistent with the
limitations in the constitution and general law of the state.
      (f)   Convey or lease or authorize by administrative action the
conveyance or lease of any lands of the City.
      (g)   Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted, except as
otherwise provided in Article VII, Section 7.09(3), with respect to the repeal
of ordinances reconsidered under the referendum power.
(Adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12)
SECTION 3.13 EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public
peace, the City Commission may adopt one or more emergency ordinances, but such
ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew, or extend a franchise, set service
or user charges for any municipal services or authorize the borrowing of money
except as provided under the emergency appropriations provision of this
charter.
   (1)   Form. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and
manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly
designated in a preamble as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the
enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing
it in clear and specific terms.
   (2)   Procedure. An emergency ordinance may be adopted in accordance with
the procedure set forth in Section 166.041, F.S., as may be amended from time
to time.
   (3)   Effective date. Emergency ordinances shall become effective upon
adoption or at such other date as may be specified in the ordinance.
(Adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12)
ARTICLE IV
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 4.01 CITY MANAGER.
   (1)   There shall be a City Manager or entity (the “City Manager”) who shall
be the Chief Administrative Officer of the City. The City Manager shall be
responsible to the Commission for the administration of all City affairs placed
in his charge by or under this Charter.
   (2)   Qualifications. The City Manager shall have a baccalaureate degree and
three (3) years experience as a City Manager or Assistant City Manager or three
(3) years of comparable experience as may be determined by the City Commission.
(Adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Amendment adopted by electorate, 3-11-25)
SECTION 4.02 CITY MANAGER – APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL; COMPENSATION.
   (a)   Appointment. The Commission shall appoint a City Manager. Said
appointment shall be by a four-fifths (4/5ths) vote of Commission members.
   (b)   Removal. The Commission may remove the City Manager by a four-fifths
(4/5ths) vote of all Commission members. Upon demand by the Manager, a public
hearing may be held prior to a final vote on the removal of the City Manager.
At least ten (10) days prior to such public hearing the Commission shall
present the City Manager with a written statement of the reasons for such
dismissal. The decision of the Commission at any such public hearing shall be
final and conclusive and no appeal shall lie therefrom.
      (1)   At any such hearing the discharged City Manager shall have the
right to be represented by his/her counsel and shall have the right to subpoena
and introduce such witnesses in his/her behalf as he/she may require.
      (2)   In the event the City Manager should be reinstated by the City
Commission at any such public hearing, the Commission shall pay the City
Manager the necessary costs and expenses reasonably incurred in offering his/
her defense to the charges preferred.
   (c)   Compensation and benefits of the City Manager shall be fixed by the
City Commission.
   (d)   The City Manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the
Commission, and in such amount as the Commission may fix. Said bond to be
conditioned on the faithful performance of his/her duties. The premium of the
bond shall be paid by the City. (Adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 4.03 ACTING CITY MANAGER.
   By letter filed with the Commission, the Manager shall designate a qualified
City Administrative Officer to exercise his powers and perform the duties of
Manager during his/her temporary absence or incapacity. During such absence or
incapacity, the Commission may remove the designated acting City Manager by an
affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of the City Commission and
appoint another officer of the City, by a four-fifths (4/5ths) vote, to serve
until the Manager returns or his/her incapacity ceases. For purposes of this
Section, incapacity shall mean the inability of the City Manager to perform the
duties of his or her office. (Adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Amendment adopted
by electorate, 3-11-25)
SECTION 4.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER.
   The powers and duties of the City Manager shall be:
   (a)   To see that the laws and ordinances are enforced.
   (b)   To advise and assist all departments that may be created by the
Commission.
   (c)   To attend all meetings of the Commission with the right to take part
in the discussion but having no vote.
   (d)   To recommend to the Commission for adoption such measures as he/she
may deem necessary or expedient.
   (e)   Direct and supervise the administration of all departments of the
municipal government and be responsible for the maintenance of sound personnel
policies and administrative practices and submit quarterly reports pertaining
to this subsection to the City Commission in writing.
   (f)   Approve or disapprove purchases for each department, division or
office. If any bill or voucher differs from the original purchase order in any
manner then the payment of such voucher or purchase order shall not be made
unless previously approved by the City Manager.
   (g)   Establish working, personnel, and vacation schedules and appropriate
records and reports.
   (h)   Approve or prescribe, in written form, the internal organization of
each department and timely provide a copy of this information to each
Commissioner.
   (i)   Assign and transfer administrative functions, powers and duties among
and within departments, in writing, and timely provide a copy of this
information to each Commissioner.
   (j)   Delegate to department heads such duties as the City Manager may deem
necessary for efficient administration.
   (k)   The City Manager shall have the authority to appoint and discharge all
Department Heads, Personnel, and Employees of the City, other than those who,
by the terms and provisions of this Charter, are appointed by the City
Commission, or who are appointed pursuant to any ordinance, or resolution
adopted by the City Commission governing appointment and discharge of City
personnel and employees and timely provide a copy of this information to each
Commissioner.
   (l)   To perform such other duties as may be required by ordinance or
resolution of the Commission.
(Adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12; Am.
Ord. 2032, passed 11-6-24)
SECTION 4.05 CITY CLERK; DEPUTY CITY CLERK.
   (a)   The City Manager shall hire a City Clerk. The City Clerk shall give
notice of Commission, City Board and special meetings to its members and the
public and shall keep the journal of its proceedings which shall be a public
record, and shall perform other duties as the Commission or City Manager may
prescribe from time to time. The City Clerk shall report to the City Manager.
   (b)   The City Clerk shall monitor the attendance at all regular Commission,
City Board and special meetings and report any failure to meet the minimum
attendance standard as prescribed in Section
8.05
   (c)   The City Manager shall appoint one or more Deputy City Clerks in the
absence of the City Clerk. During this absence, the Deputy City Clerk shall
have all the powers vested in the City Clerk and who shall perform all of the
duties of the City Clerk.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 3-10-92;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Am. Ord. 2032, passed 11-6-24)
SECTION 4.06 DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE.
   The Department of Finance shall be responsible for administration of the
financial affairs of the City.
   (a)   The Department shall:
      (1)   Collect and disburse City Funds.
      (2)   Maintain a general accounting system for City government and units
thereof.
      (3)   Compile fiscal estimates and reports.
      (4)   Assist the City Manager in preparation of budgets.
      (5)   Assist the City Manager in establishing controls for budget
administration.
      (6)   Develop and apply legal and policy provisions applicable to
financial accounting.
   (b)   Director of Finance. There shall be a Director of Finance who shall be
appointed and/or removed by an affirmative vote of four (4) or more Commission
members and who, under the supervision of the City Manager, shall be charged
with the administration of the Department of Finance.
      (1)   Qualifications/requirements. The Director of Finance shall have a
four-year college degree with a major in accounting and finance and two (2)
years experience in municipal accounting, taxation, budgeting and financial
control.
      (2)   Shall furnish a surety bond for the faithful and honest performance
of his official duties in such amount as the City Commission may determine. The
cost of such shall be paid by the City.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12)
SECTION 4.07 CITY ATTORNEY.
   (a)   There shall be a City Attorney of the City, appointed or removed, by
an affirmative vote of at least four-fifths (4/5) of the full Commission, who
shall serve as chief legal advisor to the Commission, the City Manager and all
City departments, office and agencies and who shall assure that the City is
represented in all legal proceedings and perform any other duties prescribed by
this Charter or by ordinance.
   (b)   Qualifications: The City Attorney shall have been admitted to practice
in the State of Florida for four (4) years, with not less than two (2) of those
years in the practice of law for municipal or county government.
   (c)   Duties: The City Attorney or his or her designee shall:
      (1)   Be notified of and shall attend all regular and special meetings of
the City Commission.
      (2)   Act as the legal advisor to and counselor for the municipality, and
all its officers in matters relating to their official duties.
      (3)   Prepare all contracts, bonds and other instruments, in writing, in
which the municipality is concerned, and on each instrument, the City attorney
or their designee shall endorse their approval of the form and correctness
thereof. No contract with the municipality shall take effect until their
approval is so endorsed thereon.
      (4)   Prosecute and defend, on behalf of the City, all complaints, suits,
and controversies in which the City is a party unless otherwise instructed by
the City Commission.
      (5)   When so requested, furnish the Commission, Mayor or City Manager,
his or her opinion on any question of law involving their respective powers and
duties.
      (6)   Perform such other professional duties as may be required by him/
her by resolution of the Commission or as prescribed for the City Attorneys in
general or special laws of the State, including any rules and regulations of
the Florida Bar, which are not inconsistent with this Charter. The City
Attorney is obliged to periodically and in a timely manner inform the
Commission of the status of any pending litigation.
      (7)   The Commission shall determine the terms and conditions, and
compensation of the City Attorney’s employment in a written contract.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 9-1-98;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-5-02; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-
7-06; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12; Am. Ord. 2032, passed 11-6-24)
SECTION 4.08 PERSONNEL SYSTEM.
   This system of City personnel administration shall govern the appointment,
promotion, transfer, layoff, dismissal, suspension, removal and discipline of
all City employees and certain City officers and shall be based on merit
principles and scientific methods in order to foster effective career service
in City employment and to employ those persons best qualified for City services
which they are to perform.
   (a)   All appointments and promotions of City officials and employees except
those specifically exempted by ordinance, shall be made solely on the basis of
merit and fitness demonstrated by examination or other evidence of competence
and to this end, the Commission shall, by ordinance, establish personnel
procedures and rules.
   (b)   The standards or ethical conduct for the City of Pembroke Pines shall
be the standards of conduct for public officers and employees of agencies which
is set forth in Part III of Chapter 112, Florida Statutes, as may be amended
from time to time.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 4.09 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The Fire/Rescue Department shall be responsible for promoting the public
safety of all residents of the City through fire prevention, fire suppression,
rescue and emergency medical services. The department shall:
   (a)   Comply with applicable Federal, State and Local fire/rescue standards,
policies and regulations.
   (b)   Maintain all required licenses and certifications through training and
continuing education.
   (c)   Enforce all applicable Federal, State and Local laws in providing for
fire safety of all residents.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12)
SECTION 4.10 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The Police Department shall be responsible for promoting the public safety
of all residents of the City through police protection. The department shall:
   (a)   Comply with applicable National, State and Local police safety
standards and procedures.
   (b)   Maintain all required licenses and certifications.
   (c)   Enforce all applicable Federal, State and Local laws in providing for
the protection of all residents.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12)
SECTION 4.11 PUBLIC SERVICES DEPARTMENT.
   The Public Services Department shall establish standards, planning schedules
and operating procedures for extending, maintaining, repairing and operating
water production, distribution and sewage collection facilities.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 4.12 PROCUREMENT.
   (a)   Pursuant to the requirements of this Charter and ordinances, the City
Manager shall contract for, purchase, store and distribute all supplies,
materials and equipment required by any office, department, or agency of the
City government. Said purchases shall be made pursuant to the following
procedures:
      (1)   No goods, supplies, materials or services for City purposes or use
shall be purchased when the amount to be paid therefore by the City shall
exceed that amount the City Commission sets by ordinance for which the City
shall require sealed bids, unless notice thereof shall be advertised as
provided ordinance. The provision of this section shall not apply where
purchases are made from any agency, department or bureau of the United States
Government, State of Florida, or any of its political divisions or
municipalities. The City Commission may contract with other government agencies
for joint, cooperative or pooled purchasing of supplies, goods, materials or
services for its present or future needs, and bidding shall not be required for
purchases made by this method.
         (i)   If the City Manager shall determine that based upon specific
conditions and circumstances that an emergency exists in regards to the
purchases of any commodity, so that the delay incident to giving opportunity
for competitive bidding would be detrimental to the interest of the City, then
the City Manager shall file with the City Commission a statement under oath
certifying the conditions and circumstances.
         (ii)   Purchases made from any agency, department or bureau of the
United States Government, State of Florida, or any of its political
subdivisions or municipalities are excepted from bid requirements.
         (iii)   Any contract with other government agencies for joint,
cooperative, or pooled purchasing of commodities.
         (iv)   Commodities, services, and supplies available only from a
single source may be excepted from the bid requirements upon the filing by the
City Manager of a certification of conditions and circumstances with the City
Commission, if, subsequent thereto, the City Commission authorizes the
exceptions in writing.
      (2)   No contract shall be made by the City for the purchase, lease, or
renting of materials and/or equipment for use in any public work or
improvement, when the amount to be paid therefore by the City shall exceed that
amount for sealed bids prescribed by Florida Statute 180.24, as may be amended
from time to time, unless notice or advertisement for bids upon the same shall
be published in accordance with the provisions of this Charter.
      (3)   Requirements of advertising/notice.
         (i)   The notice required by Section 4.12(a) may refer to general
terms as to the extent and nature of the improvement and may identify the same
by the short designation indicated in the resolution authorizing such local
improvement, and by reference to the plans and specifications on file in the
office of the City Clerk. If said resolution shall have given two (2) or more
alternative descriptions of the improvement as to its material, nature,
character and size, and if the Commission shall not have theretofore determined
upon a definite description, the notice may call for bids upon each of such
descriptions.
         (ii)   Said notice shall state the conditions of payments.
         (iii)   Bids may be requested for the work as a whole or for any part
thereof separately. Bids may be asked for any one or more improvements
authorized by the same or different resolutions. Any bid covering work upon
more than one improvement shall be in such form as to permit a separation of
costs as to each improvement.
         (iv)   The City Commission may, by ordinance, provide that a bid must
be accompanied by a bid deposit. The process for submitting a bid deposit may
be specified by ordinance.
      (4)   When it becomes necessary in the opinion of the Director of Public
Services or City Manager to make alterations or modifications in any executory
contract for any public work or improvement, such alterations or specifications
shall be made only as authorized by the Commission and approved by the City
Attorney, upon the written recommendations of the City Manager. No such
alteration shall be valid unless the price to be paid for the work or material,
or both, under the altered or modified contract shall have been agreed upon in
writing and signed by the Commission or the City Manager, as provided by
ordinance.
      (5)   The City Commission may, by ordinance, specify the criteria to be
used for the City to award contracts for public work or improvement and
purchases received under sections 2 and 3. The City Commission may for good
cause reject any bid even though it may be the lowest.
      (6)   In the event all bids received are rejected, the Commission shall
direct the City Manager to re-advertise or may determine, in the case of public
work or improvement, to do the work by City forces without contract. All
advertisements shall contain a reservation of the rights contained in this
section.
      (7)   The Commission shall reject any bid received from any individual,
firm, corporation, or business enterprise in which any City elected official is
currently employed full time in or by said enterprise.
      (8)   Contracts for public works or improvements or purchases shall be
attested by the City Clerk, and signed by the Mayor or City Manager after
approval by the City Attorney, and the City Commission, where required.
(Adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Am. Ord. 2032, passed 11-6-24)
SECTION 4.13 COMMISSION AUDITOR.
   The City Commission shall appoint or retain, by an affirmative vote of at
least four-fifths (4/5) of the full Commission, a charter officer of the City
who shall have the title of Commission Auditor. The Commission Auditor shall
serve at the pleasure of the Commission. The Commission Auditor shall submit an
Annual Audit Plan at the beginning of each fiscal year which shall be adopted
by a majority vote of the City Commission and which may be amended, from time
to time, by a majority vote of the City Commission. The Commission Auditor
shall, from time to time, perform independent and objective audits or reviews
of financial, compliance and operational activities of the City and the City’s
contractors, licensees and franchisees. Audits or reviews performed by the
Commission Auditor shall analyze and evaluate financial management systems and
operational controls and procedures of the city to develop recommended policies
and procedures. The Commission Auditor shall also respond to questions by the
City Commission or the City Manager and perform such other duties as may be
imposed or required by ordinance, resolution or direction of a majority of the
City Commission. In furtherance of their duties and responsibilities under this
section, the Commission Auditor shall have unrestricted access to the City's
records and staff. Nothing contained in this section shall adversely impact the
position of the City Manager, as set forth in Article IV of the City Charter.
(Adopted by electorate 11-2-10; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12; Am.
Ord. 2032, passed 11-6-24)
SECTION 4.14 ANNUAL WRITTEN REVIEW OF CHARTER OFFICERS.
   Within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this section, the City
Commission shall adopt an ordinance providing for the annual written
performance review of all Charter officers who are hired by and report to the
City Commission.
(Adopted by electorate, 11-6-12)
ARTICLE V
BUDGET
SECTION 5.01 ESTIMATES OF REVENUES AND EXPENDITURES; INFORMATION TO BE
INCLUDED.
   (a)   Not later than sixty (60) days before the end of each fiscal year, the
City Manager shall prepare and submit to the Commission a budget estimate of
the expenditures and revenues of all City departments, divisions and officers
for the ensuing fiscal year.
   (b)   The information and estimate so given and constituting the
recommendation of the City Manager as to the amounts necessary to be
appropriated for the ensuing fiscal year shall be supported with information
giving the reason therefore in such detail as may be necessary to afford the
Commission a comprehensive understanding of the needs and requirements of the
various divisions of the City government for the ensuing period.
   (c)   Copies of the budget estimate of the City Manager shall be on file in
the office of the City Clerk and open for inspection by the public.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 5.02 PREPARATION OF PROPOSED BUDGET.
   Upon receipt of the annual budget estimates of the City Manager, the
Commission shall prepare an appropriation ordinance using the City Manager’s
estimate as a basis. The budget shall be specific as to the nature of each
category of appropriations therein. Reasonable appropriations may be made for
contingencies, but only within defined spending categories.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 5.03 PUBLIC HEARING ON BUDGET.
   (a)   At the meeting of the Commission at which the budget estimate is
submitted by the City Manager, the Commission shall determine the place and
time of the public hearing on the budget and shall cause to be published a
notice thereof.
   (b)   At the time and place so advertised, or at any time and place to which
such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the Commission shall
hold a public hearing on the budget as incorporated in the proposed
appropriation ordinance. At such hearing all interested persons shall be given
an opportunity to be heard, for or against the estimates of any item thereof.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 5.04 ADOPTION OF BUDGET.
   (a)   Each annual budget adopted by the Commission shall be a balanced
budget.
   (b)   The budget shall be adopted in accordance with Ch. 200, F.S., as may
be amended from time to time.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12)
SECTION 5.05 RESERVED.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12)
SECTION 5.06 WHEN CONTRACTS AND EXPENDITURES PROHIBITED.
   No officer, department, or agency shall, during the budget year expend or
contract to expend any money or voluntarily incur any liability, or enter into
any contract which by its terms involves the expenditure of money, for any
purpose, in excess of the amounts appropriated for that general classification
of expenditures pursuant to this Charter. Nothing in this section, however,
shall prevent the making of contracts or the spending of money for capital
improvements to be financed in whole or in part by the issuance of bonds, nor
the making of contracts of lease or for services for a period exceeding the
budget year in which such contract is made when such contract is permitted by
law.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12; Am. Ord. 2032, passed 11-6-24)
SECTION 5.07 APPROPRIATIONS TO LAPSE AT END OF YEAR.
   All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the budget year to the extent
that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered. All lapsed
appropriations shall be used by the City Manager in appropriating money for the
budget of the next fiscal year.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 5.08 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.
   The City shall adopt a five (5) year capital improvement program in the
annual budget.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 5.09 INDEPENDENT AUDIT.
   The City Commission shall provide for an independent annual audit of all
City accounts and may provide for more frequent audits as it deems necessary.
Such audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm of such
accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal
affairs of the City government or any of its officers.
(Adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
ARTICLE VI
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
SECTION 6.01 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.
   (a)   Initiative. The qualified voters of the City shall have power to
propose ordinances to the Commission and, if the Commission fails to adopt an
ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at
a City election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or
capital program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of
taxes or salaries of City officers or employees.
   (b)   Referendum. The qualified voters of the City shall have power to
require reconsideration by the Commission of any adopted ordinances and, if the
Commission fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject
it at a City election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget
or capital program or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to
appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of the City officers or
employees.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 6.02 COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS.
   Any ten (10) qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum
proceedings by filing with the City Clerk, or other official designated by the
Commission, an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners’
committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in
proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to
which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the
proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be
reconsidered.
   Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners’ committee is filed, the
Clerk or other official designated by the Commission may, at the committee’s
request, issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners’ committee at
the committee’s expense. (Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by
electorate, 11-7-06; Am. Ord. 2032, passed 11-6-24)
SECTION 6.03 PETITIONS.
   (a)   Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be
signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least ten (10%)
percent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last
regular City election.
   (b)   Form and Content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size
and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature
shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the
address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain, or have attached
thereto, throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed
or sought to be reconsidered.
   (c)   Affidavit of Circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached
to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that
he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all
the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the
genuine signature of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each
signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance
proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
   (d)   Time for Filing Referendum Petitions. Referendum petitions must be
filed within sixty (60) days after adoption by the Commission of the ordinance
sought to be reconsidered.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Am.
Ord. 2032, passed 11-6-24)
SECTION 6.04 PROCEDURE FOR FILING.
   (a)   Certificate of Clerk; Amendment. Within twenty (20) days after the
initiative petition is filed and five (5) days for a referendum petition, the
City Clerk, or other official designated by the Commission, shall complete a
certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the
particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the
certificate to the petitioners’ committee by registered mail. Grounds for
insufficiency are only those specified in subsection
6.03. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of
valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners’ committee files a
notice of intention to amend it with the Clerk or other official designated by
the Commission within two (2) days after receiving the copy of the certificate
and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten (10) days
after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall
comply with the requirements of subsection (b) and (c) of Section
6.03, and within five (5) days after it is filed with the Clerk or other
official designated by the Commission, shall complete a certificate as to the
sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such
certificate to the petitioners’ committee by registered mail as in the case of
an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient
or if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the
petitioners’ committee does not elect to amend or request Commission review
under subsection (b) of this section within the time required, the clerk or
other official designated by the Commission shall promptly present his
certificate to the Commission and the certificate shall then be a final
determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.
   (b)   Commission Review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and
the petitioners’ committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if
an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within
two (2) days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that
it be reviewed by the Commission. The Commission shall review the certificate
at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or
disapprove it, and the Commission’s determination shall then be a final
determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Am.
Ord. 2032, passed 11-6-24)
SECTION 6.05 REFERENDUM PETITIONS; SUSPENSION OF EFFECT OF ORDINANCE.
   When a referendum petition is filed with the City Clerk or other official
designated by the Commission, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be
suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when:
   (a)   There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, or;
   (b)   The petitioners’ committee withdraws the petition, or;
   (c)   The Commission repeals the ordinance, or;
   (d)   After a vote of the City on the ordinance has been certified.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 6.06 ACTION ON PETITIONS.
   (a)   Action by Commission. When an initiative or referendum petition has
been finally determined sufficient, the Commission shall promptly consider the
proposed initiative ordinance in the manner provided in Article III or
reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the Commission fails
to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within
sixty (60) days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within thirty (30)
days, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the voters of the
City.
   (b)   Submission to Voters. The vote of the City on a proposed or referred
ordinance shall be held not less than thirty (30) days and not later than sixty
(60) days from the date that the petition was determined sufficient. If no
regular City election is to be held within the period described in this
subsection, the Commission shall provide for a special election, except that
the Commission may, in its discretion, provide for a special election at an
earlier date within the described period. Copies of the proposed or referred
ordinance shall be made available at the polls.
   (c)   Withdrawal of Petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be
withdrawn at any time prior to the fifteenth (15th) day preceding the day
scheduled for a vote of the City by filing with the City Clerk or other
official designated by the Commission a request for withdrawal signed by at
least four (4) members of the petitioners’ committee. Upon the filing of such
request the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings
thereon shall be terminated.
(Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 6.07 RESULTS OF ELECTION.
   (a)   Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a
proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted
upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects
in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the Commission. If
conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the
greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such
conflict.
   (b)   Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a
referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon
certification of the election results.
(Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
ARTICLE VII
CHARTER REVIEW BOARD
SECTION 7.01 CREATION OF BOARD; MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby created and established in the City of Pembroke Pines,
Florida, an impartial and independent advisory board to be known as the
Pembroke Pines Charter Review Board. The Charter Review Board shall consist of
eleven (11) members appointed by the City Commission beginning in May, 2016,
and every 6 years thereafter. The City Commission shall have the authority, if
it deems necessary, to appoint the members to the Charter Review Board at other
times by a majority vote of the entire City Commission. The Mayor shall appoint
three (3) individuals and each City Commissioner shall appoint two (2)
individuals to serve as a member of the Charter Review Board in May, 2016 and
every six years thereafter.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-84;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 3-10-92; Amendments adopted by electorate, 11-
7-06; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12)
SECTION 7.02 QUALIFICATIONS AND TERM FOR THE CHARTER REVIEW BOARD.
   Each member of the Board shall be a qualified elector of the City of
Pembroke Pines and shall have resided within the City of Pembroke Pines,
Florida, for a period of not less than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to
his appointment and shall serve for a term of one (1) year from the date of the
first meeting of the Board. Any vacancy occurring on the Board shall be filled:
   (a)   By the City Commission. The person appointed shall be a qualified
elector, shall have resided in the City of Pembroke Pines not less than one
hundred eighty (180) days prior to his appointment and shall serve only the
unexpired term of the Charter Review Board member whose position became vacant.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-8-88;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 3-13-90; Amendment adopted by electorate, 3-
10-92; Amendments adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Amendment adopted by
electorate, 11-6-12)
SECTION 7.03 EXPENSE FUND.
   The City Commission shall provide sufficient funds in the annual budget and
each successive annual budget for reasonable and necessary expenses to be
incurred by the Board in the performance of its duties. The City Commission
shall provide additional funds in the annual budget and each successive annual
budget for reasonable and necessary expenses to be incurred in the event the
Board is required to submit a revised Charter of Charter Amendments. The City
Manager shall provide such administrative staff and clerical personnel as may
be necessary to assist the Board in the proper performance of its duties and
functions.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendments adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 7.04 ORGANIZATION.
   The members shall within thirty (30) days after their appointment meet and
elect a chairman and such other officers as may be deemed necessary, who shall
serve at the pleasure of the Board. All meetings of the Board shall be open to
the public. No action shall be taken by the Board to recommend an amendment to
the City Charter except by a majority vote of the entire membership. The rules
of procedures adopted by the Board shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 3-10-92;
Amendments adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 7.05 FORFEITURE OF MEMBERSHIP OFFICE.
   A Charter Review Board Member shall forfeit the office if said person, (1)
lacks any qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or other
applicable law or, (2) is convicted of a felony while in office, or (3) fails
to attend four consecutive regular meetings of the Charter Review Board, unless
such absences are each excused by motion setting forth the reason for the
absence duly entered upon the minutes.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 3-11-86;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 3-10-92; Amendments adopted by electorate, 11-
7-06)
SECTION 7.06 DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.
   (a)   The Pembroke Pines Charter Review Board is hereby authorized to review
and to study the Charter of government for the City of Pembroke Pines, and to
recommend changes to the City Charter to the City Commission.
   (b)   It shall take an affirmative vote by a supermajority of the membership
of the Charter Review Board to present recommendations to the City Commission
for review.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 3-10-92;
Amendments adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Amendments adopted by electorate 11-
6-12)
ARTICLE VIII
GENERAL LIMITATIONS
SECTION 8.01 PRINTING, RECORDING AND INDEXING OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Provisions shall be made for the printing, preservation, recording and
indexing of all ordinances and resolutions by the City Clerk, which shall at
all reasonable times be open for inspection by the public.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 8.02 AUTHORITY TO CODIFY ORDINANCES.
   The City shall have authority to codify its ordinances into a “Code of
Ordinances for the City of Pembroke Pines” and by a single ordinance to adopt
such code as a complete revision of all existing and applicable ordinances on
the date of such adoption; to adopt a decimal system similar to that used in
Florida Statutes, and to amend such code, once adopted, by reference to any
section or sections. The City Attorney shall have power and authority to codify
any duly adopted ordinance of the City and assign proper section numbers and
headings to various parts of such ordinances, and thereafter such sections
shall be cited in referring to such ordinances.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 8.03 SALE OF CITY PROPERTY.
   No right, title or interest of the City or any part thereof in and to the
waterfront, wharf, docks, streets, avenues, parks, bridges and other public
places, and its gas, water, electric and other works, shall be sold unless by
authority of an ordinance passed by a recorded affirmative vote of four-fifths
(4/5ths) of all members of the Commission, and with the provision that no such
property which may be valued by three independent appraisers in excess of
fifteen (15%) percent of the City’s annual operating budget in the year of the
sale, shall be sold in whole or in part or shall be leased for term in excess
of five (5) years without a referendum election authorizing such sale, and
under such other restrictions as may be imposed by law.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-84;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 8.04 CHIEF OF POLICE OR HIS HER DESIGNEE SHALL ATTEND ALL COMMISSION
MEETINGS AND EXECUTE THEIR COMMANDS.
   The Chief of Police or one of his deputies shall attend all meeting of the
City Commission and act as a sergeant at arms.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12)
SECTION 8.05 CONFLICTING CHARTER AMENDMENTS.
   In the event that a Charter Amendment proposed by the Charter Review Board
is on the ballot at the same election in which a Charter Amendment is proposed
pursuant to Florida Statutes Section 166.031 and the results of the elections
on those Charter Amendments creates a conflict between the two, then they shall
go into effect in respect to such of their provisions as are not in conflict
and the one
receiving the highest affirmative vote shall prevail insofar as their
provisions conflict. (Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by
electorate, 11-7-06; Am. Ord. 2032, passed 11-6-24)
SECTION 8.06 APPROPRIATIONS TO LIBRARIES AND CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS.
   The Commission shall make no appropriation of public funds towards the
maintenance and support of any private library or charitable institution.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 8.07 NO CONTRACT EXECUTED UNTIL BOND ORDINANCE EFFECTIVE.
   No contract shall be executed for the acquisition of any property or the
construction of any improvement or betterment to be financed by the issuance of
bonds until the ordinance authorizing the issuance of such bonds shall have
taken effect, and any contract executed before such day shall be unenforceable
in any Court of Law.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 8.08 ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY FOR MUNICIPAL PURPOSES.
   (a)   The City Commission shall not utilize eminent domain powers to acquire
privately owned residential real property for economic development purposes or
to acquire privately owned residential real property for transfer to a private
entity for economic development purposes.
   (b)   The City Commission may acquire property within or outside the
corporate limits of the City for any municipal purpose, in fee simple or any
lesser interest or estate, by purchase, provided such amount of expenditure for
real property shall not exceed twenty- five (25%) percent of the current annual
fiscal budget of the City. The City Commission, may, through proper procedure,
propose, undertake and finance capital improvement projects to fulfill the
necessary needs of the City, provided that the amount of total expenditures
including the cost of all financing for all such projects shall not exceed
twenty-five (25%) percent of the current annual budget of the City in any one
fiscal year. In the event that the proposed purchase(s) of property or total
capital expenditure(s) do exceed the limit of twenty-five (25%) percent of the
current annual budget of the City in any one fiscal year and the City has not
received federal, state or county funds specifically for the purchase of such
property(s) or for financing of such capital improvement project(s), then a
referendum will be held of the qualified electors of the City of Pembroke
Pines, Florida, and it shall require a majority of those voting in such
election to authorize such projects. This referendum requirement may be waived,
however, if the City Commission by a four-fifths (4/5ths) vote of its members
finds and declares that an emergency exists, and that there is a threat to the
health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the City.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-84;
Amendments adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-
6-12)
ARTICLE IX
TRANSITION SCHEDULE
SECTION 9.01 RESERVED.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06;
Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-6-12)
SECTION 9.02 ORDINANCES PRESERVED.
   All ordinances in effect upon the adoption of this Charter, to the extent
not inconsistent, shall remain in force until repealed or changed as provided
herein.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06; Am.
Ord. 2032, passed 11-6-24)
SECTION 9.03 RIGHTS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Elected officers shall continue to hold their office and discharge the
duties thereof until their successors are elected. Other City officials and
employees shall continue their employment and discharge their duties subject to
the Ordinances of the City, the provisions of State Law, and the provisions of
this Charter.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 9.04 PENDING MATTERS.
   All rights, claims, action, orders, contracts and legal or administrative
proceedings involving the City shall continue except as modified pursuant to
the provisions of this Charter.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 9.05 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This Charter shall take effect immediately upon its approval by a majority
of those electors voting at a referendum thereon.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
SECTION 9.06 SEVERABILITY OF CHARTER PROVISIONS.
   If any section or part of a section of this Charter shall be declared to be
unconstitutional, the same shall not be held to invalidate or enjoin the
validity, force or effect of any other section or part of a section of this
Charter, unless it clearly appears that such other section or part of a section
is wholly or necessarily dependent for its operation upon the section or part
of a section to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Adopted by electorate, 3-13-84; Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-7-06)
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Captions
   
10.04   Definitions
   
10.05   Rules of construction
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Computation of time
   
10.11   Effect of repealing ordinances
   
10.12   Amendments to code
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Altering code
   
10.16   City hall address
   
10.17   Official city seal
 
   
10.98   Remedies
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Pembroke
Pines, Florida," and may be so cited.
('69 Code, § 1-1)
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   All words, matters, and phrases contained in this code shall, except as
herein otherwise provided, be interpreted in the manner provided by the laws of
the State of Florida for the interpretation of like words, matters, and phrases
occurring therein, and as far as applicable the provisions contained in the
state laws for the construction of the provisions thereof, shall apply to the
provisions of this code.
§ 10.03 CAPTIONS.
   The captions of the several sections of this code printed in capital letters
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of the sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of the sections, including the captions, are amended or reenacted.
('69 Code, § 1-3)
§ 10.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The CITY of Pembroke Pines, in the County of Broward and State of
Florida.
   COMMISSION. The City Commission of the City of Pembroke Pines, Florida.
   COUNTY. The COUNTY of Broward in the State of Florida.
   IN THE CITY. Any territory, jurisdiction of which, for the exercise of its
regulatory power, has been conferred on the city by public or private law.
   MONTH. A calendar MONTH.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an OATH, and in such case the words "swear" and "sworn" shall
be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
   OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall mean any person who
holds a written or oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or part of the
building or land, either alone or with others.
   OFFICIAL TIME. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean
Eastern Standard  Time or Daylight Saving Time as may be in current use in the
city.
   OFFICER or OFFICIAL. Wherever reference is made to any OFFICER or OFFICIAL,
such as Mayor or City Clerk, the reference will be taken to be that OFFICER or
OFFICIAL of the city.
   OWNER. When applied to a building or land, shall include any part "owner,"
joint "owner," tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of
the whole or part of the building or land.
   PERSON. Includes individual natural persons, partnerships, joint adventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations, and all other
groups or combinations; and any officers, agents, employees, factors, or any
kind of personal representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either
for himself, or for any other person, under either personal appointment or
pursuant to law.
   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Real, personal, or mixed property.
   PUBLIC GROUNDS. The parks and all public lands owned or leased by the city,
and those parts of public places which do not form traveled parts of streets as
defined in this section.
   SHALL.  SHALL is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines
of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line intended
for the use of pedestrians.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. A mark when the person cannot write, his name
being written near it, and being witnessed by a person who writes his own name
as a witness.
   STATE. The State of Florida.
   STREET. Avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts,
bridges, and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the
city, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines.
It shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is
expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the City Commission.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Typewriting, printing on paper, and any other mode of
representing words and letters.
   YEAR. A calendar YEAR, unless a fiscal year is indicated.
('69 Code, § 1-2)
Statutory reference:
   For definitions under state law, see F.S. §§ 1.01 and 1.02
§ 10.05 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this code, the following rules shall be observed,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   (A)   AND or OR. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the
sense requires it.
   (B)   Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships, and corporations as well as to
males.
('69 Code, § 1-2)
   (C)   Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
('69 Code, § 1-2)
   (D)   Time. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as
well as the present and past.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   It is declared to be the intention of the City Commission that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this code are severable, and if
any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, or sections of this code.
('69 Code, § 1-5)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Sunday or a legal
holiday, however, that day shall be excluded.
('69 Code, § 1-2)
§ 10.11 EFFECT OF REPEALING ORDINANCES.
   (A)   The repeal or amendment of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance
in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
   (B)   The repeal or amendment of an ordinance shall not affect any
punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal or amendment took effect, nor
any suit, prosecution, or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal or
amendment, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed or amended.
('69 Code, § 1-4)
§ 10.12 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed
chapters, sections, and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered
and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of
the subsequent ordinances until such time as this code and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the City
Commission.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in the following language: "This section of the Code of Ordinances, City
of Pembroke Pines, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows: . . . ." The
new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (C)   In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to
be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances,
City of Pembroke Pines, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section (or
subchapter or chapter) to be numbered , which said section reads as follows: .
. . ." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (D)   All sections, subchapters, chapters, or provisions desired to be
repealed must be specifically repealed by section, subchapter, or chapter
number, as the case may be.
('69 Code, § 1-7)
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 ALTERING CODE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by
additions or deletions, any part of this code, or to insert or delete pages, or
portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the code in any manner whatsoever,
except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the City Commission
which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating this section shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99.
('69 Code, § 1-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Altering, forging, and the like of public records for purposes of
defrauding, see F.S. § 831.01
§ 10.16 CITY HALL ADDRESS.
   The address and location of the City Hall is 601 City Center Way, Pembroke
Pines, Florida 33025.
('69 Code, § 2-1) (Ord. 17, passed 5-17- 60; Am. Ord. 627, passed 10-6-82; Am.
Ord. 1201, passed 1-8-97; Am. Ord. 1923, passed 5-15-19)
§ 10.17 OFFICIAL CITY SEAL.
   (A)   Design. The official city seal of the City of Pembroke Pines shall be
a circle containing therein a setting sun in the background with its rays
emanating therefrom with clouds in the sky and Slash Pine in the foreground
over a field of Palmetto Shrubs and inscribed with the words “Join Us. Progress
with Us,” as more particularly described as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6860.jpg]
 
   (B)   Adopted. The seal set forth in this section is hereby and used by the
city shall be and is hereby established and declared to have been and now to be
the official seal of the City of Pembroke Pines.
   (C)   Custodian. The City Clerk is hereby declared to be the custodian of
the Pembroke Pines city seal and shall be authorized to affix the seal to any
document for the purpose of attesting, certifying or otherwise formalizing any
ordinance, resolution, record, letter or other document or preparing official
certified copies of same. Only the City Clerk, Deputy City Clerk or other
person authorized by law shall be entitled to use the official city seal.
   (D)   Facsimiles; permitted for certificate official uses. The City Clerk is
hereby authorized to permit facsimiles or reproductions of the official seal
for municipal purposes, including but not exclusive of city and public
officials’ stationery, business cards, proclamations, certificates and forms,
badges and pins, official record books and code books.
   (E)   Approval required. Unless otherwise provided for herein, any facsimile
or reproduction of the official city seal shall be manufactured, used,
displayed, or otherwise employed by any person, firm or corporation only upon
approval of the City Commission, upon application to it by such person, firm or
corporation showing good cause for the use of the official city seal for a
proper purpose. The City Manager may approve the use of the city seal for non-
commercial purposes.
   (F)   Unauthorized use. No person, firm or corporation may use the official
seal of the city or a facsimile or reproduction of same except as otherwise
provided for in this section. Such unauthorized use shall constitute a
violation of this section and may be punished pursuant to F.S. § 165.043, as
amended from time to time. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the city
from seeking further civil recourse in protecting its proprietary interests in
the city seal.
(Ord. 1685, passed 3-16-11)
§ 10.98 REMEDIES.
   (A)   In addition to the penalties herein provided in §
10.99, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this code or any ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation, or
order shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as
provided by law.
   (B)   Each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and
separate offense.
('69 Code, § 1-8)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever in this code, any ordinance or resolution of the city, or any
rule, regulation, or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city
under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is declared
to be unlawful, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any
act is declared unlawful and no specific penalty is provided for the violation
thereof, the violation of that provision of this code or such an ordinance,
resolution, rule, regulation, or order shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $500, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or by both.
   (B)   Each day any violation or any provision of this code or of any
ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation, or order shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
('69 Code, § 1-8)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY COMMISSION
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
      
33.   GENERAL CITY POLICIES
      
34.   EMPLOYMENT POLICIES
      
35.   BID PROCEDURES; PUBLIC FUNDS
      
36.   PLACEMENT, ENFORCEMENT OF LIENS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
      
37.   (RESERVED)
      
38.   RETIREMENT INCOME PLAN FOR GENERAL CITY EMPLOYEES
      
39.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
CHAPTER 30: CITY COMMISSION
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Presiding officer, seating arrangement
   
30.02   Sergeant-at-Arms
Meetings
   
30.10   Regular meetings
   
30.11   Special meetings
   
30.12   City Commission procedure
   
30.13   Calling meeting to order;
Chairman and Temporary Chairman
   
30.14   Roll call
   
30.15   Agenda
   
30.16   Discussion and voting procedure
   
30.17   Rules of debate
   
30.18   Public hearings
   
30.19   Workshop meetings
   
30.20   Decorum, disturbing meeting
   
30.21   Electronic meetings during a public health emergency
Ordinances and Resolutions
   
30.30   Procedure for adoption
   
30.31   When to enact legislation as ordinance rather than resolution
   
30.32   Financial impact of proposed charter amendments
Minutes as Record of Commission Proceedings
   
30.40   Preparation of minutes; distribution to Commission
   
30.41   Reading of minutes
   
30.42   Minutes as official record when approved by Commission
   
30.43   Furnishing copies of minutes to public; fee
   
30.44   Contents of minutes
   
30.45   Recording remarks verbatim
   
30.46   Use of recording devices
Code of Ethics
   
30.50   Code of ethics
   
30.51   Violation of code
Vacancy in Candidacy
   
30.60   Vacancy in candidacy for City Commission member and Charter Review
Board member
Pembroke Pines Lobbyist Registration Act
   
30.70   Title; intent and purpose
   
30.71   Definitions
   
30.72   Lobbyist registration and statements
   
30.73   Filing of contact log
   
30.74   Prohibition on use of lobbying statements
   
30.75   Contingency fee; disclosure
   
30.76   Penalties
Cross-reference:
   For Charter provisions concerning the Commission, see Charter §§
3.01 through
3.09
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 PRESIDING OFFICER, SEATING ARRANGEMENT.
   (A)   The presiding officer of the City Commission shall be the Mayor, in
his absence the Vice-Mayor, in his absence the Vice-Mayor Designate, or in his
absence a member of the Commission selected by a majority vote of those members
of the Commission present.
   (B)   The Vice-Mayor shall be selected in accordance with the Charter of the
city and shall be a member of the City Commission who has not just recently
served as the Vice-Mayor or the Vice-Mayor Designate, where possible. To the
extent possible that the members of the City Commission deem it appropriate,
the regular order of nominating a member of the City Commission to serve as
Vice Mayor is presumed to be as follows: Commissioner from District 4,
Commissioner from District 2, Commissioner from District 3, and Commissioner
from District 1. Beginning with the second regularly scheduled meeting of the
City Commission in April of each year, upon the election of a new Vice-Mayor in
accordance with the Charter, the Vice-Mayor shall become the Vice-Mayor
Designate for the following year. If a general election has been held and the
Vice-Mayor has not been re- elected by the electorate or is otherwise no longer
a member of the City Commission, the City Commission shall elect by majority
vote, immediately after the new Vice-Mayor is elected, the Vice-Mayor Designate
who shall have the privileges, powers and duties of the Vice- Mayor in the
Vice-Mayor’s absence or disability.
   (C)   (1)   There are nine seats established on the dais within the
Commission Chambers, and said seats shall be referred to as Seats 1 through 9,
from one’s right to left when seated on the dais. When the City Commission
meets in the City Commission Chambers, the seating arrangement shall be as
follows:
      Seat 1 - City Clerk
      Seat 2 - City Attorney
      Seat 3 - City Manager
      Seat 4 - Vice-Mayor
      Seat 5 - Mayor
      Seat 6 - Vice-Mayor Designate
      Seat 7 - City Commissioner
      Seat 8 - City Commissioner
      Seat 9 - Not assigned
      (2)   At the second regularly scheduled meeting of the City Commission in
April of each year and immediately after the election of Vice-Mayor and Vice-
Mayor Designate at that meeting, the individuals serving in the above offices
shall move to their respective designated seats as set forth above, and the
departing Vice-Mayor Designate shall move to and be seated at Seat 8.
(‘69 Code, § 2-26) (Ord. 162, passed 5-1-67; Am. Ord.596, passed 5-5-82; Am.
Ord. 1482, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 1647, passed 6-17-09)
Cross-reference:
   Mayor, see Charter §
3.03
   Vice-Mayor, see Charter §
3.04
§ 30.02 SERGEANT-AT-ARMS.
   The Chief of Police, or that member of the Police Department he shall
designate, shall be the Sergeant- at-Arms of the Commission meetings for the
purpose of maintaining order and decorum. He shall act under the direction and
control of the presiding officer.
(‘69 Code, § 2-34) (Ord. 162, passed 5-1-67)
MEETINGS
§ 30.10 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The City Commission shall hold two regular meetings per month. The time and
day of holding the meetings shall be determined by resolution from time to
time. Regular meetings of the City Commission which fall on a legal holiday
shall be held on the evening of the following business day.
(‘69 Code, § 2-23) (Ord. 162, passed 5-1-67)
Cross-reference:
   Regular meetings of Commission, see Charter § 3.05(b)
§ 30.11 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Mayor, or a majority of the Commission members shall request, in
writing, the calling of special meetings of the Commission whenever in his or
their opinions the public business may require it. The request for a special
meeting shall be served on or communicated to the City Clerk or, in his
absence, the Deputy City Clerk. The official on whom the request for a special
meeting has been served shall promptly cause the notice or call to be served on
each member of the Commission and the Mayor, either in person or at their place
of residence.
   (B)   No special meeting shall be called unless at least 48 hours’ notice in
writing is given in advance of the meeting, both to each Commission member and
to the public.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall as soon as possible affix a copy of the notice or
call of a special meeting on the front door of the City Hall so that it is
visible from the exterior of the building. The notice shall state the date,
hour, and place of the meeting and the purpose for which the meeting is called,
and no business shall be transacted thereat, except such as is stated in the
notice.
   (D)   Special meetings may be called without written notice during the
course of a regular meeting on motion passed by a majority vote of the
Commission.
(‘69 Code, § 2-24) (Ord. 52, passed 3-5-62)
Cross-reference:
   Special meetings of Commission, see Charter § 3.05(c)
§ 30.12 CITY COMMISSION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Mayor shall make rulings on parliamentary procedure and shall call
for the vote. In order to overrule the Mayor, when calling for the vote or on
parliamentary procedure, a 3/5 vote of the Commission shall be required.
Motions to change the order of business shall require a majority vote of the
Commission. Items under old business shall be for discussion items previously
addressed by the City Commission which may require further consideration, as
well as those items tabled or awaiting Commission action.
   (B)   A City Commissioner may not reintroduce any discussion item that has
failed, due to lack of a second or lack of a majority vote, within the
subsequent six-month period, unless either an emergency exists and the public
business requires its reconsideration, or a City Commissioner who was on the
prevailing side of the prior City Commission vote, introduces the discussion
item for reconsideration. For purposes of this division, it shall take a 4/
5 majority vote to determine that an emergency exits which requires the
reconsideration of an item that has previously failed.
   (C)   The City Commission, by consensus or by majority vote, may suspend the
rules set forth in this section.
   (D)   The Mayor shall be subject to the same rules of procedure as the other
members of the City Commission. The City Commission, by majority vote, may
overrule decisions of the Mayor. Challenges to the Mayor's ruling, when
seconded, shall be recognized and voted on without debate.
   (E)   Unless otherwise provided for herein, members of the City Commission
shall not interrupt other Commission members when they have the floor during
discussion and debate. Members of the City Commission may interrupt other
members to correct factual errors or mischaracterizations of a previously
presented viewpoint. When interrupting another member of the City Commission
pursuant to this division, the interrupting member shall request a "point of
clarification." Such a declaration shall cut off discussion and give the
interrupting Commissioner the floor for the limited purpose of correcting any
misstatements. Once such clarifications are presented, the floor shall
immediately return to the Commissioner who was interrupted.
   (F)   This section shall supersede Robert’s Rules of Order on any subjects
specifically addressed herein. On any matters not specifically addressed by
this section, Robert’s Rules of Order shall prevail.
(‘69 Code, § 2-27) (Ord. 520, passed 9-17-79; Am. Ord. 869, passed 9-7-88; Am.
Ord. 1717, passed 5-16-12)
Cross-reference:
   Authority to establish rules of procedure, order of business, see Charter §
3.05(d)
§ 30.13 CALLING MEETING TO ORDER; CHAIRMAN AND TEMPORARY CHAIRMAN.
   The Mayor, or in his absence the Vice-Mayor, of the City Commission shall
take the chair precisely at the hour appointed for any Commission meeting, and
shall immediately call the Commission to order. In the absence of both of them,
the City Clerk shall call the meeting to order and preside until a temporary
chairman is selected by the members of the Commission present. Upon the arrival
of the Mayor or Vice-Mayor, the temporary chairman shall relinquish the chair
on the conclusion of the business pending before the Commission.
(‘69 Code, § 2-28) (Ord. 162, passed 5-1-67)
§ 30.14 ROLL CALL.
   Before proceeding with the business of the meeting, the City Clerk or Deputy
City Clerk shall call the roll of the members and the names of the members of
the Commission absent or present shall be entered on the minutes.
(‘69 Code, § 2-29) (Ord. 162, passed 5-1-67)
§ 30.15 AGENDA.
   (A)   Agenda. The agenda of the City Commission shall be as follows:
      (1)   Meeting called to order;
      (2)   Roll call;
      (3)   Pledge of allegiance;
      (4)   Presentations;
      (5)   Announcement of items to be pulled from agenda;
      (6)   Items at the request of the public;
      (7)   Commission Auditor Report;
      (8)   Appeals of Board of Adjustment decisions;
      (9)   Announcement of board and committee appointments;
      (10)   Consent agenda;
      (11)   Ordinances and Resolutions;
      (12)   Regular agenda;
      (13)   Reports of League Representatives;
      (14)   Reports of the City Manager and City Attorney;
      (15)   Commission items;
      (16)   Old business;
      (17)   Adjourn.
   (B)   Reports of City Manager and City Attorney. At each regularly scheduled
meeting, the City Manager and the City Attorney shall present their reports.
Their reports shall consist of matters of importance requiring action by the
Commission. Prior to the regularly scheduled meetings, these reports shall be
submitted in writings for review by members of the Commission. On the first
regularly scheduled meeting of the month, the City Manager shall present his
report first, followed by the City Attorney’s report.
      (1)   The report of the Finance Director shall not be a part of the
regular agenda unless a report is requested by the City Manager or any member
of the Commission. Upon such request, the Finance Director shall be present to
present is report. Prior to presenting his report at the meeting, on a request
having been made for a report, he shall submit his report in writing in advance
for review by the members of the Commission. In the event the Finance Director
determines that a report is required and that Commission action may be
required, he may at any regularly schedule meeting ask to have a report from
the Finance Director made a part of the agenda. In such event, the Finance
Director’s report shall follow the report of the City Manager or the report of
the City Attorney as the case may be.
      (2)   At each regularly scheduled City Commission meeting, the City
Commission delegate to the Broward League of Cities (“BLOC”), or its successor,
shall present a report to the City Commission if there are any matters under
review and consideration by the BLOC which impact the city, or any proposal of
the BLOC to change any law, or any existing governmental or intergovernmental
policy or procedure at the city, county or state level. Whenever possible,
back-up material from the BLOC and other relevant sources shall be included in
the agenda materials as back-up to help prepare the public and the Commission
for any discussion they may wish to consider regarding items included in the
BLOC report.
   (C)   Reports of boards and committees. All boards and committees shall
submit their reports, if any, to the Commission at the regularly scheduled
meetings. If a written report is made, a copy shall be furnished in advance to
the Commission and the City Manager. If the report is verbal, the City Manager
shall be notified by the Board or Committee Chairman in order that the verbal
report may be included as part of the agenda. At the time the report is made,
the Commission may act on the report or receive the report for further study
and review before final legislative action.
   (D)   Items at the request of the public to be heard at a time certain.
Items at the request of the public, as stated on the order of business, shall
be heard at a time certain at all regular Commission meetings. The time certain
shall be 9:00 p.m. or after the last item before the adjournment of the regular
Commission meeting. To further the orderly progression of the meeting, the
items to be heard at the time certain shall only include municipal matters
before the Commission or municipal matters that may arise in the future.
Individuals may voice concerns regarding specific municipal activities such as
city government regulations, police, fire, school, utility, transportation,
waste disposal, or another specific municipal service provided by the city.
Items pertaining solely to personal matters should not be addressed at this
time. To maintain decorum and order, no person shall use loud, offensive,
disorderly, threatening, insulting, abusive, or foul language, or behave in an
offensive, disorderly, threatening, abusive, or insulting manner, or make
personal, impertinent, slanderous, or profane remarks during the meeting.
      (1)   Each individual desiring to address the Commission shall submit to
the City Clerk in writing only one of two forms requesting an opportunity to be
heard by 8:45 p.m. One form shall be for the request to speak for three minutes
at 9:00 p.m. or after the last item before the adjournment of the regular
Commission meeting. The other form shall be for the request to speak for five
minutes after the conclusion of all agenda items of the regular Commission
meeting. These forms shall be available in the Commission room during meetings
and on the afternoon prior to the meeting. They shall be returned to the City
Clerk, who shall present them to the Mayor at 9:00 p.m. or after the last item
before the adjournment of the regular Commission meeting, so that the members
of the public may be heard.
      (2)   Individuals desiring to address the Commission at 9:00 p.m. shall
limit their presentation to three minutes. Individuals desiring to address the
Commission after the last item before the adjournment of the regular Commission
meeting shall limit their presentation to five minutes. The City Clerk shall
keep the time limitations for each speaker with the use of a mechanical clock.
In no event shall an individual make two presentations before the Commission at
any one meeting, including one presentation at a time certain and the other
presentation as the last item before the adjournment of the meeting. There
shall be no debate or discussion by the Commission on items presented by
members of the public. Any member of the Commission desiring to further discuss
the matter may present it as a part of the agenda for the next regularly
scheduled meeting under “Commission Items.” No one shall interrupt or disrupt
an individual who is addressing the City Commission.
      (3)   Individuals requesting items of information or answers from the
administration shall be entitled to receive an answer from the city
administration at the time of their presentation. It is recognized that the
city administration’s answer may be that further study will be required before
an adequate answer can be given. On the next City Manager’s report after the
additional information has become available, the city administration shall note
that an answer was made to the question. The city administration shall always
use its best efforts to obtain answers to questions presented by members of the
public.
      (4)   To maintain order and decorum at City Commission meetings,
individuals should strictly adhere to the procedures enacted by this section.
Individuals failing to do so may not be allowed to present their concerns
before the Commission. Individuals who disturb, interrupt, or otherwise impede
the conduct of meetings, or who refuse to conform their discussion to items set
in the agenda, may be ejected from the meeting by the Chair. In addition to the
foregoing, for repeated disruptive behavior by an individual, the Chair may
preclude that individual from speaking at Commission meetings. The individual
may appeal to the Commission, which may overrule the Chair.
   (E)   Commission items. The section of the agenda known as “Commission
Items” shall consist of items brought forward by individual members of the
Commission. These items must be submitted to the City Clerk to be included as
part of the agenda and part of the meeting notice prior to noon on Wednesday
prior to their placement on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting.
These items shall be part of the meeting notice and part of the meeting agenda.
The name of the individual Commission member bringing forth the item shall be
placed with the agenda item to be presented. These Commission items shall be
presented by Commission members in rotating alphabetical order for each
regularly scheduled meeting. A second is not required for a motion to discuss
items presented by members of the City Commission. No member of the Commission
may present more than three items at any meeting.
   (F)   Commission Auditor Report. At a regularly scheduled City Commission
meeting, at the request of the City Commission, the Commission Auditor shall
attend, appear, and present report(s). The Commission Auditor report shall
include updates to the City Commission on matters contained within the annual
audit plan, financial matters of importance and other specific matters as may
be requested by the City Commission from time to time.
   (G)   City Commission meetings shall adjourn at 11:30 p.m. If the City
Commission is considering an item at 11:30 p.m., the discussion and any action
on the item being considered shall be completed prior to adjournment. All
remaining items on the agenda shall be deferred until the next regular meeting
of the City Commission. The City Commission may, by majority vote, extend the
time of its meetings past 11:30 p.m.
(`69 Code, § 2-30(a), (b), (c), (d), (f)) (Ord. 520, passed 9-17-79; Am. Ord.
562, passed 3-18-81; Am. Ord. 573, passed 8-19-81; Am. Ord. 586, passed 1-7-82;
Am. Ord. 696, passed 6-20-84; Am. Ord. 1141, passed 9-6-95; Am. Ord. 1158,
passed 5-1-96; Am. Ord. 1605, passed 4-16-08; Am. Ord. 1658, passed 3-17-10;
Am. Ord. 1711, passed 12-7-11; Am. Ord. 1910, passed 9-4-18; Am. Ord. 1979,
passed 12-15-21)
§ 30.16 DISCUSSION AND VOTING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Each member of the City Commission shall be entitled to speak only
twice on any one motion. This shall apply to the maker and seconder of the
motion as well as all others. Members of the public who speak on a specific
motion and not pursuant to §
30.15(D) shall be limited to two minutes each.
   (B)   No member of the Commission may speak in support of a motion until
such time as a member of the Commission has spoken in opposition to the motion.
After opposition has been presented, the rules of discussion as outlined herein
shall apply.
   (C)   All motions must be submitted in writing in the language to be used by
the member of the Commission making the motion subject to formal amendment by
the Commission, which shall subsequently be included in the minutes of the
meeting as part of the original motion as adopted. The maker of the motion
shall have the opportunity to speak last on the motion immediately prior to the
calling of the vote. At the time the vote is called, the City Clerk shall poll
the maker and seconder first. Then the City Clerk shall poll the Commission in
alphabetical order. Each succeeding vote shall begin with the next member of
the Commission in alphabetical order so that the same member of the Commission
will vote first after the maker and seconder only once and not consecutively.
   (D)   The Chairman of the meeting, whether the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, or any
other member of the Commission shall always vote last.
   (E)   The maker of the motion may make a statement explaining the purpose of
his motion at the time that the motion is made and seconded and accepted by the
Chairman.
(169 Code, § 2-30(e)) (Ord. 520, passed 9-17-79; Am. Ord. 562, passed 3-18-81;
Am. Ord. 573, passed 8-19-81; Am. Ord. 586, passed 1-7-82; Am. Ord. 696, passed
6-20-84)
§ 30.17 RULES OF DEBATE.
   (A)   Presiding officer. The presiding officer may debate from the chair and
by relinquishing the chair, may move and second and shall not be deprived of
any of the rights and privileges of a Commission member by reason of his acting
as the presiding officer.
   (B)   Obtaining the floor. Every person desiring to, speak shall address the
chair, and upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself to
the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language.
   (C)   Interruptions. A member of the Commission, or of the public, once
recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it is to call him to
order, or as herein otherwise provided.
   (D)   Motion to limit debate. A motion to limit debate shall take precedence
over all motions, except a motion to adjourn, a point of order, or a motion to
table. It shall not be debatable and shall require an affirmative vote of two-
thirds of the members of the Commission present in order to carry.
   (E)   Order of recognition. The members of the Commission, the Mayor, and
city officials shall be recognized first on any matter under discussion before
any member of the public shall be allowed to address the Commission.
   (F)   Addressing the Commission. Any person desiring to address the
Commission shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer and shall
give his name and address for the record. All remarks shall be addressed to the
Commission as a body and not to any member thereof, unless permission to do so
is first granted by the presiding officer. Unless further time is granted by
the presiding officer or the Commission, members of the public shall limit
their discussion or address to no more than five minutes. No question shall be
asked a Commission member or city official except through the presiding
officer.
(`69 Code, § 2-32) (Ord. 162, passed 5-1-67)
§ 30.18 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   Public hearings will be scheduled by the Commission as necessary at 6:00
p.m. or such later time as otherwise specified in the notice thereof and as may
otherwise be required by law. The time for commencement of such meetings shall
be determined by resolution from time to time, unless otherwise specified in
the notice thereof. All public hearings shall precede the regularly scheduled
Commission meeting and shall run consecutively at such earlier or later hours
as they may occur before the Commission.
(`69 Code, § 2-30(g)) (Ord. 520, passed 9-17-79; Am. Ord. 562, passed 3-18-81;
Am. Ord. 573, passed 8-19-81; Am. Ord. 586, passed 1-7-82; Am. Ord. 712, passed
10-3-84; Am. Ord. 1266, passed 6-17-98)
§ 30.19 WORKSHOP MEETINGS.
   (A)   Workshop meetings may be called from time to time as necessary and
held at times scheduled and approved by the City Commission. The Commission, by
majority vote, may schedule subjects for discussion at the workshop meeting.
Appropriate public notices of the workshop meeting shall be made in accordance
with state law. The City Manager may request a City Commission workshop at a
regular or special meeting of the City Commission, subject to the approval of a
majority of the City Commission, or at the behest of a majority of the City
Commission.
   (B)   If a workshop is scheduled immediately preceding a regular meeting of
the City Commission, then an item shall be placed on that regular meeting
agenda for the purpose of voting on all items discussed at the workshop
meeting. If there is not a regular meeting scheduled immediately following a
Commission workshop, then a special meeting of the City Commission shall be
convened immediately following the workshop for the purpose of voting on all
items discussed at the workshop meeting.
   (C)   In the event of an emergency threatening the health, safety or welfare
of the citizens and residents of the City, the Mayor, in his or her sole
discretion, may call an emergency workshop of the City Commission. A special
meeting of the City Commission shall be convened immediately following the
emergency workshop for the purpose of voting on all items discussed at the
workshop meeting. All discussion at an emergency workshop meeting shall be
limited to the subject matter of the emergency.
   (D)   Parliamentary procedure, as set forth in §
30.12, shall not apply to workshops of the City Commission. Discussion and
debate at City Commission workshops shall be organized, but informal, with the
mayor serving as the presiding officer. Each member of the City Commission
shall be afforded an opportunity to participate in the matter being discussed.
Discussion and debate shall be limited to the subject matter of the workshop.
   (E)   Public participation shall not be permitted at workshop meetings of
the City Commission. Members of the public shall be afforded an opportunity to
provide public comment during the regular or special City Commission meeting
immediately following the workshop meeting when the matter that was the subject
of the workshop meeting is presented to the City Commission for formal
consideration and a vote. This division shall not prohibit the participation of
experts who may be asked by the City Commission, or any member thereof, or any
Charter officer to participate in a workshop meeting for the purpose of
offering information related to the subject matter being discussed.
   (F)   To the extent possible, City Commission workshop meetings shall be
scheduled to accommodate the schedules of the members of the City Commission to
ensure attendance either in person or by remote participation. Whenever
possible, City Commission workshops shall be scheduled during a regular meeting
of the City Commission.
(`69 Code, § 2-30(h)) (Ord. 520, passed 9-17-79; Am. Ord. 562, passed 3-18-81;
Am. Ord. 573, passed 8-19-81; Am. Ord. 586, passed 1-7-82; Am. Ord. 1266,
passed 6-17-98; Am. Ord. 1717, passed 5-16-12)
§ 30.20 DECORUM, DISTURBING MEETING.
   (A)   While the City Commission is in session, the members thereof and the
public present in the Commission chambers shall not, by conversation or
otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceeding nor the peace of the Commission.
   (B)   No person shall willfully interrupt, delay or disturb the proceedings
or meeting of the City Commission or any city board.
   (C)   Only those individuals recognized by the Mayor are authorized to speak
to the Commission or to a city board. All other speech, remarks, or comments
are unauthorized.
   (D)   Unauthorized speech, remarks, comments, stamping of feet, whistles,
yells and similar actions or demonstrations constitute an interruption to
public meetings, and are prohibited.
   (E)   All persons attending any city meeting shall render inaudible any
beepers, cellular telephones, or other mechanical or electronic devices while
such meeting is in session.
   (F)   The Mayor shall preserve strict order and decorum at all meetings.
   (G)   The Chief of Police or such member or members of the Police Department
as the Chief may designate shall be sergeant-at-arms at the regular and special
meetings of the City Commission or board. The sergeant-at-arms shall carry out
orders and instructions given by the Mayor officer or by a majority of the City
Commission or board present for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at
the city commission meetings.
   (H)   Public participation at the city commission meetings shall be in the
following manner:
      (1)   Members of the public may speak only at times designated by the
mayor. Public speaking at City Commission workshops shall be permitted at the
discretion of the Mayor.
      (2)   If a member of the public is designated to speak on an item by the
Mayor, the member of the public shall step to the floor microphone and state
her/his name and address in an audible tone for the Clerk's record.
      (3)   Remarks shall be limited to the question(s) under discussion,
unless such remarks come during the public participation section of the meeting
pursuant to §
 30.15(D) of the city's Code of Ordinances. Speakers will be limited to three
minutes during this time. The Mayor may further reasonably limit the time
period provided for public comment, as necessary, in order to ensure that all
members of the public seeking to speak are afforded an opportunity to do so in
a timely manner. Members of the public are permitted and encouraged to submit
written testimony to the City Clerk, which shall become part of the official
public record.
      (4)   Public hearings consist of those agenda items where the public may
participate. The public shall speak only on the agendized subject. Speaking
time for members of the public is limited to three minutes for any particular
topic. Additional time may be added by the City Commission. Members of the
public shall not delegate or give their time, or any portion there of, to
another party. For a public hearing, the City Commission may set an aggregate
time limit for public comment. When an issue has been designated as quasi-
judicial, public remarks shall only be heard during a quasi-judicial hearing
that has been properly noticed for that matter.
      (5)   During public participation any member of the public may speak to
any issue that is not on the agenda for public hearing during the City
Commission meeting, pursuant to §
30.15(D) of the city's Code of Ordinances.
      (6)   Any person making disruptive, impertinent or slanderous remarks, or
who shall become boisterous while addressing the City Commission and refuses to
stop may be requested to leave the meeting by the Mayor, pursuant to divisions
(I)(1) and (I)(2).
      (7)   Persons whose allotted time to speak has expired shall be so
advised by the Mayor to conclude. Cumulative and repetitive testimony should be
avoided on any matter. Persons of the same position as the previous speaker may
simply state their names, address and the positions with which they agree.
Members of the public are permitted and encouraged to submit written testimony
to the City Clerk in advance of a City Commission meeting, which shall become
part of the official public record.
   (I)   Any person who causes a delay or interruption of the meeting shall be
warned by the Mayor that the conduct is interfering with the order of the
meeting and shall be given the opportunity to cease the conduct that
constitutes a delay or interruption.
      (1)   If the individual fails to cease the offending conduct and
continues interrupting the meeting, the individual shall be removed from the
meeting room if the sergeant-at-arms is so directed by the Mayor, and such
person shall be barred from further audience for the remainder of the meeting.
      (2)   In case the Mayor shall fail to act, any member of the City
Commission may move to require the Mayor to act to enforce the rules, and the
affirmative vote of the majority of the City Commission or board shall require
the Mayor to act.
   (J)   Any person who, at a City Commission or board meeting, willfully
interrupts or disturbs a City Commission or board meeting in violation of F.S.
§ 871.01, entitled "Disturbing Schools and Religious and Other Assemblies," is
subject to arrest by those law enforcement officers present.
(`69 Code, S 2-33) (Ord. 162, passed 5-1-67; Am. Ord. 1717, passed 5-16-12)
§ 30.21 ELECTRONIC MEETINGS DURING A PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY.
   Pursuant to the city’s Charter and Code of Ordinances, the Home Rule
authority of the Mayor and the City Commission, Chapter 252, Florida Statutes,
Section 4D of Governor DeSantis’ Executive Order 20-52, and based upon the
legislative findings set forth in the recitals in Ordinance No. 1952, the City
Commission is hereby authorized, during a declared public health emergency, to
arrange for the City Commission, and all boards and committees to meet
electronically. Such meetings shall be planned and conducted in consultation
with the City Attorney’s Office to ensure, to the extent practicable,
substantial compliance with Section 286.001, Florida Statutes, “Florida’s
Sunshine Law.” (Ord. 1952, passed 11-18-20)
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
§ 30.30 PROCEDURE FOR ADOPTION.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ORDINANCE. An official legislative action of the City Commission,
which is a regulation of a general and permanent nature and enforceable as a
local law.
      (2)   RESOLUTION. An expression of the City Commission concerning matters
of administration, an expression of a temporary character, or a provision for
the disposition of a particular item of the administrative business of the
Commission.
   (B)   Each ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing and shall
embrace but one subject and matters properly connected herewith. The subject
shall be clearly stated in the title. No ordinance shall be revised or amended
by reference to its title only. Ordinances to revise or amend shall set out in
full the revised or amended act, section or subsection, or paragraph of a
section or subsection.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (E) below, a proposed ordinance may be
read by title, or in full, on at least two separate days and shall, at least
ten days prior to adoption, be noticed once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality. The notice of proposed enactment shall state
the date, time, and place of the meeting; the title or titles of proposed
ordinances; and the place or places within the municipality where such proposed
ordinances may be inspected by the public. The notice shall also advise that
interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard with respect to the
proposed ordinance.
   (D)   The City Commission may, by a two-thirds vote, enact an emergency
ordinance without complying with the requirements of division (C). However, no
emergency ordinance shall be enacted which enacts or amends a land use plan or
which rezones private real property.
   (E)   Ordinances initiated by the City Commission or its designee which
rezone specific parcels of private real property or which substantially change
permitted use categories in zoning districts shall be enacted pursuant to the
following procedure:
      (1)   In cases in which the proposed rezoning or change in permitted use
involves less than 5% of the total land area of the municipality, the City
Commission shall direct the City Clerk to notify by mail each real property
owner whose land the municipality will rezone or whose land will be affected by
the change in permitted use by enactment of the ordinance and whose address is
known by reference to the latest ad valorem tax records. The notice shall state
the substance of the proposed ordinance as it affects that property owner and
shall set a time and place for one or more public hearings on such ordinance.
Notice shall be given at least 30 days prior to the date set for the public
hearing, and a copy of the notice shall be kept available for public inspection
during the regular business hours of the office of the City Clerk. The City
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance and may, upon
the conclusion of the hearing, immediately adopt the ordinance.
      (2)   In cases in which the proposed ordinance deals with more than 5% of
the total land area of the municipality, the City Commission shall provide for
public notice and hearings as follows:
         (a)   The Commission shall hold two advertised public hearings on the
proposed ordinance. Both hearings shall be held after 5:00 p.m. on a weekday,
and the first shall be held approximately seven days after the day that the
first advertisement is published. The second hearing shall be held
approximately two weeks after the first hearing and shall be advertised
approximately five days prior to the public hearing. The day, time, and place
at which the second public hearing will be held shall be announced at the first
public hearing.
         (b)   The required advertisements shall be no less than one- quarter
page in a standard size or a tabloid size newspaper, and the headline in the
advertisement shall be in a type no smaller than 18 point. The advertisement
shall not be placed in that portion of the newspaper where legal notices and
classified advertisements appear. The advertisement shall be published in a
newspaper of general paid circulation in the municipality and of general
interest and readership in the community, not one of limited subject matter,
pursuant to F.S. Chapter 50. Whenever possible, the advertisement should appear
in a newspaper that is published at least five days a week unless the only
newspaper in the community is published less than five days a week.
         (c)   The advertisement shall be in the following form:
      NOTICE OF ZONING (PERMITTED USE) CHANGE
   The         (name of local governmental unit) proposes to rezone (change the
permitted use of) the land within the area shown in the map in this
advertisement.
   A public hearing on the rezoning will be held on (date and time) at (meeting
place).
   The advertisement shall also contain a geographic location map which clearly
indicates the area covered by the proposed ordinance. The map shall include
major street names as a means of identification of the area.
         (d)   In lieu of publishing the advertisement set out in (c) above,
the municipality may mail a notice to each person owning real property within
the area covered by the ordinance. The notice shall clearly explain the
proposed ordinance and shall notify the person of the time, place, and location
of both public hearings on the proposed ordinance.
   (F)   A majority of the members of the City Commission shall constitute a
quorum. An affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum present is necessary to
enact any ordinance or adopt any resolution; however, two-thirds of the
membership of the Commission is required to enact an emergency ordinance. On
final passage, the vote of each member of the Commission voting shall be
entered on the official record of the meeting. All ordinances or resolutions
passed by the Commission shall become effective ten days after passage or as
otherwise provided therein.
   (G)   Every ordinance or resolution shall, upon its final passage, be
recorded in a book kept for that purpose and shall be signed by the Presiding
Officer and the City Clerk.
   (H)   The procedure as set forth herein shall constitute a uniform method
for the adoption and enactment of municipal ordinances and resolutions and
shall be taken as cumulative to other methods now provided by law for adoption
and enactment of municipal ordinances and resolutions. By future ordinance or
charter amendment, the city may specify additional requirements for the
adoption or enactment of ordinances or resolutions or prescribe procedures in
greater detail than contained herein. However, the city shall not have the
power or authority to lessen or reduce the requirements of this section or
other requirements as provided by general law.
(F.S. § 166.041)
§ 30.31 WHEN TO ENACT LEGISLATION AS ORDINANCE RATHER THAN RESOLUTION.
   (A)   All enactments of the City Commission of a permanent and general
nature, and intended to become a part of the code of ordinances of the city,
shall be enacted by the passage of an ordinance. Enactments of a temporary or
special nature shall be enacted by the adoption of a resolution, unless
otherwise specified or directed by law.
   (B)   All enactments of a penal nature or providing for the imposition of a
penalty for the violation thereof shall be by ordinance.
   (C)   Municipal budgets and tax levies may be adopted by resolution.
(`69 Code, § 2-46) (Ord. 9, passed 2-22-60)
§ 30.32 FINANCIAL IMPACT OF PROPOSED CHARTER AMENDMENTS.
   For all elections, beginning with the November 2, 2010 General Election, the
City Commission shall receive a separate financial impact statement, not to
exceed 75 words, estimating the increase or decrease in revenues or costs to
the city resulting from the approval of any proposed Charter amendment. The
financial impact statement shall be prepared at the direction of the City
Commission, and no item shall appear on the ballot without approval by the City
Commission of both the proposed Charter amendment and the financial impact
statement.
(Ord. 1663, passed 5-5-10)
MINUTES AS RECORD OF COMMISSION PROCEEDINGS
§ 30.40 PREPARATION OF MINUTES; DISTRIBUTION TO COMMISSION.
   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk or his Deputy to prepare, in printed
form, the minutes of the proceedings of the City Commission whenever it is in
official session. Copies of the minutes shall be distributed to each
Commissioner, the Mayor, City Manager, and City Attorney as soon as possible
after the meeting for which they were taken.
(`69 Code, § 2-52) (Ord. 76, passed 1-21-63)
§ 30.41 READING OF MINUTES.
   Unless a reading of the minutes of a Commission meeting is requested by a
majority of the Commission present, the minutes may be approved without
reading.
(`69 Code, § 2-31) (Ord. 162, passed 5-1-67)
§ 30.42 MINUTES AS OFFICIAL RECORD WHEN APPROVED BY COMMISSION.
   The minutes of the City Commission, after approval by the Commission, shall
be filed in a permanent record book, to be kept in the custody of the City
Clerk and shall be open to the public for inspection. This permanent record of
the minutes shall be the official record and journal of the proceedings of the
Commission.
(`69 Code, § 2-53) (Ord. 76, passed 1-21-63)
§ 30.43 FURNISHING COPIES OF MINUTES TO PUBLIC; FEE.
   The City Clerk is authorized to furnish copies of the minutes to the public,
when requested by the public. When so requested, the City Clerk shall charge a
fee of $1 for each certification of the minutes, together with the cost of
reproduction of the minutes, such fees to be deposited in the General Revenue
Fund of the city.
(`69 Code, § 2-54) (Ord. 76, passed 1-21-63)
§ 30.44 CONTENTS OF MINUTES.
   The minutes of the City Commission meetings shall contain, but not be
limited to the following information.
   (A)   Date, time, and place of holding of the meetings and time of
adjournment.
   (B)   The attendance or absence of the members of the City Commission, City
Clerk, City Manager, and City Attorney.
   (C)   The type of meeting held, whether regular or special, and if special
by whom called. A copy of the agenda shall accompany the minutes of each
meeting and be kept in the official journal of the minutes.
   (D)   A verbatim account of all motions made, by whom made and seconded, and
a record of the vote or action taken in the meeting, together with a record of
the ayes and nays.
   (E)   The City Treasurer’s report.
   (F)   A brief summary of the reports of officers, officials, and committees
and petitions, remonstrances, or grievances presented to the Commission, at its
meeting.
   (G)   The introduction of ordinances and resolutions, the action taken
thereon, including an account as to the number of readings, and whether read by
title or in full.
(‘69 Code, § 2-55) (Ord. 76, passed 1-21-63)
§ 30.45 RECORDING REMARKS VERBATIM.
   Each Commission member and the Mayor shall have the privilege, upon request,
to have his remarks recorded verbatim in the minutes. Such a request shall be
made during the course of the meeting.
(‘69 Code, § 2-56)   (Ord. 76, passed 1-21-63)
§ 30.46 USE OF RECORDING DEVICES.
   (A)   Oral recording of City Commission meetings shall be made by use of a
voice-recording device or machine. However, no Commission meeting shall be
deemed invalid or illegal because of the failure to use such device or the
taking of voice transcriptions.
   (B)   The records taken by a recording device shall be a public record and
shall be kept in the possession of the City Clerk.
(‘69 Code, § 2-57) (Ord. 76, passed 1-21-63)
CODE OF ETHICS
§ 30.50 CODE OF ETHICS.
   (A)   The City Commission shall be dedicated to the concepts of effective
and democratic local government through its elected officials.
   (B)   Each Commission member pledges himself to affirm the dignity and worth
of the services rendered by local government and to maintain a constructive,
creative, and practical attitude towards urban affairs incorporating a deep
sense of social responsibility as public servants.
   (C)   Each Commission member dedicates himself to the highest ideals of
honor and integrity in all personal and public relationships in order to merit
the respect and confidence of fellow elected officials, of the city officials
and employees, and of the public, whom he serves.
   (D)   The Commission recognizes that the chief function of the local
government, at all times, is to serve the best interests of all of the people.
   (E)   The Commission pledges itself to keep the community informed on
municipal affairs; to encourage communication between the citizens and all
municipal officials; to emphasize friendly and courteous service to the public;
and to seek to improve the quality and image of public service.
   (F)   Each Commission member pledges that he will seek no favor or personal
profit or misuse his public office.
   (G)   When appearing before any other governmental body, each Commission
member pledges to inform that body that the issue before them has or has not
been addressed officially by the Commission, and further, to inform that body
of any official position taken by the Commission, and to indicate that his
appearance is authorized by the Commission.
   (H)   The Commission and each individual member pledges to uphold and not to
violate the provisions of the Charter of the city.
(‘69 Code, § 2-58) (Ord. 549, passed 11-15-80)
§ 30.51 VIOLATION OF CODE.
   Any member of the City Commission that violates the ethics and pledges
contained in §
30.50, shall be subject to censure by at least five-sevenths vote of the
Commission.
(‘69 Code, § 2-59) (Ord. 549, passed 11-15-80)
VACANCY IN CANDIDACY
§ 30.60 VACANCY IN CANDIDACY FOR CITY COMMISSION MEMBER AND CHARTER REVIEW
BOARD MEMBER.
   If the death, or removal for the ballot of a qualified candidate for the
office of City Commission member, including the position of Mayor, or Charter
Review Board Member (“Vacancy or Vacancies” hereafter), occurs after the close
of registration for candidates for this office, and if the death or removal
leaves fewer than two candidates for the office before the election, the
qualifying period for that office shall be reopened for a period of three days
following the date the vacancy occurs. All qualified candidates registered
during the period shall be placed on the ballot at the election along with the
remaining candidate provided, however, if there is insufficient time to place
the matter at the scheduled election, a special municipal election shall be
called by the City Commission, which election shall be conducted in accordance
with the procedures for conducting elections as provided by the laws of the
state. The City Clerk shall promptly post notice at City Hall in a conspicuous
place of the opening of registration.
(Ord. 974, passed 10-16-91)
PEMBROKE PINES LOBBYIST REGISTRATION ACT
§ 30.70 TITLE; INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Sections
30.70 through
30.76 of Title III, Pembroke Pines Code of Ordinances, may be cited as the
"Pembroke Pines Lobbyist Registration Act."
   (B)   The Broward County Code of Ethics for Elected Officials provides that
all municipalities in Broward County shall establish lobbyist registration
procedures. The City Commission determines that the registration of lobbyists
promotes the integrity of the governmental decision-making process and fosters
transparency in government by providing the identity and activities of certain
persons who engage in efforts to influence City Commissioners and decision-
making bodies under the jurisdiction of the City Commission.
(Ord. 1712, passed 12-21-11)
§ 30.71 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The City Commission of Pembroke Pines, Florida or any other decision-
making body under the jurisdiction of the City Commission.
   LOBBYING OR LOBBYING ACTIVITIES. A communication, by any means, from a
lobbyist to a member of a Board regarding any item that will foreseeably be
decided by the Board, which communication seeks to influence, convince, or
persuade the covered individual to support or oppose the item. LOBBYING does
not include communications made on the record at a duly-noticed public meeting
or hearing.
   LOBBYIST. A person who is retained, with or without compensation, for the
purpose of lobbying, or a person who is employed by another person or entity,
on a full-time or part-time basis, principally to lobby on behalf of that other
person or entity. LOBBYIST does not include a person who is:
      (1)   An elected official, employee, or appointee of Broward County or of
any municipality within Broward County communicating in his or her official
capacity.
      (2)   An individual who communicates on his or her own behalf, or on
behalf of a person or entity employing the individual on a full-time or part-
time basis, unless the individual is principally employed by that person or
entity to lobby.
      (3)   Any employee, officer, or board member of a homeowners'
association, condominium association, or neighborhood association when
addressing, in his or her capacity as an employee, officer, or board member of
such association, an issue impacting the association or its members; or
      (4)   Any employee, an officer, or a board member of a nonprofit public
interest entity (e.g., Sierra Club, NAACP, ACLU) when addressing an issue
impacting a constituent of that entity.
   PERSON.  Any individual, business, corporation, association, firm,
partnership, nonprofit organization, or other organization or group.
(Ord. 1712, passed 12-21-11)
§ 30.72 LOBBYIST REGISTRATION AND STATEMENTS.
   (A)   Registration statement required. By January 2, 2012 and annually
thereafter, every lobbyist shall file with the City Clerk the following
information:
      (1)   Prior to engaging in lobbying activities, a registration statement
under oath containing the following information:
         (a)   The lobbyist's full name, residence address, business address,
and nature of business.
         (b)   The full name and address of all persons on whose behalf the
lobbyist will be lobbying. If, after filing the registration statement, the
lobbyist intends to lobby on behalf of any person(s) not listed on the
registration statement, the lobbyist shall, prior to engaging in any lobbying
activities on behalf of such unlisted person(s), file an amendment to the
registration statement in form prescribed by the City Clerk, containing all the
information required in the annual registration statement.
         (c)   The subject matters which the lobbyist seeks to influence.
         (d)   The extent of any direct business association by the lobbyist
with any current elected or appointed official or employee of the City of
Pembroke Pines. For the purposes of this subchapter, the term DIRECT BUSINESS
ASSOCIATION shall mean any mutual endeavor undertaken for profit or
compensation.
         (e)   A lobbyist representing a group, association, or organization
shall, prior to engaging in lobbying, receive appropriate authorization from
said group, association, or organization to lobby on its behalf upon a
particular subject matter. A copy of the applicable minutes, motion, or other
documentation of action shall be attached to the statements required this
subsection.
   (B)   List of current lobbyists. The City Clerk's office shall keep a
current list of registered lobbyists and their respective reports required
under this subchapter, all of which shall be open for public inspection.
   (C)   Fees. A lobbyist shall pay to the City Clerk's office an annual
registration fee. The registration fees required by this section shall be
expended for the purpose of defraying the administrative costs of implementing,
monitoring, and otherwise ensuring compliance with this section and shall be
determined by resolution of the City Commission. A lobbyist, who is lobbying as
a volunteer, without any compensation, is not required to pay a registration
fee in connection with those uncompensated lobbying activities.  
(Ord. 1712, passed 12-21-11)
§ 30.73 FILING OF CONTACT LOG.
   To promote full and complete transparency, lobbyists and their principals or
employers who intend to meet or otherwise communicate with a member of the
Board for the purpose of engaging in lobbying activities, either at the Board
member's offices or elsewhere on City premises, must legibly complete a contact
log listing each member of the Board with whom the lobbyist, principal, or
employer meets or intends on meeting or communicating.
   (A)   The information stated on the contact log shall include the lobbyist's
name; the name of the entity by which the lobbyist is employed; the name of the
person or entity for whom or which he or she is lobbying; the name of each
member of the Board with whom he or she is meeting or communicating; the date
and time of each such meeting; and the specific purpose and subject matter of
each such meeting.
   (B)   The contact log shall be completed contemporaneously with the meeting
(s) and shall be filed for public inspection.
(Ord. 1712, passed 12-21-11)
§ 30.74 PROHIBITION ON USE OF LOBBYING STATEMENTS.
   No information obtained from lobbying statements required by this subchapter
shall be sold or utilized by any person for the purpose of soliciting campaign
contributions or selling tickets to a testimonial or similar fund-raising
affair or for commercial purposes.
(Ord. 1712, passed 12-21-11)
§ 30.75 CONTINGENCY FEES; DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   CONTINGENCY FEE means a fee, bonus, commission, or non-monetary
benefit as compensation which is dependent or in any way contingent on the
enactment, defeat, modification, or other outcome of any specific action of the
City Commission.
   (B)   A lobbyist shall separately disclose to the City Clerk any
compensation received in the form of contingency.
(Ord. 1712, passed 12-21-11)
§ 30.76 PENALTIES.
   (A)   The City Attorney or City Manager, or their designee, shall be
informed of any person engaged in lobbying activities who has failed to comply
with the registration, reporting requirements and prohibitions of this
subchapter, and, in each such instance, shall conduct such investigation as he
or she shall deem necessary under the circumstances. The results of each
investigation shall be reported to the City Commission.
   (B)   The City Commission may warn, reprimand, or censure the violator or
may suspend or prohibit the violator from appearing on behalf of any employer
before the City Commission or any decision-making body under the jurisdiction
of the City Commission or from otherwise lobbying for any employer in any
fashion for a period of time; provided, however, that any suspension or
prohibition may not exceed a period of two years, and no sanction shall be
imposed unless the lobbyist allegedly in violation has been afforded reasonable
notice and an opportunity to be heard.
   (C)   The validity of any action taken by the City Commission, city
employees, or any decision-making body under the jurisdiction of the City
Commission, shall not be affected by the failure of any person to comply with
the provisions of this subchapter.
   (D)   In addition to the penalties provided by this section, individuals
found to be in violation may be subject to additional penalties as provided by
law. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the
Broward County Office of the Inspector General as provided for by Article XII
of the Broward County Charter.
(Ord. 1712, passed 12-21-11)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.01   City Attorney
   
31.02   City Clerk; Deputy City Clerk
   
31.03   City Manager
   
31.04   Code Enforcement Officer
   
31.05   Finance Director
   
31.06   Fire Chief
   
31.07   Local Business Tax Receipt Inspector
   
31.08   Mayor; Vice-Mayor
   
31.09   Police Chief
   
31.10   Public Defender
   
31.11   Annual performance review of charter officers
Cross-reference:
   Conflicts of interest prohibited, see §§
33.20 through
33.22
§ 31.01 CITY ATTORNEY.
   For provisions concerning the City Attorney, see Charter §
4.07.
§ 31.02 CITY CLERK; DEPUTY CITY CLERK.
   For provisions concerning the City Clerk and the Deputy City Clerk, see
Charter §
4.01.
Cross-reference:
   City Clerk to be custodian of public records, see §
33.02.
§ 31.03 CITY MANAGER.
   For provisions concerning the City Manager, see Charter §§
4.01 through
4.05.
§ 31.04 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   There is established in the city a position to be known as Code Enforcement
Officer. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce all
provisions of the code. The Code Enforcement Officer is granted the power of
arrest in the same manner and to the same degree as the police officers of the
city and he shall have the power to issue summons for code violations.
(‘69 Code, § 5-6) Ord. 393, passed 3-17-75)
§ 31.05 FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   For provisions concerning the Finance Director, see Charter §
4.06.
§ 31.06 FIRE CHIEF.
   For provisions concerning the Fire Chief, see § 32.081 of this code.
§ 31.07 LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT INSPECTOR.
   For provisions concerning the Local Business Tax Receipt Inspector, see §
115.45 of this code.
(Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 31.08 MAYOR; VICE-MAYOR.
   For provisions concerning the Mayor and Vice- Mayor, see Charter §§
3.03 and
3.04.
§ 31.09 POLICE CHIEF.
   For provisions concerning the Police Chief, see §§ 32.105 through 32.107 of
this code. See also Charter §
9.04.
§ 31.10 PUBLIC DEFENDER.
   The office of Public Defender is created for the city. The Public Defender
shall be an attorney licensed to practice in the courts of the state.
(‘69 Code, § 5-111)
   (B)   The Public Defender shall be appointed by the City Commission and
shall serve at the will of the Commission determined by an affirmative vote of
four or more of the commission members.
(‘69 Code, § 5-112)
   (C)   The office of the Public Defender shall be a part-time position, the
compensation for which shall be determined by resolution of the Commission.
(‘69 Code, § 5-113)
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the Public Defender to defend all cases
assigned to him and to appear in court whenever necessary.
(‘69 Code, § 5-114) (Ord. 292, passed 8-21-72)
§ 31.11 ANNUAL PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF CHARTER OFFICERS.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CHARTER OFFICER. Those city positions identified in the City Charter who
are hired by and report to the City Commission.
      EVALUATION FORM. The written performance evaluation form created by the
Human Resources Department and approved by the City Commission. The evaluation
form shall be presented to the City Commission for consideration no later than
45 days following the adoption of this section.
   (B)   Beginning in 2013, and annually thereafter, each Charter officer shall
be given a written performance review in accordance with the following
procedure:
      (1)   No later than the second regular meeting in June, the City Clerk
shall provide each member of the City Commission with one evaluation form for
each Charter officer.
      (2)   Each member of the City Commission shall submit their completed
evaluation forms to the City Clerk no later than the second regular meeting in
August. The evaluation forms shall be retained by the City Clerk as public
records pursuant to F.S. Ch. 119.
(Ord. 1745, passed 2-20-13)
CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Appointment Process for City Advisory  Boards and Committees
   
32.001   Appointment process
   
32.002   Composition of city advisory boards
   
32.003   Eligibility of city advisory board members
   
32.004   Application and appointment process
   
32.005   Terms of appointees
   
32.006   Attendance requirement for advisory board members
   
32.007   Quorum
   
32.008   Officers
   
32.009   Procedures; public records, the Sunshine Law
   
32.010   Compensation
   
32.011   Annual report
Architectural Review Board
   
32.020   Establishment and intent
   
32.021   Powers and duties
   
32.022   Meetings
Board of Adjustment
   
32.030   Definitions
   
32.031   (Reserved)
   
32.032   (Reserved)
   
32.033   (Reserved)
   
32.034   Granting variance or permit applications, deciding appeals
   
32.035   Time limit for use of variance permit
Charter Review Board
   
32.040   Establishment and intent
Civil Defense Department
   
32.041   Establishment and intent
Code Enforcement Board
   
32.050   Establishment and intent
   
32.051   Definitions
   
32.052   Organization of Board
   
32.053   Qualifications of members
   
32.054   Jurisdiction
   
32.055   Powers and duties
   
32.056   Notice of violation
   
32.057   Hearings
   
32.058   Imposition of fine; liens
   
32.059   Additional remedies
   
32.060   Appeal of Board decision
   
32.061   Jurisdiction of Circuit Court
   
32.062   Method of delivering any notice required by subchapter
Alternative Code Enforcement
   
32.063   County uniform code citation form
   
32.064   Alternative code enforcement system; Special Magistrate
   
32.065   Schedule of fines and penalties
   
32.066   Enforcement of codes or ordinances; penalties
Crowd Management and  Safety Task Force
   
32.070   Establishment and intent
   
32.071   Appropriate areas of review and consideration
   
32.072   Inspection required for certain events
   
32.073   Additional recommendations, information may be supplied to task force
Finance Department
   
32.075   Establishment and intent
Fire Department
   
32.076   Establishment and intent
   
32.077   Fire Chief
   
32.078   Operation of Department
   
32.079   Nonemergency transportation service
Planning and Zoning Board
   
32.080   Establishment and intent
   
32.081   Meetings and vote requirement
   
32.082   Duties and responsibilities
Police Department
   
32.090   Establishment and intent
   
32.091   Complaints against police officers
   
32.092   Automatic telephone dialing alarm systems
Unsafe Structures Board
   
32.093   Establishment and intent
Utilities Department
   
32.094   Establishment and intent
Environmental Advisory Board
   
32.100   Establishment and intent
   
32.101   Ex officio members; appointment of members; composition, quorum
   
32.102   Objectives, purposes
   
32.103   Meetings
Charter School Advisory Board
   
32.110   Establishment and intent
   
32.111   Duties
   
32.112   Board action advisory only
   
32.113   Composition; appointment of members; terms of appointment
   
32.114   Qualifications of membership
   
32.115   Meetings, dates, procedures, records and quorum
   
32.116   Assistance to the Board
   
32.117   Funding
Economic Development Board
   
32.120   Establishment and intent
   
32.121   Duties
   
32.122   Board action advisory only
   
32.123   Composition; appointment of members
   
32.124   Qualifications of membership
   
32.125   Meetings, dates, procedures, records, and quorum
   
32.126   Assistance to the Board
   
32.127   Funding
Arts and Culture Advisory Board
   
32.130   Establishment and intent
   
32.131   Duties
   
32.132   Board action advisory only
   
32.133   Composition; appointment of members
   
32.134   Qualification of membership
   
32.135   Meetings, dates, procedures, records and quorum
   
32.136   Assistance to the Board
   
32.137   Funding
River of Grass Cultural Arts Center Advisory Board
   
32.138   Establishment and intent
   
32.139   Duties
   
32.140   Board action advisory only
   
32.141   Composition; appointment of members; terms of appointment
   
32.142   Meetings, dates, procedures, records and quorum
   
32.143   Removal of members
   
32.144   Assistance to the Board
   
32.145   Funding
Citizen Budget Advisory Board
   
32.146   Establishment and intent
   
32.147   Composition and ex-officio members; appointment of members; quorum
   
32.148   Duties, responsibilities, and exclusions
   
32.149   Meetings
Education Advisory Board
   
32.150   Establishment and intent
   
32.151   Duties and responsibilities
   
32.152   Board action advisory only
   
32.153   Assistance to the Board
Affordable Housing Advisory Committee
   
32.160   Establishment
   
32.161   Composition; appointment of members; terms of office
   
32.162   Officers; quorum
   
32.163   Duties and responsibilities
   
32.164   Annual report of the Affordable Housing Advisory Committee
   
32.165   Consideration and approval of report; notice; public hearing
   
32.166   City Commission consideration of Affordable Housing Advisory Committee
report
   
32.167   Assistance to the Board
   
32.168   Funding
Cross-reference:
   Affordable Housing Program, see
Ch. 158
   
32.170   Homeowners’ association and condominium association board member
emergency contact information
   Public Art Committee
   
32.180   Establishment and mission
   
32.181   Composition
   
32.182   Meetings
   
32.183   Duties and responsibilities
   
32.184   Conflicts of interest prohibited
Cross-reference:
   Public Art Program, see §§
97.40 -
97.42
Diversity and Heritage Advisory Board
   
32.190   Establishment and mission
   
32.191   Duties and responsibilities
   
32.192   Composition and quorum
   
32.193   Meetings
   
32.194   Board action advisory only
   
32.195   Assistance to the Board
Youth Advisory Board
   
32.197   Creation
   
32.198   Powers and duties
Code of Ethics
   
32.200   Code of ethics for quasi-judicial advisory board members
APPOINTMENT PROCESS FOR CITY ADVISORY BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
§ 32.001 APPOINTMENT PROCESS.
   The City Commission shall follow the following process for the appointment
of regular members and alternate members to all city advisory boards and
committees other than the Charter Review Board, the Code Enforcement Board, the
city's Charter School Advisory Boards, the Police and Fire Pension Board, and
the River of Grass Arts Park Advisory Board. With respect to any advisory board
or committee created after the adoption of this section, the applicable
resolution or ordinance shall specify whether the processes as stated in this
section apply to the appointment of advisory board or committee members. (Ord.
1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.002 COMPOSITION OF CITY ADVISORY BOARDS.
   Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, all city advisory boards
shall be comprised of five voting members and two alternate members. The voting
members shall be appointed in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
32.004. The alternate members of all city advisory boards shall be appointed by
the Mayor. In the event of a vacancy on a city advisory board, the board's
alternate members shall not automatically fill the vacant position. The
Commission member from the district in which the vacancy occurred shall fill
the vacancy pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.003 ELIGIBILITY OF CITY ADVISORY BOARD MEMBERS.
   Unless otherwise provided for in this code of ordinances or the Florida
Statutes, as may be amended from time to time, all members of the city's
advisory boards shall be residents of the City of Pembroke Pines. This section
shall not apply to the Economic Development Board. (Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.004 APPLICATION AND APPOINTMENT PROCESS.
   (A)   The City Commission shall request that individuals who meet the
qualification requirements for a specific advisory board and/or committee
submit an application for appointment to a specific advisory board. The City
Clerk shall provide notice of the request for applications for appointment to
the city's advisory boards and committees through notices posted at City Hall,
on the city's web site, on the city's cable television station, and in local
newspapers of general circulation. The form of the application shall be
approved by the City Commission by resolution, and be kept on file in the City
Clerk's office.
   (B)   Once all applications are submitted, the City Clerk shall provide
copies of all of the applications for each prospective member to the Mayor and
Commissioners for their review.
   (C)   The Mayor shall appoint one applicant to serve as a voting member of
each of the city's advisory boards. Each Commissioner shall appoint one
applicant who is a resident of their district to serve on each of the city's
advisory boards. If no applications are received from a particular district,
the Commissioner representing that district shall use reasonable efforts to
locate a resident within that district that is willing to serve. Such efforts
may include requesting the City Clerk to re-advertise the open position on a
particular advisory board. If no residents within a particular district are
willing or able to serve on a city advisory board, the Commissioner
representing that district may consider applicants from outside of the district
to fill the position on the advisory board.
   (D)   The Mayor and each City Commissioner shall provide the names of their
appointees to the city's advisory board to the City Clerk for placement on the
City Commission agenda. The Mayor and each City Commissioner shall announce
their appointees to the city's advisory boards at a public meeting of the City
Commission. No further action shall be required by the City Commission to
approve the Mayor or City Commissioners' appointees to the city's advisory
boards. (Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.005 TERMS OF APPOINTEES.
   Except where otherwise provided by, or inconsistent with, the City Charter,
general or special law, all appointees to advisory boards and committees shall
serve at the pleasure of the appointing member of the City Commission, or until
the appointing member of the City Commissioner vacates his or her office for
any reason.
   (A)   If the appointing member of the City Commission vacates his or her
office for any reason, the terms of the respective advisory board or committee
members appointed by the member of the City Commission shall terminate at the
time the new member of the City Commission appoints a replacement member to the
advisory board or committee.
   (B)   Upon certification of an election in which a new Mayor or City
Commissioner has been elected, the City Clerk shall notify all advisory board
and committee members appointed by the outgoing Mayor/ Commissioner of the
expiration of their terms.
   (C)   Best efforts shall be employed to ensure that membership of all city
advisory boards and committees will fairly represent the diverse population and
demographics of the city. (Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.006 ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENT FOR ADVISORY BOARD MEMBERS.
   (A)   It is the express purpose and intent of this City Commission pursuant
to this section to impose an attendance requirement on all members of city
boards not otherwise governed by Florida Statutes or the City Charter. For
purposes of this section, an UNEXCUSED ABSENCE shall be defined as an absence
where the absentee board member did not notify the City Clerk, or his or her
designee, in advance of a meeting that they would not be able to attend the
meeting. If an advisory board member notifies the City Clerk, or his or her
designee, in advance of a meeting that they will not be in attendance, then the
absence shall be excused by the board. Each advisory board shall, at each
meeting, determine by majority vote whether a member's absence is excused or
unexcused.
   (B)   By virtue of this section any member of a board who is convicted of a
felony while a member of the board shall automatically forfeit their position.
Board members may also be removed for failing to meet the following attendance
requirements:
      (1)   For the following city non-quasi judicial advisory boards, a board
member shall be automatically terminated if the board member has three
unexcused absences during any one term of office:
         (a)   Consumer Affairs Advisory Board.
         (b)   Landscape Advisory Board.
         (c)   Charter School Advisory Board.
         (d)   Economic Development Board.
         (e)   Arts and Culture Advisory Board.
         (f)   River of Grass Cultural Arts Center Board.
         (g)   Education Advisory Board.
      (2)   Following the third unexcused absence, the secretary of the
respective board shall advise the City Clerk of the board member's third
unexcused absence. The City Clerk shall then advise the City Commission of the
board member's termination. No further action by the City Commission is
required in order for the board member's termination to become effective. As
soon as possible following the receipt of the notification from the City Clerk
that a vacancy exists on the respective board, the District Commissioner shall
appoint an individual to serve the remaining term of the terminated board
member.
      (3)   For the following city quasi-judicial advisory boards, a board
member shall be automatically terminated if the board member has four unexcused
absences during any one term of office:
         (a)   Planning and Zoning Board.
         (b)   Board of Adjustment.
      (4)   Following the fourth unexcused absence, the secretary of the
respective board shall advise the City Clerk of the board member's fourth
unexcused absence. The City Clerk shall then advise the City Commission of the
board member's termination. No further action by the City Commission is
required in order for the board member's termination to become effective. As
soon as possible following the receipt of the notification from the City Clerk
that a vacancy exists on the respective board, the District Commissioner shall
appoint an individual to serve the remaining term of the terminated board
member. (Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.007 QUORUM.
   Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, three voting members in
attendance at a meeting shall constitute a quorum of the city's advisory
boards. (Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.008 OFFICERS.
   Each advisory board shall consist of a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and
such other officers as the board shall deem necessary. Unless otherwise
provided for herein, officers of the board shall be elected by a majority vote
of the membership of the board at its first meeting after the members' initial
appointments, and annually thereafter. A member of the board may be elected to
serve as an officer without restriction as to the number of terms served. The
Education Advisory Board shall elect its officers at the first meeting of each
school year. (Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.009 PROCEDURES; PUBLIC RECORDS, THE SUNSHINE LAW.
   Each city advisory board may propose reasonable rules of procedure to govern
the conduct of its business. If an advisory board does not adopt its own rules
of procedure, then the board shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Procedures.
All meetings, records and files of the board shall be open and available to the
public, consistent with F.S. Ch. 119 (the Public Records Law) and F.S. Ch. 286
(the Sunshine Law). (Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.010 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the city's advisory boards shall serve without compensation
for the performance of their duties in office, except they may be reimbursed
pursuant to F.S. Chapter 112 and the City Expense Reimbursement Regulations as
provided in §§
34.75 et seq., as may be amended from time to time, for expenses incurred
during the performance of their duties and authorized by the City Commission in
advance. (Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.011 ANNUAL REPORT.
   On or before May 1 of each year, the respective advisory board or committee
shall forward to the City Commission a summary of the advisory board or
committee's accomplishments during the prior year, along with any
recommendations or suggestions to the City Commission regarding any
improvements to city operations, ordinances, or policies, they see fit to
transmit based on their work and observations over that year. (Ord. 1697,
passed 9-7-11)
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
§ 32.020 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   There is created an Architectural Review Board for the city to consist of
all the members of the Planning and Zoning Board. The Chairman of the
Architectural Review Board shall be the Chairman of the Planning and Zoning
Board. (‘69 Code, § 5-125) (Ord. 380, passed 11-4-74; Am. Ord. 644, passed 12-
15-82; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
Cross-reference:
   Planning and Zoning Board, see §
32.080 -
32.082
§ 32.021 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Architecture Review Board shall review the architectural plans for
all buildings proposed to be constructed in business-, residential-, and
industrial-zoned areas to insure that buildings are aesthetically compatible
with the surrounding area so as not to create an eyesore within the city, and
to insure that the buildings will not adversely affect the surrounding area. A
majority vote is required to approve a project.
   (B)   No building permit shall be issued until the Board has approved the
architectural plans. (‘69 Code, § 5-126) (Ord. 380, passed 11-4-74; Am. Ord.
876, passed 11-2-88; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.022 MEETINGS.
   The Architectural Review Board shall hold meetings when necessary, to be
concurrent with the regularly scheduled Planning and Zoning Board meetings.
(‘69 Code, § 5-127) (Ord. 380, passed 11-4-74; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 32.030 DEFINITIONS.
   All terms and terminology used in this subchapter shall be given the same
definitions and meaning as similar terms and terminology used, set forth, and
defined in the zoning ordinance of the city. (‘69 Code, § 5-25) (Am. Ord. 1697,
passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.031 (RESERVED)
§ 32.032 (RESERVED)
§ 32.033 (RESERVED)
§ 32.034 GRANTING VARIANCE OR PERMIT APPLICATIONS, DECIDING APPEALS.
   The Board of Adjustment shall as soon as practicable render a decision on
matters pending before it and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing and
reflected on the minutes of the proceedings. The Board shall have the power in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and law, to reserve or
affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, decision, or determination
appealed from. The Board may make any order, determination, requirement, or
decision it may deem necessary and desirable to protect the adjacent property
and the surrounding neighborhood within the spirit and in harmony with the
terms of the zoning ordinances of the city. In the exercise of its powers under
this subchapter, the concurring vote of three of the members of the Board shall
be necessary to reserve or modify any requirements, determination, decision, or
order of an administrative official or to grant any variance or permit. (‘69
Code, § 5-23) (Ord. 438, passed 12-13-76; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9- 7-11; Am.
Ord. 1802, passed 12-3-14; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 32.035 TIME LIMIT FOR USE OF VARIANCE PERMIT.
   Any single-family residential variance authorized by the Board of Adjustment
shall expire six months after the date of action on the variance by the Board
of Adjustment, unless the Board’s decision is appealed to the City Commission
in which case the time will run from the date the city administration or City
Commission, if applicable, takes action on the variance, and unless a building
permit based on and incorporating the variance is issued within the aforesaid
six month period, or if no building permit is required, that an actual and bona
fide use of the premises is made in accordance with the terms of the variance.
(‘69 Code, § 5-24) (Ord. 438, passed 12-13-76; Am. Ord. 1147, passed 1-3-96;
Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
CHARTER REVIEW BOARD
§ 32.040 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   For provisions concerning the Charter Review Board, see Charter §§
8.01 through
8.06. (Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
CIVIL DEFENSE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.041 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   For provisions concerning the Civil Defense Department, see §§
92.10 through
92.14 of this code. (Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD
§ 32.050 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to promote, protect, and improve the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and residents of the city by
authorizing the creation of an Administrative Board to provide an equitable,
expeditious, effective, and inexpensive method of enforcing the technical codes
enforced in the city, including, but not limited to occupation license, fire,
building, zoning, and sign codes, and with the authority to impose
administrative fines, other noncriminal penalties, to recover costs and
attorney fees. The provisions of F.S. Chapter 162 are herein incorporated by
this reference.
   (A)   There is hereby created the City Code Enforcement Board in accordance
with F.S. § 162.01 et seq.
   (B)   This subchapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “Pembroke
Pines Code Enforcement Board Subchapter”. (Ord 668, passed 10-5-83; Am. Ord.
1101, passed 10-2-94; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.051 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY ATTORNEY. The legal officer and advisor of the city.
   CITY PROSECUTOR. May be the City Attorney or other appointed agents and
employees of the city.
   CODE INSPECTOR. Any authorized agent or employee of the city whose duty is
to insure code compliance.
   ENFORCEMENT BOARD. The City Code Enforcement Board.
   REPEAT VIOLATION. A violation of a provision of a Code of Ordinances by a
person whom the Code Enforcement Board has previously found to have violated
the same provision within five years prior to the violation.
   VIOLATOR. The possessor, occupier, user, owner, and/or landlord of the
property where a violation of the city’s Code of Ordinance exists, or a person
who has been charged with a Code infraction by a Code Inspector, whether that
person possesses, occupies, uses, owns, or leases property in the city or not.
(Ord. 668, passed 10-5-83; Am. Ord. 937, 11-7-90; Am. Ord. 1199, passed 12-18-
96; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.052 ORGANIZATION OF BOARD.
   (A)   The City Commission may appoint, but is under no direct mandate to do
so, a seven-member Code Enforcement Board and legal counsel for the Code
Enforcement Board. Members of the Code Enforcement Board shall be residents of
the city. Appointments shall be made in accordance with City Charter Section
4.09 on the basis of experience or interest in the fields of zoning and
building control. The membership of the Code Enforcement Board shall, whenever
possible, include an architect, a businessman, an engineer, a general
contractor, a sub-contractor, and a realtor.
   (B)   The appointments and membership of the existing Code Enforcement Board
shall continue in accordance with the allocated terms of office by resolutions
adopted by the City Commission.
   (C)   As provided for in F.S. § 162.05, initial appointments to the Code
Enforcement Board shall be as follows:
      (1)   Two members appointed for a term of one years;
      (2)   Three members appointed for a term of two years; and
      (3)   Two members appointed for a term of three years.
   (D)   Thereafter, all appointments shall be made for a term of three years.
Any member may be reappointed for one successive term on approval of the city.
Appointments to fill any vacancy on the Code Enforcement Board shall be for the
remainder of the unexpired term of office if any member fails to attend two of
three successive meetings without cause and without prior approval of the
Chairman of the Code Enforcement Board, the Code Enforcement Board shall
declare the member’s office vacant and the City Commission shall promptly fill
the vacancy. The members of the Code Enforcement Board shall serve in
accordance with the City Charter and Code of Ordinances of the city, and may be
suspended and removed for cause as provided in the Charter and ordinances of
the city providing for removal of members of city boards.
   (E)   The members of the Code Enforcement Board shall elect a Chairman from
among its members. The presence of four or more members shall constitute a
quorum of the Code Enforcement Board.
   (F)   The City Attorney shall either be counsel to the Code Enforcement
Board or shall represent the city by presenting cases before the Board, but in
no case shall the City Attorney serve in both capacities. (Ord 668, passed 10-
5-83; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11 )
§ 32.053 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   The City Commission in its legislative discretion, may impose further
and more stringent qualifications for prospective members serving on the Code
Enforcement Board.
   (B)   The City Commission shall consider the following as further qualifying
factors in the appointment of prospective members to the Code Enforcement
Board:
      (1)   Commitment to the community;
      (2)   Actual experience and exposure to the categories of membership set
forth in § 32.038 herein;
      (3)   Availability for meetings, conferences, and appearances before the
City Commission;
      (4)   Operation of a business or business entity conducted within the
city or surrounding communities, for the purpose of knowledge and understanding
of the needs and requirements of the city in effectuating the purposes of this
subchapter; and,
      (5)   Any other additional element or factor which, in the opinion and
discretion of the City Commission, warrants the appointment or non- appointment
of a member to the Code Enforcement Board. (Ord. 668, passed 10-5-83; Am. Ord.
1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.054 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Board shall have the jurisdiction and authority
to hear and decide alleged violations of the technical codes in the city
including, but not limited to occupation license, fire, building, zoning, And
sign codes, as well as the various codes and provisions of the county in effect
within the city.
   (B)   The jurisdiction of the Code Enforcement Board shall be as provided
for in F.S. Chapter 162, and shall not be exclusive but shall be supplemental
and shall not prohibit the city from enforcing its codes by any other means, as
provided by law. (Ord. 668, passed 10-5-83; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.055 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Code Enforcement Board shall have the power to do the following:
   (A)   Adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings.
   (B)   Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Subpoenas
may be served by the Police Department of the city.
   (C)   Subpoena evidence.
   (D)   Take testimony under oath.
   (E)   Issue orders having the force of law, commanding whatever steps are
necessary to bring a violation into compliance. (Ord 668, passed 10-5-83; Am.
Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
Statutory reference:
   Powers of Enforcement Board, see F.S. § 162.08
§ 32.056 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Code Inspector to initiate enforcement
proceedings of the various codes. However, no member of the Code Enforcement
Board shall have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings.
   (B)   Except as provided herein, if violation of the code is found, the Code
Inspector shall notify the violator and give him a reasonable time to correct
the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for
correction, the Code Inspector shall notify the Code Enforcement Board and
request a hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in §
32.057 herein. Written notice shall be mailed to the violator as provided in
this subchapter and as other-wise provided in the Code of Ordinances of the
city.
   (C)   If the Code Inspector has reason to believe that a violation presents
a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, the Code Inspector
may proceed directly to the procedures set forth in §
32.057 without notifying the violator. (Ord. 668, passed 10-5-83)
   (D)   If a repeat violation is found, the Code Inspector shall notify the
violator but is not required to give the violator a reasonable time to correct
the violation. The Code Inspector, upon notifying the violator of a repeat
violation, shall notify the Enforcement Board and request a hearing. The Code
Enforcement Board shall schedule a hearing and shall provide notice as provided
in this subchapter and as otherwise provided in the Code of Ordinances of the
city. The case may be presented to the Enforcement Board even if the repeat
violation has been corrected prior to the Board hearing, and the notice shall
so state.
   (E)   In addition to providing notice as set forth in subdivision (B) of
this section, at the option of the Code Enforcement Board, notice may also be
served by publication or posting as permitted by F.S. Chapter 162. (Ord. 668,
passed 10-5-83; Am. Ord. 937, passed 11-7-90; Am. Ord. 1101, passed 10-2-94;
Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.057 HEARINGS.
   (A)   The Chairman of the Code Enforcement Board may call hearings of the
Board. Hearings may also be called by written notice signed by at least three
members of the Code Enforcement Board. At any hearing, the Code Enforcement
Board may set a future hearing date. The Code Enforcement Board shall attempt
to convene no less frequently than once every two months, but it may meet more
or less often as the demand necessitates. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings
by the Code Enforcement Board, and all hearings and proceedings shall be open
to the public. The City Commission shall provide clerical and administrative
personnel as may be reasonably required by the Enforcement Board for the proper
performance of its duties.
   (B)   Each case before the Code Enforcement Board shall be presented by the
City Attorney or by a member of the administrative staff of the city. If the
city prevails in prosecuting a case before the Code Enforcement Board, it shall
be entitled to recover all cost incurred in prosecuting the case before the
Board.
   (C)   The Code Enforcement Board shall proceed to hear the cases on the
agenda and prepared docket for that day or evening. All testimony shall be
under oath and shall be recorded. The Code Enforcement Board shall take
testimony from the Code Inspector and alleged violator. Formal rules of
evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and
shall govern the proceedings.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Code Enforcement Board shall
issue findings of fact, based on evidence of record and conclusions of law, and
shall issue a formal order affording the proper relief consistent with the
powers granted herein and in F.S. Chapter 162. The findings shall be by motion
approved by a majority of those present and voting; however, at least a
majority of the members of the Code Enforcement Board must vote in order for
the action to be official. The order shall include a notice that it must be
complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed and, under the
conditions specified in F.S. § 162.09(1), all costs of repairs may be included
along with the fine if the order is not complied with by such date. Except when
such compliance is impracticable or impossible within a year, the order shall
provide that the date of such compliance be within one year of the date the
order is entered by the Code Enforcement Board. A certified copy of such order
may be recorded in the public records of the county and shall constitute notice
to any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns if the
violation concerns real property, and the findings therein shall be binding
upon the violator and, if the violation concerns real property, any subsequent
purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns. If an order is recorded in the
public records pursuant to this subchapter and the order is complied with by
the date specified in the order, the Enforcement Board shall issue an order
acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in the public records. A
hearing is not required to issue such order acknowledging compliance. (Ord.
668, passed 10-5-83; Am. Ord. 937, passed 11-7-90; Am. Ord. 1101, passed 10-2-
94; Am. Ord. 1173, passed 8-7-96; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.058 IMPOSITION OF FINE; LIENS.
   (A)   (1)   The Code Enforcement Board, upon notification by the Code
Inspector that an order of the Code Enforcement Board has not been complied
with by the set time or, upon finding that a repeat violation has been
committed may order the violator to pay a fine in an amount specified in this
section for each day the violation continues past the date set by the Code
Enforcement Board for compliance, or, in the case of a repeat violation, for
each day the repeat violation continues, beginning with the date the repeat
violation is found to have occurred by the Code Inspector. In addition, if the
violation is a violation described in F.S. § 162.06(4),(if the Code Enforcement
Officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to
the public health, safety or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or
irreversible), the Code Enforcement Board shall notify the local governing
body, which may make all reasonable repairs which are required to bring the
property into compliance and charge the violator with all reasonable costs of
repairs along with the fine imposed pursuant to this section. If a finding of a
violation or a repeat violation has been made as provided in this section, a
hearing shall not be necessary for issuance of the order imposing the fine.
      (2)   (a)   A fine imposed pursuant to this section shall not exceed $250
per day for a first violation and shall not exceed $500 per day for a repeat
violation, and in addition, may include all costs of repairs pursuant to
subdivision (A)(1) above.
         (b)   In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the Enforcement
Board shall consider the following factors:
            1.   The gravity of the violation;
            2.   Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation;
and
            3.   Any previous violations committed by the violator.
         (c)   An Enforcement Board may reduce a fine imposed pursuant to this
section.
      (3)   A certified copy of an order imposing a fine may be recorded in the
public records and there-after shall constitute a lien against the land on
which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned
by the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court such order may be enforced
in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including
levy against the personal property, but such order shall not be deemed to be a
court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A fine imposed pursuant to this
part shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until
judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien filed pursuant to this
section, whichever occurs first. After three months from the filing of any such
lien which remains unpaid, the Enforcement Board may authorize the City
Attorney to foreclose on the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions
of this section may be foreclosed on real property which is homestead under
Section 4, Article X of the State Constitution.
   (B)   No lien provided under this section, in accordance with F.S. Chapter
162, shall continue for a longer period than 20 years after the certified copy
of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an
action to foreclose on the lien is commenced in a court of competent
jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose on a lien, the prevailing party is
entitled to recover all costs, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, that it
incurs in the foreclosure. The local governing body shall be entitled to
collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a valid lien. The
continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of the action shall not
be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration
without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded.
   (C)   A lien arising from a fine imposed pursuant to this section runs in
favor of the local governing body, and the local governing body may execute a
satisfaction or release of lien entered pursuant to this section, as follows:
      (1)   Upon compliance with the Order of the Code Enforcement Board, and
payment in full of the amounts due to the city pursuant to a lien entered
pursuant to this section, the city shall provide a Release of Lien to the
property owner, which the property owner shall record at his or her expense.
      (2)   Should a Release of Lien Agreement provide for payment of a sum
that is less than the amount outstanding on the lien, such Agreement must be
approved by the City Manager prior to execution.
      (3)   The city’s Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to
enter into a Release of Lien Agreement with a property owner prior to actual
compliance with an Order of the Code Enforcement Board to ensure proper
compliance with such Order.
         (a)   Any Release of Lien Agreement between the city and a property
owner pursuant to this section shall include, without limitation:
            1.   That any violations shall be corrected so as to comply with
the Order of Code Enforcement Board within a definite period of time;
            2.   That any amounts payable pursuant to the Agreement shall be
received by the city within a reasonable period of time after the violation is
corrected, but in no case shall such time exceed 30 days;
            3.   That any Release of Lien provided by the city shall be
recorded at the expense of the property owner; and,
            4.   That failure to comply with the terms of the Agreement
regarding the correction of violations and payment of sums due to the city
pursuant thereto shall render the Agreement null and void. (Ord. 668, passed
10-5-83; Am. Ord. 937, passed 11-7-90; Am. Ord. 1101, passed 10-2-94; Am. Ord.
1274, passed 8-5-98; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.059 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   (A)   Nothing contained in the Local Government Code Enforcement Board’s
Act, as provided for in F.S. Chapter 162, amended, or by this subchapter, shall
prohibit the city from enforcing its code of ordinances and Charter by any
other means provided by law.
   (B)   The City Commission ratifies and embraces the legislative intention of
the Local Government Code Enforcement Board’s Act, as provided for in F.S.
Chapter 162, as amended, in that the city may seek additional or supplemental
means of obtaining compliance with its local codes as provided herein. (Ord.
668, passed 10-5-83; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.060 APPEAL OF BOARD DECISION.
   (A)   An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a final
administrative order of the Code Enforcement Board to the Circuit Court.
   (B)   An appeal by the violator or Code Enforcement Board shall be filed
within 30 days of the execution of the order by the Chairman and Secretary of
the Code Enforcement Board. (Ord. 668, passed 10-5-83; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-
7-11)
§ 32.061 JURISDICTION OF CIRCUIT COURT.
   The City Commission ratifies and embraces the conclusions of the Local
Government Code Enforcement Board’s Act (F.S. Chapter 162) by agreeing to the
jurisdiction of the Circuit Court of Broward County to have jurisdiction of
appeals from county courts, except appeals of county court orders or judgments
declaring invalid a state statute or a provision of the state constitution.
Circuit courts shall have jurisdiction of appeals from final administrative
orders of Local Government Code Enforcement Boards and this subchapter. (Ord.
668, passed 10-5-83; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.062 METHOD OF DELIVERING ANY NOTICE REQUIRED BY SUBCHAPTER.
   (A)   All notices required by this subchapter and by the Local Government
Code Enforcement Board’s Act (F.S. Chapter 162), shall be by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or, where mail would not be effective, by hand
delivery by the Code Inspector.
   (B)   In the event notices are sent outside the geographical boundaries of
the United States, delivery shall be effective by depositing notices in the
regular system of mails, not certified, and not return receipt requested. In
this instance, time for compliance shall begin to accrue on deposits of the
notice or order in the regular United States mail. (Ord. 668, passed 10-5-83;
Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
ALTERNATIVE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
§ 32.063 COUNTY UNIFORM CODE CITATION FORM.
   The city hereby adopts the Broward County Uniform Code Citation Form,
attached to Ord. 1224 and hereby adopted by reference, which sets forth the
required data and information for each code enforcement officer of the city in
connection with those requirements imposed by F.S. § 162.21 (Part II) and known
as Supplemental County or Municipal Code or Ordinance Enforcement Procedures.
(Ord. 1224, passed 9-3-97; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.064 ALTERNATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM; SPECIAL MAGISTRATE.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of the City
Commission to establish special magistrate procedures for code enforcement
purposes, pursuant to F.S. Chapter 162, as amended from time to time. The
special magistrate(s) shall be selected by the city attorney and approved by
the City Commission. The special magistrate shall be a member in good standing
with the Florida Bar and engaged in the practice of law in Broward County.
   (B)   The city shall serve a notice of hearing to the violator in accordance
with the provisions of this article and F.S. Chapter 162, as amended from time
to time. No hearing shall be scheduled sooner than ten days from the date of
service unless there is a reason to believe that a violation presents a serious
threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
   (C)   F.S. Chapter 162, as amended from time to time, is hereby incorporated
herein by reference so that the provisions of that chapter, as amended from
time to time, shall be controlling with regard to the organization,
jurisdiction, procedures and powers of the special magistrate.
   (D)   At the conclusion of hearings, the special magistrate shall issue
findings of fact, based on evidence presented, and conclusions of law and shall
issue an order to include, but not be limited to, a specified compliance date
and a fine amount to be imposed if the order is not complied by the specified
date. In determining the amount of the fine, if any, special magistrate shall
consider the following factors:
      (1)   The gravity of the violation;
      (2)   Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and
      (3)   Any previous violations committed by the violator.
   (E)   A certified copy of an order imposing a fine may be recorded in the
public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which
the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the
violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order may be enforced in the
same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy
against the personal property, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court
judgment except for enforcement purposes. A fine imposed pursuant to this part
shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until
judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien filed pursuant to this
section, whichever occurs first. After three months from the filing of any such
lien that remains unpaid, the special magistrate may authorize the local
governing body attorney to foreclose on the lien.
   (F)   Special magistrates are hereby authorized to conduct administrative
hearings, as required, for designated citations issued by code enforcement
officers.
   (G)   The city hereby adopts alternate code enforcement procedures pursuant
to F.S. §§ 162.03, 162.21 and 162.23, as amended from time to time, that
provide authority to code enforcement officers to issue citations and notices
to appear at a hearing conducted by a county court, and for code enforcement
officers to issue citations for administrative hearings to be heard by
designated special magistrates and assess fines against violators of the
respective codes and ordinances within the City of Pembroke Pines.
   (H)   Citations.
      (1)   Code enforcement officers and police officers shall have the
authority to initiate enforcement proceedings by issuing citations that may
require an appearance of the violator at an administrative hearing before a
special magistrate.
      (2)   A code enforcement officer who finds a violation of a code section,
pursuant to §
31.04, shall have the authority to serve a notice of violation to the violator
or property owner. Prior to issuing a citation, the code enforcement officer
shall provide a written notice to the person in violation or the property
owners that the person has committed a violation of a code or ordinance and
establish a reasonable period of time for the person to correct the violation.
Such time period shall be no more than 30 calendar days. If, upon personal
investigation, the code enforcement officer finds that the person has not
corrected the violation within the designated time period, the code enforcement
officer may issue a citation to the person who has committed the violation or
the property owner where the violation has occurred.
      (3)   The code enforcement officer is not required to provide the alleged
violator with a reasonable period of time to correct the violation prior to
issuing the citation if a repeat violation is found, or if the code enforcement
officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to
the public health, safety or welfare, or that the violator is engaged in
violations of a itinerant or transient nature, or if the violation if
irreparable or irreversible. A repeat violation is a violation of a provision
of code or ordinance by a person who has been previously found in violation by
a code enforcement board, or any other quasi-judicial or judicial process, to
have violated, or who has admitted violating the same provision within five
years prior to the violation, notwithstanding the violations occur at different
locations.
      (4)   The citation form shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
         (a)   Date and time of issuance;
         (b)   Name of the code enforcement officer and jurisdiction;
         (c)   Name and address of the violator;
         (d)   Code section that has been violated;
         (e)   Brief description of the nature of the violation, including
location, date and time of violation;
         (f)   Amount of the applicable civil penalty;
         (g)   Procedure of the person to follow to pay the civil penalty, or
to contest the citation;
         (h)   Notice that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within
the time allowed, and fails to appear in court (if assigned to County Court),
or if fails to request an administrative hearing within ten calendar days of
service (if case assigned to special magistrate), the person shall be deemed to
have waived their rights to contest the citation and that, in such case,
judgment may be entered up to the maximum civil penalty; and
         (i)   Notice that the person may be liable for reasonable costs of the
hearing should the violator be found guilty of the violation.
   (I)   Citation issued to appear before a special magistrate.
      (1)   The person who has been served with a citation to appear before a
special magistrate shall either correct the violation, and pay the civil
penalty in the manner indicated on the citation; or
      (2)   Request an administrative hearing before a special magistrate to
appeal the decision of the code enforcement officer. Said appeal shall be filed
not later than ten calendar days after the service of the citation.
      (3)   Failure of the violator to appeal the decision of the code
enforcement officer within ten calendar days shall constitute a waiver of the
violator’s right to an administrative hearing. A wavier of the right to an
administrative hearing may result in the imposition of a fine which may result
in a lien on the property where the violation occurred.
   (J)   The following table sets forth the code violation for which civil
penalties may be cited under this section. The descriptions of violations are
provided for purposes of general identification only. Where specific code
provisions apply, the same are indicated following the respective violation
description. Amendments affecting the numbering of the referenced sections
shall not affect the validity of the fines.
Code Violation             Section             First Violation Repeat Violation
BAR  Barriers              33 & 1028/150.52-57 $250            $500
BDR  Building Permit       218/155.388         150             300
BOA  Boars, R/V & Trailers 300/155.078B 1-9    150             300
C/V  Commercial Vehicles   218/155.071         250             500
ENG  Environmental         987/1017/150.95 A-U 250             500
     Services Complaint
FBC  Florida Building Code 184/150.11          250             500
GAR  Garbage Collection    016/94.10-18        250             500
G/M  Graffiti Maintenance  981/1017/155.013G   250             500
 
Code Violation            Section             First Violation Repeat Violation
I/V  Inoperable Vehicle   449/90.02B          150             300
LOT  Lot Clearing         166/94.30 & 94.34   250             500
MOP  Maintenance of       812/155.013B 7-11   250             500
     Property
NUH  Nuisance Household   812/155/013 B-7-G   250             500
NUL  Nuisance Landscape   812/155.013 B-7-H   250             500
NUO  Nuisances            812/155.013 A-F     250             500
OCC  Occupational License 171/115.10          250             500
PMC  Property Maintenance 981/1017/150.95 A-U 250             500
     Code
R/D  Refuse & Debris      812/155.013 B-6     250             500
SAN  Sanitary Code        39/95.01 & 95.02    250             500
SGP  Sign Prohibited      430/155.328 A-Q     250             500
SWT  Swale Trees          263/52.24 C-4       250             500
TRP  Tree Removal Permit  353/98.02-09        250             500
U/V  Useless Vegetation   812/155.013 7-D     250             500
WSM  Water Shortage       641/50.36           100             200
     Management
* For all other violations not specified, the fine schedule for the first
violation shall be $250 and $500 for the repeat violation.
 
   (K)   Collection and recovery of civil penalties.
      (1)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall provide the
appropriate guidelines and procedures for the administration, collection,
record keeping, reporting and accountability of fines assessed under this
subchapter.
      (2)   The City may institute proceedings in a court of competent
jurisdiction to compel payment of civil penalties.
      (3)   If the special magistrate finds that a violation exists and
assesses the fine, or if the violator does not contest the citation as provided
under this subchapter, and the violator fails to pay the applicable fine, the
special magistrate may enter an order imposing the fines previously set. A
certified copy of the order imposing a civil penalty may be recorded in the
public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the real or
personal property of the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such
order may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of
this state, including a levy against personal property, but not be deemed to be
a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. After three months from the
filing of any such lien remains unpaid, the city may foreclose or otherwise
execute on the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this section
may be foreclosed on real property that is homestead under Section 4, Article X
of the State Constitution.
   (L)   Unless otherwise provided herein, all respondents appearing before the
special magistrate who are found to be in violation of the city's Code of
Ordinances shall be assessed a $150 administrative fee, in addition to any
penalties imposed by the special magistrate. Respondents appearing before the
special magistrate who are found to be in violation of a red light camera
traffic infraction pursuant to
Chapter 73 of the City Code shall be assessed a $50 administrative fee. This
administrative fee shall be waived for respondents who enter into a stipulated
agreement with the city prior to the case being heard by the special
magistrate. Respondents found to be in compliance by the special magistrate
shall not be assessed an administrative fee. (Ord. 1224, passed 9-3-97; Am.
Ord. 1607, passed 5-21-08; Am. Ord. 1624, passed 11-19-08; Am. Ord. 1634,
passed 3-4-09; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.065 SCHEDULE OF FINES AND PENALTIES.
   In conjunction with the adoption of the aforementioned procedures for the
implementation of such provisions, the city adopts the schedule of fines and
penalties, attached to Ord. 1224 and hereby adopted by reference, which shall
be assessed by the code enforcement officers and shall be followed by the
Broward County Court system and the special master in their review and
adjudication of matters in accordance with this subchapter. (Ord. 1224, passed
9-3-97; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.066 ENFORCEMENT OF CODES OR ORDINANCES; PENALTIES.
   (A)   As used in this subchapter, CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER means any
designated employee or agent of the city whose duty it is to enforce codes and
ordinances enacted by the city. For the purpose of this subchapter, the term
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall be considered theequivalent of a code compliance
officer.
   (B)   The city may designate certain of its employees or agents as code
enforcement officers. The training and qualifications of the employees or
agents for such designation shall be determined by the city. Employees or
agents who may be designated as code enforcement officers may include but are
not limited to code inspectors, law enforcement officers, animal control
officers, park rangers, or fire safety inspectors.
Designation as a code enforcement officer does not provide the code enforcement
officer with the power to arrest or subject the code enforcement officer to the
provisions of F.S. §§ 943.085 through 943.255, as amended. Nothing in this
section amends, alters, or contravenes the provisions of any state-administered
retirement system or any state-supported retirement system established by
general law.
   (C)   (1)   A code enforcement officer is authorized to issue a citation to
a person when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable
cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation
of a duly enacted code or ordinance and the Broward County Court will hear
charge.
      (2)   Prior to issuing a citation, a code enforcement officer shall
provide notice to the person that the person has committed a violation of the
code or ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the
person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be no more than 30
days. If, upon personal investigation, a code enforcement officer finds that
the person has not corrected the violation within the time period, a code
enforcement officer may issue a citation to the person who has committed the
violation. A code enforcement officer does not have to provide the person with
a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation
and may immediately issue a citation if the code enforcement officer has reason
to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health,
safety, or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible.
      (3)   A citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be in a form
prescribed by the city and shall contain:
         (a)   The date and time of issuance.
         (b)   The name and address of the person to whom the citation is
issued.
         (c)   The date and time that the civil infraction was committed.
         (d)   The facts constituting reasonable cause.
         (e)   The number or section of the code or ordinance violated.
         (f)   The name and authority of the code enforcement officer.
         (g)   The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil
penalty or to contest the citation.
         (h)   The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the
citation.
         (i)   The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest
the citation.
         (j)   A conspicuous statement that, if the person fails to pay the
civil penalty within the time allowed or fails to appear in court to contest
the citation, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the
citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for
an amount up to the maximum civil penalty.
   (D)   After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, a code enforcement
officer shall deposit the original citation and one copy of the citation with
the Broward County Court.
   (E)   The city is authorized to enforce its codes and ordinances under the
provisions of this section and by the enactment of this subchapter; the city
shall by this subchapter set forth procedures for the implementation of such
provisions, including a schedule of violations and penalties to be assessed by
code enforcement officers. If the city chooses to enforce codes or ordinances
under the provisions of this section, each code or ordinance or the ordinance
enacted by the city establishing procedures for implementation of this section
shall provide:
      (1)   That a violation of a code or an ordinance is a civil infraction.
      (2)   A maximum civil penalty not to exceed $500.
      (3)   A civil penalty of less than the maximum civil penalty if the
person who has committed the civil infraction does not contest the citation.
      (4)   For the issue of a citation by a code enforcement officer who has
reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed an act in violation of
a code or ordinance.
      (5)   For the contesting of a citation in county court.
      (6)   Such procedures and provisions as are necessary to provide for the
enforcement of a code or ordinance under the provisions of this section.
   (F)   Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued
by a code enforcement officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree, punishable as provided in F.S. §§ 775.082 or 775.083.
   (G)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the enforcement
pursuant to F.S. §§ 553.79 and 553.80 of building codes adopted pursuant to
F.S. § 553.73, as they apply to construction, provided that a building permit
is either not required or has been issued by the city. For the purposes of this
division, BUILDING CODES means only those codes adopted pursuant to F.S. §
553.73. (Ord. 1224, passed 9-3-97; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
CROWD MANAGEMENT AND SAFETY TASK FORCE
§ 32.070 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   The express purpose of this subchapter is to establish the areas of review
and consideration to be determined by subsequent ordinances or by written
agreement by all appropriate parties relative to the subject matter of crowd
control and public safety. (‘69 Code, § 5-199) (Ord. 600, passed 6-2-82; Am.
Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.071 APPROPRIATE AREAS OF REVIEW AND CONSIDERATION.
   The appropriate areas in inquiry for the Crowd Management and Safety Task
Force are as follows:
   (A)   Areas of responsibility for police supervision, direction, and
control.
   (B)   Institution of programs for cooperation between police authorities and
professional security personnel.
   (C)   Review and study of appropriate areas of compensation for city police
and fire personnel when engaged in crowd management and safety activities.
   (D)   Availability of fire and emergency medical personnel provided by the
city.
   (E)   Coordination of professional fire fighter, emergency medical, and
ambulance personnel.
   (F)   Salary and compensation benefits review concerning fire and emergency
medical personnel.
   (G)   Review and implementation of requirements of the Florida Building
Code, Broward County Amendments to the Florida Building Code, and the Fire
Marshal relative to safety and security.
   (H)   Review of parking and vehicular access to such facilities.
   (I)   Consideration of requirements for special events permits.
   (J)   Review and analysis of interior and exterior lighting and exit
evacuation routes in such facilities.
   (K)   Review of public announcement and communications facilities and
availability and scheduling of performances and appearances of entertainers or
participants at such performances.
   (L)   Review and coordination of bonding and surety requirements for damages
which result from convention- and sport-related activities.
   (M)   Methods of implementation for better communication between municipal
and private authorities concerning the conduct of special events.
   (N)   Review and recommendation concerning contractual arrangements for
safety and security at special events.
   (O)   Review of ticket designations and floor seating at special events.
   (P)   Consideration of practices and procedures for personnel searches and
confiscation of contra-band.
   (Q)   Specific techniques and procedures for obtaining special events
permits.
   (R)   Construction and operation of supplementary facilities for individuals
who may be arrested or taken into custody during such events.
   (S)   Lavatory and sanitation facilities standards for such facilities.
   (T)   Consideration of liability and indemnification by operators and
persons scheduling special events.
   (U)   Handicapped facilities at such activities.
   (V)   Appropriate identification for security per- sonnel.
   (W)   Further investigation of the use of contraband or illicit substances
at such events.
   (X)   Record keeping and information management relating to such facilities.
(‘69 Code, § 5-197) (Ord. 600, passed 6-2-82; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11; Am.
Ord. 1715, passed 5-2-12)
§ 32.072 INSPECTION REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN EVENTS.
   (A)   Any sports or convention facility conducting a special event shall be
required to obtain prior to the conducting of the event, a complete electrical,
mechanical, and structural inspection and shall further request a Health
Department inspection. If the inspections are not obtained, or show
deficiencies, the event shall not be held. The cost for the inspections shall
be borne by the sports or convention facility proprietors.
   (B) In a case where the event involves stage electrical connections for
musical equipment or for other purposes, the electrical connections and
installations shall be inspected prior to the conduction of the event. Such
stage electrical inspections are to be paid for by the proprietors of the
sports and convention facilities. (‘69 Code, § 5-198) (Ord. 600, passed 6-2-82;
Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.073 ADDITIONAL RECOMMENDATIONS, INFORMATION MAY BE SUPPLIED TO TASK FORCE.
   (A)   Additional recommendations for consideration by the Crowd Management
and Safety Task Force may be presented from time to time and included within
the general areas of authority set forth in §
32.071. (‘69 Code, § 5-200)
   (B)   The city administration is authorized to provide such additional
information as may be required to further implement the general purpose of the
Crowd Management and Safety Task Force. (‘69 Code, § 5-201) (Ord. 600, passed
6-2-82; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.075 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   For provisions concerning the Finance Department, see Charter §
4.06. See also §
34.59 of this code. (Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.076 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   There is hereby established a City Fire Depart- ment, in accordance with
Charter §
4.10. (‘69 Code, § 5-100) (Ord. 249, passed 2-16-71; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-
11)
Cross-reference:
   Pension Fund for Firefighters and Police Officers, see §§
34.35 through
34.63
§ 32.077 FIRE CHIEF.
   The City Manager is directed to appoint a suitable person to act as the Fire
Chief of the city. (‘69 Code, § 5-101) (Ord. 249, passed 2-16-71; Am. Ord.
1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.078 OPERATION OF DEPARTMENT.
   The Chief of the Fire Department with the approval of the City Manager,
shall establish such rules and regulations as are deemed necessary for the
proper operation and functioning of the Fire Department. The City Manager shall
be responsible for the conduct and administration of the Fire Department. (‘69
Code, § 5-102) (Ord. 249, passed 2-16-71; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
Cross-reference:
   Fire prevention regulations, see
Ch. 93
§ 32.079 NONEMERGENCY TRANSPORTATION SERVICE.
   (A)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, NONEMERGENCY
TRANSPORTATION SERVICE shall mean the transportation of persons while on
stretchers or wheelchairs or whose handicap, illness, injury, or other
incapacitation makes it impractical to be transported by a regular common
carrier such as a bus or taxicab and who neither need or expect to need medical
attention en route.
   (B)   Provision of city services. The Fire/Rescue Department of the city
shall provide nonemergency transportation service within the boundaries of the
city.
   (C)   Administration. The Chief of the Fire Department, with the approval of
the City Manager, shall establish procedures, rules, and regulation for
providing nonemergency transportation service within the city. (Ord. 1240,
passed 12-10-97; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD
§ 32.080 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   There is hereby created a Planning and Zoning Board. In addition to the
composition as set forth in §
32.020, the Planning and Zoning Board shall include an ex officio, non-voting
member designated by the School Board of Broward County, Florida in accordance
with F.S. § 163.3174, as may be amended from time to time. The School Board-
appointed member may participate in all matters related to land use and zoning
matters which, if approved, would increase residential density. (Ord. 1697,
passed 9-7-11)
Cross-reference:
   City Architectural Review Board to be composed of members of Planning and
Zoning Board, see §
32.020
§ 32.081 MEETINGS AND VOTE REQUIREMENT.
   The Board shall hold regular meetings each month, and such additional or
special meetings as it may find necessary for the proper performance of its
duties. Unless otherwise provided for herein, any action taken by the Board
shall require the affirmative vote of at least three voting members. (Ord.
1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.082 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Unless otherwise provided for herein, the Board shall act in an advisory
capacity to the City Commission and make such studies and investigations, in
addition to those required by this chapter, as may be requested by the City
Commission. The Board shall have such other duties as prescribed by law, this
chapter, and other zoning ordinances of the city. It shall from time to time,
on its own initiative or at the request of property owners or the City
Commission, make studies and recommendations for the supplement repealing and
amending of district and area regulations and restrictions.
   (A)   Designated as local planning agency.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Board is hereby designated as the local
planning agency pursuant to F.S. § 163.3164(12), as amended from time to time.
      (2)   The Board is hereby assigned the responsibility of the preparation
of the comprehensive plan after hearings to be held after due public notice,
and shall make recommendations to the City Commission regarding the adoption of
the plan.
      (3)   The Board shall have such powers as are necessary to accomplish its
purpose pursuant to F.S. § 163.3161 et seq., and shall expend such funds from
time to time, upon the approval of the City Commission, as shall be allocated
for its use in preparing the comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11; Am. Ord. 1786, passed 9-3-14; Am. Ord. 1802, passed
12-3-14; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered,
Commission passed 4-21-2021)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.090 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   For provisions concerning the Police Department, see Charter §
4.11. For provisions concerning the Pension Fund for Firefighters and Police
Officers, see §§
34.35 through
34.63. (Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.091 COMPLAINTS AGAINST POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   Complaints. Any complaint made by any person involving the actions or
conduct of a police officer of the city shall be directed to the Chief of
Police.
   (B)   Internal investigation unit. Upon receipt of a complaint, the Chief of
Police shall refer the complaint to an internal investigation unit, the
personnel of the unit to be designated by the Chief of Police from time to time
as necessary to investigate complaints. It shall be the duty of the internal
investigation unit to receive the complaint, index it in a book kept for that
purpose and, as a fact-finding body, take statements from the complaint and
witnesses, collect evidence, and, based on their findings, make a written
report and recommendation to the Chief of Police. No member of the
investigation unit may sit as a member of the Complaint Review Board arising
out of the investigation. No interrogation of the accused officer shall be
conducted except in compliance with F.S. § 112.532(1)(a) through (i).
   (C)   Chief of Police recommendation. The Chief of Police, upon receipt of
the written report from the internal investigation unit, shall forward the
report along with his written recommendation of action to be taken against the
accused officer to the City Manager.
   (D)   City Manager action. The City Manager shall consider the report of the
internal investigation unit, all evidence collected, and the recommendation of
the Chief of Police in making any decision with respect to disciplinary
measures, if any, to be taken against the accused officer. Notice of
disciplinary action must be given the officer as provided by the employees’
representation program.
   (E)   Appeal. In the event the accused officer feels aggrieved at the
decision of the City Manager, he may elect, at his binding option and within
the time limits provided by the employees’ representation program, to follow
the appeal procedure set forth in the program, or he may request that a
Complaint Review Board as provided in F.S. § 112.532(2), be impaneled to hear
his appeal.
   (F)   Complaint Review Board. At the demand of the accused, a Complaint
Review Board shall be impaneled as provided by F.S. § 112.532(2). The Chairman
of the Board shall be the third person selected by the representative of the
city and the accused. The Chairman shall preside over the hearing. The accused
officer shall be entitled to have counsel at his expense, to confront and
cross-examine witnesses against him, and to present evidence in his behalf. The
hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner, technical rules of evidence
not being applicable. The city shall tape record the proceedings. The
affirmative vote of two members of the Board shall be required as the decision
of the Board. After deliberation of the Board, the finding of the Board shall
be reduced to writing and submitted to the City Manager and the accused
officer. The decision of the Board shall be binding on the City Manager.
   (G)   City Manager’s final action. After receipt of the report and
recommendation of the Complaint Review Board and consideration of same, the
City Manager shall notify the accused of the final decision in writing within
48 hours of his receipt of the finding of the Board.
   (H)   Establishment of rules to implement procedures. The Police Department
is authorized to establish whatever detailed rules and regulations are
determined necessary to implement the procedures provided for herein. (‘69
Code, § 12-19.5) (Ord. 442, passed 4-25-77; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.092 AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALINGALARM SYSTEMS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING ALARM SYSTEM. A system which, upon being
automatically activated, transmits by telephone and telephone line, a recorded
message or any other electronic, emergency, or mechanical alarm signal to the
City Police Department notifying the Police Department that a crime was being
committed or that an emergency situation exists. However, public coin telephone
alarm systems, alarm systems which are utilized by governmental departments or
agencies of Broward County or the city, alarm systems which transmit to the
City Police Department live voices capable of two-way communication; or alarm
systems which are automatically answered by the response of a private security
alarm service agency to the premises are expressly excluded from the definition
of the term AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING ALARM SYSTEM as used in this section.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any individual, person, firm, or corporation
to sell, offer for sale, install, maintain, lease, own, possess, or operate an
automatic telephone dialing alarm system connected to any exchange telephone
trunk line within the city, which is regulated to make telephonic communication
with any telephone line leased by the city and installed within any facility
operated by the City Police Department.
   (C)   The Chief of Police and any officer serving under his direction, when
he or they have knowledge that the unlawful maintenance of an automatic
telephone dialing alarm system is installed and operated in violation of this
section, shall order the owner, operator, or lessee to disconnect and cease
operation of the system within 48 hours of receipt of the order. Automatic
telephone dialing alarm systems installed prior to the effective date of this
section shall be removed within ten days of such date. It shall be unlawful for
any person, natural or corporate, to fail to comply with any of the provisions
of this section. (Ord. 700, passed 7-18-84; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
Penalty, see §
10.99
UNSAFE STRUCTURES BOARD
§ 32.093 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   For provisions concerning the Unsafe Structures Board, see §
150.23 of this code. (Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
UTILITIES DEPARTMENT
§ 32.094 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   For provisions concerning the Utilities Department, see Charter §
4.12. (Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY BOARD
§ 32.100 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   There is hereby established a Pembroke Pines Environmental Advisory Board,
which shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City Commission. (Ord. 941,
passed 11-28-90; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11; Am. Ord. 1869, passed 2-15-17)
§ 32.101 EX OFFICIO MEMBERS; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; COMPOSITION, QUORUM.
   (A)   The Environmental Advisory Board shall consist of 11 regular members
and one alternate member. Additionally the following ex officio members who
shall have no voting powers on the Board, to wit: the City Manager, or his/her
designee, and a Board Secretary.
   (B)   Each member of the City Commission shall appoint two members to the
Environmental Advisory Board, with the Mayor appointing three members and one
alternate member. All appointments shall be made pursuant to the City Code. All
persons considered for appointment, to the extent practicable, shall represent
environmental interests, specialties and qualifications in the following field:
      (1)   Architecture;
      (2)   Biology;
      (3)   Education;
      (4)   Engineering;
      (5)   Environmental science;
      (6)   Forestry;
      (7)   Geology;
      (8)   Horticulture;
      (9)   Law;
      (10)   Urban Planning.
   (C)   Six members in attendance shall constitute a quorum of the
Environmental Advisory Board. (Ord. 941, passed 11-28-90; Am. Ord. 1697, passed
9-7-11; Am. Ord. 1869, passed 2-15-17)
§ 32.102 OBJECTIVES; PURPOSES.
   The objectives and purposes of the Environmental Advisory Board shall be to
provide constructive advice and counsel to the City Commission, with a broad
outlook toward environmental protection and conservation in the following
manner:
   (A)   Advise the City Commission with regards to implementation of the
city's adopted Green Plan;
   (B)   Advise the City Commission with regards to environmental
sustainability and planning;
   (C)   Review and advise the City Commission with regards to best practices
in arboriculture, forestry, recycling, waste reduction and litter abatement;
   (D)   Review and advise the City Commission with regards to regional or
emerging issues such as water and air quality, fracking, dark skies and/or
airborne diseases;
   (E)   Review and advise the City Commission with regards to community
supported agricultural initiatives or regional food supply or food deserts;
   (F)   Review and advise the City Commission with regards to alternate
transportation options such as bicycle, pedestrian and mass transit:
   (G)   Review and advise the City Commission with regards to wildlife and/or
wildlife habitats;
   (H)   Identify and recommend affordable strategies associated with
conservation, renewable energy and energy efficiency;
   (I)   Research environmentally sound practices that will reduce greenhouse
gas emissions, save money, energy and natural resources;
   (J)   Make recommendations and then promote projects that beautify and
improve the aesthetic of the city;
   (K)   Provide recommendations to the City Commission on the adoption,
prioritization and implementation of initiatives, actions, policies, and public
outreach and education programs to support and promote all aspects of
sustainabilitv and/or going green;
   (L)   Research financial initiatives and resources to offset costs;
   (M)   Develop and recommend outcome measures for green programs and
initiatives;
   (N)   Participate in city events to promote Green practices to further the
Board's mission and purpose;
   (O)   Monitor the progress of approved initiatives and identify and address
stumbling blocks to their implementation, to ensure that sustainabilitv
benefits are achieved and strategic plans to achieve said benefits are
implemented in a reasonable timeframe;
   (P)   Investigate, research and make recommendations regarding the
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Green Building Rating
System and other environmental programs and green technologies which may be of
interest to the city and its residents and businesses;
   (Q)   Make recommendations and/or advise other City Advisory Boards in
regards to environmental issues. (Ord. 941, passed 11-28-90; Am. Ord. 1697,
passed 9-7-11; Am. Ord. 1869, passed 2-15-17)
§ 32.103 MEETINGS.
   The Environmental Advisory Board meetings will meet on the first Tuesday of
every month or as needed. (Ord. 941, passed 11-28-90; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-
7-11; Am. Ord. 1869, passed 2-15-17)
CHARTER SCHOOL ADVISORY BOARD
§ 32.110 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is the intent of the City Commission in the establishment of the
Charter School Advisory Board that this Board shall act in an advisory capacity
to the City Commission in matters relating to the city’s charter schools.
   (B)   It is the further intent and purpose in the creation of the Pembroke
Pines Charter School Advisory Board that the Board shall serve in a responsive
capacity to the needs of the community, the charter schools, the schoolchildren
and their parents so as to assist in the ability of the charter school to
foster a positive and creative liaison between the City Commission and the
charter school community.
   (C)   It is the further intent of the City Commission that a separate
Advisory Board shall be created for the Charter Elementary School, the Charter
Middle School and the Charter High School. The commencement of each Advisory
Board shall precede the opening of each respective school. (Ord. 1265, passed
6-17-98; Am. Ord. 1314, passed 9-1-99; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.111 DUTIES.
   The duties of the Pembroke Pines Charter School Advisory Board shall include
but not be limited to the following:
   (A)   Observe effectiveness of school operations;
   (B)   Review of principal’s policies regarding such issues as attendance and
discipline;
   (C)   Perform fiscal review and submit recommendations to the city;
   (D)   Provide evaluation input with regard to the performance of the
principal to the City Manager;
   (E)   Provide periodic reports to City Commission including an end-of-year
annual report;
   (F)   Recommend curriculum initiatives to the city in cooperation with the
principal;
   (G)   Serve and offer leadership on selected subcommittees;
   (H)   Assist in the development of long range strategic plans to establish
comprehensive vision of the city’s educational initiatives;
   (I)   Assist and advise in development efforts including grant
administration and other fund raising efforts; and
   (J)   To abide by the goals and objectives and fulfill the requirements of
the Charter School application made by the city to the Broward County School
Board. (Ord. 1265, passed 6-17-98; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.112 BOARD ACTION ADVISORY ONLY.
   The actions, decisions and recommendations of the Pembroke Pines Charter
School Advisory Board shall not be final or binding on the City Commission, but
shall be advisory only. The Board or its members shall coordinate all
recommendations for improvement in the operation of the Pembroke Pines Charter
Schools through the Charter School Principal and shall not interact directly
with the Charter School administration and staff, except for the purpose of
inquiries, investigations, and observations consistent with the provisions of §
3.07 of the Pembroke Pines Charter. (Ord. 1265, passed 6-17-98; Am. Ord. 1697,
passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.113 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERMS OF APPOINTMENT.
   The Pembroke Pines Charter School Advisory Board shall consist of nine
members, seven of which shall be voting members.
   (A)   Non-voting members: The City Manager, or his/her designee, and the
Principal of the Charter Schools shall serve as ex officio, non-voting members.
   (B)   Voting members:
      (1)   An individual possessing definable experience in educational and
administrative matters shall be appointed by a majority of the City Commission.
      (2)   Five additional voting members and two alternates shall consist of
parents of those students enrolled in the Pembroke Pines Charter Schools and
shall be elected by the parents of the Pembroke Pines Charter School students
for a one year term commencing October 1 until September 30. The initial parent
members shall be selected and appointed by the City Commission and shall serve
until September 30, 1999.
      (3)   The remaining voting members shall be business representatives of
the community selected and appointed by a majority of the City Commission and
shall serve a two year terms commencing October 1 until September 30. The
initial business representative members shall be selected and appointed by the
City Commission to serve until September 30, 2000.
   (C)   Each parent, business representative, and alternate member of the
Board shall serve until the expiration of his or her term, resignation, removal
for cause, or until a successor is appointed by the respective appointing body,
except that the City Manager, or his/her designee, and the Principal shall
remain as permanent members of the Board. Removal for cause shall take effect
immediately, upon approval of such removal by the City Commission. (Ord. 1265,
passed 6-17-98; Am. Ord. 1306, passed 6-2-99; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.114 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP.
   The qualifications for membership shall be as follows:
   (A)   The City Commission’s educational and administrative appointee shall
demonstrate definable experience in administrative matters in an educational
setting and shall serve a one year term commencing October 1 until September
30.
   (B)   Each parent member of the Board shall have a student enrolled in a
Pembroke Pines Charter School. As no students will be enrolled at the time of
the appointment of the initial parent members of this Board, the initial parent
members are exempt from this requirement.
   (C)   Each business representative serving on the Board shall either reside
in the city or do business within the boundaries of the city, evidenced by a
valid, current local business tax receipt issued by the city.
   (D)   Each applicant shall indicate his or her interest in becoming well-
versed with the City of Pembroke Pines Charter and Code of Ordinances as the
same may apply to the operation and administration of the Pembroke Pines
Charter Schools and shall be further interested in the development and
operations of the Pembroke Pines Charter School programs to best serve the
health, safety and welfare of the citizen and residents of the city and Broward
County, Florida. (Ord. 1265, passed 6-17-98; Am. Ord. 1306, passed 6-2-99; Am.
Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.115 MEETINGS, DATES, PROCEDURES, RECORDS AND QUORUM.
   (A)   An organizational meeting of the Charter School Advisory Board shall
be held as the first meeting of each year, or as soon thereafter as
practicable, for the purpose of electing officers for the ensuing year. A Chair
and Vice Chair shall be elected for terms of one year by the Board from its
voting membership. At least one regular meeting of the Board shall be held each
month and special meetings may be called by the Chair or by any five voting
members of the Board.
   (B)   Five voting members in attendance shall constitute a quorum of the
Board. (Ord. 1265, passed 6-17-98; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.116 ASSISTANCE TO THE BOARD.
   The City Clerk or his/her designee shall act as secretary to the Board and
be responsible for providing the items necessary for conducting meetings, as
requested by the Chair of the Board, and for recording and preparation of
meeting minutes. The City Attorney or his/her designee shall act as the
attorney for the Board. (Ord. 1265, passed 6-17-98; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-
11)
§ 32.117 FUNDING.
   The City Commission shall appropriate funds at its discretion to the Board
for expenses necessary in the conduct of its work. The Board, upon the approval
of the City Commission, may accept grants or other monetary and physical
assistance to aid in its work. (Ord. 1265, passed 6-17-98; Am. Ord. 1697,
passed 9-7-11)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BOARD
§ 32.120 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is the intent of the City Commission in the establishment of the
Pembroke Pines Economic Development Board that this Board shall act in an
advisory capacity to the City Commission for the express purposes of pursuing
new business opportunities as well as assisting local businesses and business
operations in enhancing and in solidifying their existing conditions and roles
within the city and the business environment of Broward County, Florida.
   (B)   It is the further intent and purpose in the creation of the Pembroke
Pines Economic Development Board that the Board shall serve as a voice and in a
responsive capacity to the needs of local businesses and business operations so
as to assist local businesses and business operations in their ability to
continue to do business in this city and to foster a positive and creative
liaison between the City Commission and local businesses. (Ord. 1289, passed
11-4-98; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.121 DUTIES.
   The duties of the Pembroke Pines Economic Development Board shall be as
follows:
   (A)   To act in an advisory capacity to the City Commission; to conduct and
hold public meetings in which matters affecting local businesses and local
business activities to the city shall be considered, analyzed and reviewed for
the express purposes of enhancing and enlightening the relationship between
local government and local businesses in this city.
   (B)   To review and to formulate recommendations to the City Commission on
specific business issues or business matters which reflect upon specific
economic conditions or business matters which could, through legislation or
other public action, be resolved or alleviated by actions taken or to be taken
by the City Commission or the City Administration.
   (C)   To periodically review business matters affected by the Comprehensive
Zoning Ordinances of the city, the city’s Comprehensive Land Use Plan, the
city’s Comprehensive Land Use map, and other land development regulations
which, by their terms or by implication have an effect upon the operation of
local businesses and business operations which require the attention and
further consideration of the City Commission.
   (D)   To accept the responsibility of periodic specific assignments from the
City Commission to consider and to analyze matters which may be of a general or
specific concern to the City Commission, or otherwise required by ordinance.
(Ord. 1289, passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.122 BOARD ACTION ADVISORY ONLY.
   The actions, decisions, and recommendations of the Pembroke Pines Economic
Development Board shall not be final or binding on the City Commission, but
shall be advisory only. (Ord. 1289, passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-
11)
§ 32.123 COMPOSITION: APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Pembroke Pines Economic Development Board shall consist of 11
members and one alternate, as provided for hereinafter.
   (B)   Each member of the City Commission shall appoint one member
representing their district with the Mayor’s appointee chosen at large to serve
on the Pembroke Pines Economic Development Board.
   (C)   The City Commission, by majority vote, shall appoint two additional
voting members. These two members shall serve a term of two years each.
   (D)   The Mayor shall appoint one alternate member.
   (E)   The City Commission shall direct the City Manager, or his or her
designee, to serve as an ex-officio member of the Pembroke Pines Economic
Development Board during his or her term as City Manager of the city.
   (F)   The Miramar/Pembroke Pines Chamber of Commerce, or any successor
organization, shall nominate four members to be appointed by a majority of the
City Commission and shall serve an initial term of one year.
   (G)   Unless otherwise provided for in this section, each member of the
Board shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing member of the City
Commission. The Miramar/Pembroke Pines Chamber of Commerce, or its successor,
shall be permitted to re-nominate a member to serve on the Pembroke Pines
Economic Development Board for approval by the City Commission. (Ord. 1289,
passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. 1522, passed 9-7-05; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.124 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The qualifications for membership shall be as follows:
      (1)   The applicant/members appointed by the City Commission may be full-
time residents of the city for not less than a period of six months immediately
prior to the appointment or;
      (2)   The City Commission shall endeavor to appoint members who are local
business persons doing business in the city and who possess local business tax
receipts issued by the city. However, Pembroke Pines residents, if available,
who otherwise meet the qualifications of this subchapter but who are local
business persons outside the city, shall also be considered for appointment. In
the event that members of the Commission are unable to appoint members to this
Board who qualify as local business persons, then the City Commission shall be
free to appoint persons who otherwise demonstrate their strong and sincere
commitment to the legislative intent set forth in this subchapter.
      (3)   All persons considered for appointment by the City Commission shall
demonstrate a specific interest in the preservation, generation, and
enhancement of local businesses and local business operations in the city which
shall be demonstrated by an objective statement of commitment by such person to
foster a more comprehensive and positive business climate in the city.
      (4)   Each applicant shall indicate his or her interest in becoming well-
versed with the City of Pembroke Pines Charter and Code of Ordinances as
amended from time to time as the same may apply to businesses and business
operations and shall be further interested in the business development of
business activities and operations in the city to best serve the health,
safety, and welfare of the city. (Ord. 1289, passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. 1576,
passed 4-18-07; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.125 MEETINGS, DATES, PROCEDURES, RECORDS, AND QUORUM.
   (A)   An organizational meeting of the Economic Development Board shall be
held at the first meeting of the Board after their appointment and thereafter
at the first regular meeting in the month of July of each year or as soon
thereafter as practicable, for the purpose of electing officers for the ensuing
year. A chairman and vice-chairman shall be elected for terms of one year by
the Board from its membership. At least one regular meeting of the Board shall
be held each month and special meetings may be called by the chairman or by any
five regular members of the Board.
   (B)   Six members in attendance shall constitute a quorum of the Board.
(Ord. 1289, passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.126 ASSISTANCE TO THE BOARD.
   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall attend Board meetings and
provide assistance and advice to the Board in its deliberations. The City Clerk
shall act as secretary to the Board and be responsible for providing the items
necessary for conducting meetings, as requested by the chairman of the Board,
and for recording of meeting minutes. (Ord. 1289, passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord.
1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.127 FUNDING.
   The City Administration may budget appropriate funds, at the discretion of
the City Commission, to the Board for expenses necessary in the conduct of its
work. The Board, upon the approval of the City Commission, may accept grants
for other monetary and physical assistance to aid in its work. (Ord. 1289,
passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
ARTS AND CULTURE ADVISORY BOARD
§ 32.130 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is the intent of the City Commission in the establishment of the
Arts and Culture Advisory Board that this Board shall act in an advisory
capacity to the City Commission in matters relating to arts and culture within
the city.
   (B)   It is the further intent and purpose in the creation of the Arts and
Culture Advisory Board that the Board shall serve as a voice and in a
responsive capacity to the artistic and cultural needs of the community, to
encourage artistic opportunities for the residents, citizens and visitors of
the city and to foster a positive and creative liaison between City Commission
and the artistic community. (Ord. 1367, passed 1-17-01; Am. Ord. 1697, passed
9-7-11)
§ 32.131 DUTIES.
   The duties of the Arts and Culture Advisory Board shall include but not be
limited to the following:
   (A)   Identify artistic and cultural opportunities in the city and county.
   (B)   Seek out artists and performers to exhibit or perform for the citizens
residents and visitors of the city.
   (C)   Assist and advise the City Commission in an effort to address the
cultural needs of the city.
   (D)   Develop opportunities and recommend initiatives in cooperation with
the city for artisans to provide exposure to their craft.
   (E)   Assist in the development of long range strategic plans to establish
comprehensive vision of the city’s cultural initiatives;
   (F)   Assist and advise in development efforts including grant
administration and other fund raising efforts. (Ord. 1367, passed 1-17-01; Am.
Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.132 BOARD ACTION ADVISORY ONLY.
   The actions, decisions and recommendations of the Arts and Culture Advisory
Board shall not be final or binding on the City Commission, but shall be
advisory only. The Board or its members shall coordinate all recommendations
for improvement in the cultural experience in the city and shall not interact
directly with city administration and staff, except for the purpose of
inquiries, investigations, and observations consistent with the provisions of
3.07 of the City Charter. (Ord. 1367, passed 1-17-01; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-
7-11)
§ 32.133 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Arts and Culture Advisory Board shall consist of seven permanent
members who shall be voting members and two alternate members. Alternate
members shall be permitted to vote in the absence of permanent members provided
that no more than seven members vote on any action being considered by the
Board. Five members of the Board shall be selected and appointed in accordance
with §
32.004. Two additional voting members appointed by the City Commission and two
alternates shall be appointed by the Mayor. The two members appointed by the
City Commission shall serve a two-year term.
   (B)   The Arts and Culture Advisory Board may, at its option, appoint non-
voting members of the Board to serve as “Friends of the Arts and Culture
Advisory Board.”
   (C)   The City Manager, or his/her designee, and the Director of the City’s
Parks and Recreation Department, or his/her designee, shall serve as ex
officio, non-voting members and shall remain as permanent members of the Board.
(Ord. 1367, passed 1-17-01; Am. Ord. 1640, passed 5-6-09; Am. Ord. 1697, passed
9-7-11)
§ 32.134 QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERSHIP.
   The qualifications for membership shall be as follows:
   (A)   Each member of the Board shall be a resident of the city.
   (B)   No member of the Board may recommend their own artistic creations or
cultural exhibits to the Board for display or performance.
   (C)   Each applicant shall indicate his or her interest in becoming well-
versed with the City Charter and Code of Ordinances as the same may apply to
the operation and administration of the Board and shall be further interested
in the development of programs to best serve the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens and residents of the city and county. (Ord. 1367, passed 1-17-01;
Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.135 MEETINGS, DATES, PROCEDURES, RECORDS AND QUORUM.
   (A)   An organizational meeting of the Arts and Culture Advisory Board shall
be held as the first meeting of each year, or as soon thereafter as
practicable, for the purpose of electing officers for the ensuing year. A Chair
and Vice Chair shall be elected for terms of one year by the Board from its
voting membership. At least one regular meeting of the Board shall be held each
month and special meetings may be called by the Chair or by any five voting
members of the Board.
   (B)   The Board may designate sub-committees to perform fact-finding
functions. Each sub-committees shall report back to the Board during regular or
special meetings of the Board to advise the Board as a whole and report all
information collected in order for the Board to take further action.
   (C)   Five voting members in attendance shall constitute a quorum of the
Board. (Ord. 1367, passed 1-17-01; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.136 ASSISTANCE TO THE BOARD.
   The City Clerk or his/her designee shall act as secretary to the Board and
be responsible for providing the items necessary for conducting meetings, as
requested by the Chair of the Board, and for recording and preparation of
meeting minutes. The City Attorney, or his/her designee, shall act as the
attorney for the Board. (Ord. 1367, passed 1-17-01; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-
11)
§ 32.137 FUNDING.
   The City Commission shall appropriate funds at its discretion to the Board
for expenses necessary in the conduct of its work. The Board, upon the approval
of the City Commission, may accept grants or other monetary and physical
assistance to aid in its work. All funds raised by the Board are public funds.
City Commission approval shall be required for any expenditures by the Board.
(Ord. 1367, passed 1-17-01; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
RIVER OF GRASS CULTURAL ARTS CENTER ADVISORY BOARD
§ 32.138 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is the intent of the City Commission in the establishment of the
River of Grass Cultural Arts Center Advisory Board that this Board shall act in
an advisory capacity to the City Commission in matters relating to the River of
Grass Cultural Arts Center.
   (B)   It is further the intent and purpose in the creation of the River of
Grass Cultural Arts Center Advisory Board that the Board shall facilitate the
management and production of the cultural programming at the River of Grass
Cultural Arts Center and to foster a positive and creative liaison between the
City Commission and the community for the effective utilization of the River of
Grass Cultural Arts Center. (Ord. 1439, passed 4-2-03; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-
7-11)
§ 32.139 DUTIES.
   The duties of the River of Grass Cultural Arts Center Advisory Board shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Solicit corporate sponsorship and grant funding for programs and
special events and performances in the River of Grass Cultural Arts Center;
   (B)   Advise the City Commission in an effort to address the cultural and
educational needs of all citizens;
   (C)   Assist in the development of the Program Goals and Plan for the
operation of the River of Grass Cultural Arts Center;
   (D)   Recommend events and programming at the River of Grass Cultural Arts
Center in furtherance of the program goals and plan; and
   (E)   Develop and identify cooperative opportunities with community
organizations for the benefit of the River of Grass Cultural Arts Center. (Ord.
1439, passed 4-2-03; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.140 BOARD ACTION ADVISORY ONLY.
   The actions, decisions and recommendations of the River of Grass Cultural
Arts Center shall not be final or binding on the City Commission, but shall be
advisory only. The Board or its members shall coordinate all recommendations on
behalf of the Center with the city and shall not interact directly with city
administration and staff, except for the purpose of inquiries, investigations,
and observations consistent with the provisions of §
3.07 of the City Charter. (Ord. 1439, passed 4-2-03; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-
11)
§ 32.141 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERMS OF APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   The River of Grass Cultural Arts Center Advisory Board shall consist
of nine members who shall be voting members. The members of the Board shall
consist of one designee from each of the following organizations in partnership
with the city. The Board member representing the Pembroke Pines Academic
Village shall be an appointment of the Pembroke Pines City Commission.
      (1)   Broward County Cultural Affairs Council.
      (2)   Florida International University.
      (3)   Broward Community College.
      (4)   Broward County Southwest Regional Library.
      (5)   Pembroke Pines Charter High School.
      (6)   Pembroke Pines Academic Village.
      (7)   Pembroke Pines Arts and Cultural Advisory Board.
      (8)   Pembroke Pines Parks and Recreation Department.
      (9)   South Florida Water Management District.
   (B)   Each member of the Board shall serve for a term of one year and shall
continue to serve until the expiration of his or her term, resignation, removal
for cause by the appointing organization or the City Commission, or until a
successor is designated by the appropriate organization.
   (C)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, and the Director of the
city’s Parks and Recreation Department, or his or her designee, shall serve as
ex officio, non-voting members and shall remain as permanent members of the
Board.
   (D)   No individual member of the Board may recommend their own personal,
artistic creations or cultural exhibits to the Board for display or
performance. (Ord. 1439, passed 4-2-03; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.142 MEETINGS, DATES, PROCEDURES, RECORDS AND QUORUM.
   (A)   An organizational meeting of the River of Grass Cultural Arts Center
Advisory Board shall be held as the first meeting of each year, or as soon
thereafter as practicable, for the purpose of electing officers for the ensuing
year. A Chair and Vice Chair shall be elected for terms of one year by the
Board from among its voting membership. Commencing in February 2008, at least
one regular meeting of the Board shall be held every other month and special
meetings may be called by the Chair or by any five voting members of the Board.
   (B)   The Board shall be governed by Robert’s Rules of Order, but may
otherwise propose reasonable rules of procedure to govern the conduct of its
business subject to the approval of the City Commission. All meetings, records
and files of the Board shall be open and available to the public consistent
with the Florida Public Records Law (Chapter 119, Florida Statutes) and the
Sunshine Law (Chapter 286, Florida Statutes).
   (C)   Five voting members in attendance shall constitute a quorum of the
Board. (Ord. 1439, passed 4-2-03; Am. Ord. 1600, passed 1-16-08; Am. Ord. 1697,
passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.143 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   In addition to the automatic removal for the failure of a member to meet the
attendance requirements set forth in this chapter, the City Commission or
appointing organization may further remove a member of the Board for good
cause. Good cause shall be defined herein as:
   (A)   Failure to perform and perceive the functions and duties of a member
of the Board;
   (B)   Any other factor or matter within the legislative discretion of the
City Commission or appointing organization which may be considered in
determining the individual membership of a River of Grass Cultural Arts Center
Board member. (Ord. 1439, passed 4-2-03; Am. Ord. 1494, passed 9-13-04; Am.
Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.144 ASSISTANCE TO THE BOARD.
   The City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall act as secretary to the Board
and be responsible for providing the items necessary for conducting meetings,
as requested by the Chair of the Board, and for recording and preparation of
meeting minutes. The City Attorney, or his or her designee, shall act as the
attorney for the Board. (Ord. 1439, passed 4-2-03; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-
11)
§ 32.145 FUNDING.
   The City Commission shall appropriate funds at its discretion to the Board
for expenses necessary in the conduct of its work. The Board, upon the approval
of the City Commission, may accept grants or other monetary and physical
assistance to aid in its work. (Ord. 1439, passed 4-2-03; Am. Ord. 1697, passed
9-7-11)
CITIZEN BUDGET ADVISORY BOARD
§ 32.146 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   There is hereby established the Pembroke Pines Citizen Budget Advisory Board
(the "Board"), which shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City
Commission. (Ord. 2025, passed 9-4-24)
§ 32.147 COMPOSITION AND EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; QUORUM.
   (A)   The Citizen Budget Advisory Board shall consist of 11 members.
Additionally, the following ex-officio members shall serve as nonvoting members
and participants on the Board: the City Manager, the Finance Director, and the
Budget Director, or their respective designees; and a member of the Pembroke
Pines Police Department and a member of the Pembroke Pines Fire Department, as
designated by their respective bargaining units.
   (B)   Each member of the City Commission shall appoint two members to the
Citizen Budget Advisory Board, with the Mayor appointing three members.
      (1)   The Mayor shall appoint at least one member to the Citizen Budget
Advisory Board who has demonstrated through practice, profession, or education
to possess a specialized knowledge and understanding of budgetary or financial
matters and affairs reasonably related to the city's budget. Examples of the
requisite practice, profession, and education include educational degrees
earned or direct practical experience in one of the following or related
subject matters and careers: finance, economics, accounting, business
administration and budget analyst.
   (C)   Six members in attendance shall constitute a quorum of the Citizen
Budget Advisory Board. (Ord. 2025, passed 9-4-24)
§ 32.148 DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES, AND EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   The purpose and duties of the Citizen Budget Advisory Board shall be
as follows:
      (1)   To provide the City Commission with recommendations and input
regarding the wants, needs, and expectations of the citizens and residents of
Pembroke Pines for the city's annual budget.
      (2)   To analyze and review city budget-related information including,
but not limited to, the city budget, an advanced copy of which shall be
concurrently provided to the Board and City Commission; the city's annual
comprehensive financial report; and other financial and budget-related reports
provided to the Board by the City Manager in order for the Board to offer input
to the City Commission regarding the city's millage rate and other rates to be
included in the annual Broward County Property Appraiser's Notice of Proposed
Property Taxes.
      (3)   To submit recommendations, including recommendations made by the
Board's annual report to the City Commission, to be evaluated by the Commission
ahead of its consideration of the budget for the next fiscal year.
      (4)   To advise the City Commission on matters related to the levels of
different services provided by the city and its budget priorities.
   (B)   The Board shall not make recommendations to the City Commission on the
following matters:
      (1)   Matters pertaining to the city's Pension Trust Funds and Other Post
Employment Benefit Trust Fund (OPEB), which are administered by their own
boards; and
      (2)   Matters pertaining to collective bargaining, which is governed by
state law. (Ord. 2025, passed 9-4-24)
§ 32.149 MEETINGS.
   The Citizen Budget Advisory Board shall meet at least once per month or on
an as-needed basis. (Ord. 2025, passed 9-4-24)
EDUCATION ADVISORY BOARD
§ 32.150 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.
   It is the intent of the City Commission in the establishment of an Education
Advisory Board that this Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the City
Commission in matters relating to issues relating to educational matters from
the pre-school through and including post-secondary education level which will
impact the quality of education for all city residents and citizens or which
will impact education facilities located within the city. The mission of the
Education Advisory Board of the City of Pembroke Pines is to enhance education
by researching areas of concern, recommending effective programs, and creating
partnerships for those schools that are within the appropriate boundaries
enabling them to serve Pembroke Pines students. (Ord. 1500, passed 11-15-04;
Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.151 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The duties of the Education Advisory Board shall include but not be limited
to the following:
   (A)   Communicate with the administration of each school within the city as
well as those schools attended by city citizens and residents.
   (B)   Serve as a liaison between the citizens, residents, neighborhood
associations, local businesses and the city on educational issues.
   (C)   Recommend activities of the city with those activities of the local
schools, colleges and universities in order to promote educational
opportunities for citizens and residents of the city.
   (D)   Develop recommendations regarding programs which may be created to
enhance educational opportunities within the city.
   (E)   Develop proposed actions, including proposed legislation at the state
and federal level, which may be taken in support of educational programs within
the city.
   (F)   Identify and advise the city on ways to attract state and federal
programs and grants in direct support of schools within the city.
   (G)   Contact businesses within the geographical boundaries of the city and
businesses outside the geographical boundaries of the city, but who do business
with the city to provide professional skills, materials, financial or
educational support for the schools.
   (H)   Advise the city in the promotion of the public image of schools within
the city and those attended by city citizens and residents through the
development of brochures and other materials to be used in marketing city
schools.
   (I)   Collaborate and/or coordinate with the city’s police department to
improve safety for public school students before, during and after school.
   (J)   Collaborate and/or coordinate with the city’s parks and recreation
department regarding parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities and
utilization of such facilities by the schools within the city.
   (K)   Collaborate and/or coordinate, work in conjunction and communicate
regularly with the Pembroke Pines Charter Elementary and Middle School Advisory
Board and the Pembroke Pines Charter High School Advisory Board.
   (L)   Solicit participation of and regular attendance at Board meetings by
representatives of the traditional public schools located within Pembroke Pines
and those public schools serving students who reside in Pembroke Pines. (Ord.
1500, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.152 BOARD ACTION ADVISORY ONLY.
   The actions, decisions and recommendations of the Education Advisory Board
shall not be final or binding on the City Commission but shall be advisory
only. The Board or its members shall coordinate all recommendations for
improvement in education matters in the city with the City Commission through
the City Manager, or his or her designee, and shall not interact directly with
city administration and staff, except for the purpose of inquiries,
investigations, and observations consistent with the provisions of §
3.07 of the City Charter. (Ord. 1500, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-
7-11)
§ 32.153 ASSISTANCE TO THE BOARD.
   The City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall act as secretary to the Board
and be responsible for providing the items necessary for conducting meetings,
as requested by the Chair of the Board, and for recording and preparation of
meeting minutes. The City Attorney, or his or her designee shall act as the
attorney for the Board. (Ord. 1500, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-
11)
AFFORDABLE HOUSING ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 32.160 ESTABLISHMENT.
   Pursuant to the requirements of the State of Florida Housing Initiative
Partnership Act, as may be amended from time to time, the City of Pembroke
Pines hereby established the Affordable Housing Advisory Committee. (Ord. 1606,
passed 4-16-08; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.161 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The City Commission shall appoint, by motion, members to the
Affordable Housing Advisory Committee (the “Committee”) as provided in this
section. The Committee shall be comprised of the following individuals:
      (1)   One citizen who is actively engaged in the residential home
building industry in connection with affordable housing.
      (2)   One citizen who is actively engaged in the banking or mortgage
banking industry in connection with affordable housing.
      (3)   One citizen who is a representative of those areas of labor
actively engaged in home building in connection with affordable housing.
      (4)   One citizen who is actively engaged as an advocate for low-income
persons in connection with affordable housing.
      (5)   One citizen who is actively engaged as a for-profit provider of
affordable housing.
      (6)   One citizen who is actively engaged as a not-for-profit provider of
affordable housing.
      (7)   One citizen who is actively engaged as a real estate professional
in connection with affordable housing.
      (8)   One citizen who actively serves on the local planning agency
pursuant to F.S. § 163.3174.
      (9)   One citizen who resides within the municipal boundaries of the City
of Pembroke Pines.
      (10)   One citizen who represents employers within the City of Pembroke
Pines.
      (11)   One citizen who represents essential services personnel, as
defined in the city’s local housing assistance plan.
      (12)   One locally elected official from the city as selected by the City
Commission.
   (B)   Members of the Committee shall serve continuously at the pleasure of
the City Commission. The local elected official shall only serve while holding
the elected office.
   (C)   Appointments to fill any vacancy on the Committee shall be for the
remainder of the unexpired term of office.
   (D)   In addition to automatic removal for the failure of a member to meet
the attendance requirements set forth in this chapter, the members of the
Committee shall serve at the pleasure of the City Commission and may be removed
at any time by a majority vote of the City Commission.
   (E)   The locally elected official serving on an advisory committee, or a
locally elected designee, must attend biannual regional workshops convened and
administered under the Affordable Housing Catalyst Program. (Ord. 1606, passed
4-16-08; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11; Am. Ord. 1949, passed 9-16-20; Am. Ord.
2002, passed 12-14-22)
§ 32.162 OFFICERS; QUORUM.
   (A)   The Committee shall elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and such
other officers as the Committee shall deem necessary. Officers of the Committee
shall be elected by a majority vote of the membership of the Committee at its
first meeting after the members’ initial appointments, and annually thereafter.
A member of the Committee may be elected to serve as an officer without
restriction as to the number of terms served.
   (B)   The presence of six or more members shall constitute a quorum of the
Committee. (Ord. 1606, passed 4-16-08; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.163 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   As required by F.S. § 420.9076, as may be amended from time to time,
the Committee shall review the established policies and procedures, ordinances,
land development regulations, and adopted local government comprehensive plan
of the City of Pembroke Pines, and shall recommend specific actions or
initiatives to encourage or facilitate affordable housing while protecting the
ability of the property to appreciate in value.
   (B)   The Committee may perform other duties at the request of the local
government, including:
      (1)   The provision of mentoring services to affordable housing partners,
including developers, banking institutions, employers, and others to identify
available incentives, assist with applications for funding request, and develop
partnerships between various parties.
      (2)   The creation of best practices for the development of affordable
housing in the community. (Ord. 1606, passed 4-16-08; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-
7-11)
§ 32.164 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   The Committee shall annually submit a report to the City Commission that
includes recommendations on, and evaluates the implementation of affordable
housing incentives as provided in F.S. § 420.9076(4), as may be amended from
time to time.
(Ord. 1606, passed 4-16-08; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11; Am. Ord. 1949, passed
9-16-20)
§ 32.165 CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF REPORT; NOTICE; PUBLIC HEARING.
   The approval by the Committee of the City of Pembroke Pines local housing
incentive strategies recommendations, and its review of the City of Pembroke
Pines implementation of previously recommended strategies, must be made by an
affirmative vote of a majority of the membership of the Committee taken at a
public hearing. Notice of the time, date, and place of the public hearing of
the Committee to final local housing incentives strategies recommendations must
be published in a newspaper of general paid circulation in the county. The
notice must contain a short and concise summary of the local housing incentive
strategies recommendation to be considered by the Committee. The notice must
state the public place where a copy of the tentative Committee recommendations
can be obtained by interested persons. (Ord. 1606, passed 4-16-08; Am. Ord.
1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.166 CITY COMMISSION CONSIDERATION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING ADVISORY COMMITTEE
REPORT.
   Within 90 days after the date of receipt of the local housing incentive
strategies recommendations from the Committee, the City Commission shall
consider the adoption an amendment to its local housing assistance plan to
incorporate the local housing incentive strategies it will implement within its
jurisdiction. The consideration of the amendment shall comply with the
requirements of F.S. § 420.9076(6), as may be amended from time to time. (Ord.
1606, passed 4-16-08; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.167 ASSISTANCE TO THE BOARD.
   The City Clerk or his or her designee shall act as secretary to the
Committee and be responsible for providing the items necessary for conducting
meetings, as requested by the chair of the Committee, and for recording and
preparation of meeting minutes. The City Attorney or his or her designee shall
act as the attorney for the Committee. In addition, the Committee shall be
cooperatively staffed by the appropriate city department, as determined by the
City Manager, in order to insure an integrated approach to the work of the
Committee. (Ord. 1606, passed 4-16-06; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.168 FUNDING.
   The City Commission shall appropriate funds, at its discretion, to the
Committee for expenses necessary in the conduct of its work. The Committee,
upon the approval of the City Commission, may accept grants or other monetary
and physical assistance to aid in its work. (Ord. 1606, passed 4-16-06; Am.
Ord. 1697, passed 9-7-11)
§ 32.170 HOMEOWNERS’ ASSOCIATION AND CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION BOARD MEMBER
EMERGENCY CONTACT INFORMATION.
   Homeowners’ associations and condominium associations, as defined by
Chapters 718 and 720, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time,
respectively, located within the City of Pembroke Pines shall designate one of
their officers to be an emergency contact person. Each homeowners’ association
and condominium association shall provide the City Clerk the name, address and
phone number of the association’s property manager, emergency contact person,
and at least one other board member. The associations, at their discretion, may
provide the city with the contact information of additional board members to be
used in the event of an emergency or natural disaster. Current associations
shall provide the contact information of the necessary individuals no later
than June 30, 2006. Thereafter, the associations shall provide the contact
information of the necessary individuals no later than April 1 each year or
within 30 days of an election of new board members. The homeowners’ association
and condominium association are responsible for providing updated information
within 30 days in the event there is a change in their board membership. The
contact information for homeowners’ association and condominium association
board members shall only be used in accordance with Chapter 119, Florida
Statutes, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 1544, passed 5-17-06; Am. Ord.
1697, passed 9-7-11)
PUBLIC ART COMMITTEE
§ 32.180 ESTABLISHMENT AND MISSION.
   (A)   There is hereby established a committee to be known as the "Public Art
Committee."
   (B)   The mission of the Public Art Committee is to expand cultural
opportunities for residents and visitors and to enhance the appearance of the
city through the selection and integration of artwork in a public environment.
   (C)   Members of the Public Art Committee shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 1960, passed 3-3-21)
§ 32.181 COMPOSITION.
   (A)   Notwithstanding §§
32.002 through
32.004, the Public Art Committee consists of seven regular members, who live or
conduct business in the city, with a strong commitment to the objectives of the
public art program, who unless otherwise stated shall be appointed by the City
Manager, or his/her designee. Membership of the Public Art Committee may
include:
      (1)   Three individuals chosen from the following disciplines: landscape
architecture, urban planning, engineering, or a related design discipline;
      (2)   One professional artist, whose primary source of income is through
the sale of original art or art instruction;
      (3)   One resident, knowledgeable in the field of public art, education,
or community affairs;
      (4)   One private citizen from the development community; and
      (5)   One member of the Arts and Culture Board selected by a majority of
the Arts and Culture Board.
   (D)   Membership terms. To provide for staggered terms, the individuals
appointed pursuant to divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) shall serve for an initial
term of three years from the date of appointment; and the individuals appointed
pursuant to divisions (A)(3), (A)(4) and (A)(5) shall serve for an initial term
of one year from the date of appointment. Thereafter, all appointees shall be
appointed to serve for a term of three years from the date of appointment.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all board members shall continue to serve until
their successors are appointed pursuant to this section.
   (E)   Any member of the Public Art Committee that misses three consecutive
Committee meetings may be replaced by the City Manager, at the City Manager's
sole discretion. (Ord. 1960, passed 3-3-21)
§ 32.182 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Public Art Committee shall meet at least once per quarter or on an
as needed basis.
   (B)   Other meetings will be held as necessary to carry out the duties and
responsibilities of the Committee.
   (C)   Four members of the Public Art Committee shall constitute a quorum.
(Ord. 1960, passed 3-3-21)
§ 32.183 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Public Art Committee shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Recommendations to the City Manager through the Department Director or
Liaison, on revisions to the public art master plan, as set forth in §
97.42.
   (B)   Recommendations to the City Manager through the Department Director or
Liaison, on art and artist selection. (Ord. 1960, passed 3-3-21)
§ 32.184 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST PROHIBITED.
   No member of the Public Art Committee shall have his/her work of art
considered or approved by the Public Art Committee during their term of service
on the Committee or for one year thereafter; nor shall any member of the Public
Art Committee derive a financial gain as a result of their service on the
Committee during their term of service or for one year thereafter. (Ord. 1960,
passed 3-3-21)
DIVERSITY AND HERITAGE ADVISORY BOARD
§ 32.190 ESTABLISHMENT AND MISSION.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Board to be known as the “Diversity and
Heritage Advisory Board.”
   (B)   The mission of the Diversity and Heritage Advisory Board is to promote
awareness and to celebrate the rich heritage and the vast diversity of the
city.
(Ord. 1928, passed 6-19-19)
§ 32.191 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Diversity and Heritage Advisory Board shall have the following power and
duties:
   (A)   Recommendations to the Commission on diversity and equity strategies
that strengthen connections among diverse community groups and with city
government.
   (B)   Recommendations to the Commission on exploring new methods and
techniques to acknowledge tangible and intangible cultural heritage and expand
recognition programs related to heritage preservation activities.
   (C)   Recommendations to the Commission on ways to work with public and
private stakeholders in the city to increase understanding of the diverse
groups that make up the city.
(Ord. 1928, passed 6-19-19)
§ 32.192 COMPOSITION AND QUORUM.
   (A)   The Diversity and Heritage Advisory Board consists of 15 regular
members and ten alternates, who live or conduct business in the city, with a
strong commitment to the mission of the Diversity and Heritage Advisory Board.
The Mayor and each City Commissioner shall appoint three regular members. The
Mayor shall appoint two alternates and each City Commissioner shall appoint two
alternates. Alternates may only be appointed from the district in which the
appointing Commissioner resides; with the exception of the Mayor's
appointments, who may reside in any district. Alternates may only be seated at
a meeting for voting and quorum purposes in the absence of a regular member.
There shall be a rotation of alternate members by district to vote in the
absence of a regular member from the same or different district.
   (B)   In the event that a Diversity and Heritage Advisory Board meeting does
not have a quorum, the first alternate members shall be from the same district
of the absent member for voting and quorum purposes.
   (C)   However, in a meeting in which there are no alternates from the
district of the absent member present, then alternate members from another
district or a Mayor’s appointee shall be seated for voting and quorum purposes
through a rotation process.
   (D)   Once the rotation goes through the appointees from the four districts
and the Mayor’s appointees, then the rotation shall start over from District 1.
   (E)   In the rotation process, the Clerk or the Clerk’s designee shall
designate the alternate being seated for quorum and voting purposes based on
where the last meeting ended. If at the last two meetings a district or Mayor’s
appointee was seated for voting or quorum purposes, then at the next two
meetings, the next alternate in the rotation shall be from the next consecutive
district or a Mayor’s appointee. For example, if the District 1 alternates are
not present when it is their turn in the rotation, then the alternates from
District 2 would be next in the rotation. However, if the alternates from
District 2 are not available, then the alternates from District 3 would be next
in the rotation. This pattern would continue for District 4 and the Mayor’s
appointed alternates.
   (F)   In the event that a District’s alternates are not present at a meeting
in which it is their turn in the rotation, then the next time those alternates
will be called in the rotation will be in the normal course pursuant to this
section.
   (G)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, every alternate present at each
meeting, regardless of whether they are seated for voting and quorum purposes,
shall have the opportunity to participate in the meeting.
   (H)   Eight voting members in attendance shall constitute a quorum of the
Board. (Ord. 1928, passed 6-19-19; Am. Ord. 1933, passed 9-18-19; Am. Ord.
2004, passed 4-4-23)
§ 32.193 MEETINGS.
   The Diversity and Heritage Advisory Board shall meet at least once per
quarter or on an as needed basis. Other meetings may be held as necessary to
carry out the duties and responsibilities of the Board.
(Ord. 1928, passed 6-19-19)
§ 32.194 BOARD ACTION ADVISORY ONLY.
   The actions, decisions and recommendations of the Diversity and Heritage
Advisory Board shall not be final or binding on the City Commission, but shall
be advisory only.
(Ord. 1928, passed 6-19-19)
§ 32.195 ASSISTANCE TO THE BOARD.
   The City Clerk or his/her designee shall act as Secretary to the Board and
be responsible for providing the items necessary for conducting meetings, as
requested by the Chair of the Board, and for recording and preparation of
meeting minutes.
(Ord. 1928, passed 6-19-19)
YOUTH ADVISORY BOARD
§ 32.197 CREATION.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created and established the City of Pembroke
Pines Youth Advisory Board (“Board”). Unless otherwise expressly provided for
herein, the requirements of City Code of Ordinances §§
32.001 to
32.011, shall apply to the Board.
   (B)   Appointments. It is the intention and purpose of this subchapter that
the school principals of (1) Franklin Academy; (2) West Broward High School;
(3) Somerset Academy; (4) Flanagan High School; and (5) Pines Charter High
School shall each recommend to the City Manager no more than three students to
fill vacant positions on the Board. Each school shall have no more than three
appointments to the Board at any one time. Up to two students that are
residents, as defined in subsection (C), but do not attend one of the five
school listed above, may also submit an application to the City Manager for
consideration of appointment to the Board to fill vacant positions. The total
membership of this Board shall be comprised of no more than 17 members. A
majority of the members appointed to the Board shall constitute a quorum.
   (C)   Eligibility. In making appointments to this Board, consideration shall
be given to seeking student members who reside in the city. All Board members
must currently reside in the city, be enrolled in grades ten through 12, and be
no less than 14 years old. All Board members must maintain at least a 2.5 GPA.
All members must be recommended by the principal of their respective school or
submit an application to the City Manager and each student must be approved by
the City Manager to serve on the Board.
   (D)   Term. The selection of Board members shall take place at the start of
each school year during the month of August. Notwithstanding the requirements
of City Code of Ordinances §
32.005, the term of appointment for Board members shall continue for a period
of up to three years. The term of appointment for Board members shall conclude
during the month of May. Members of the Board shall be removed by the City
Manager for missing three consecutive Board meetings, and may be removed by the
City Manager, in his/her sole discretion.
   (E)   Community service hours. Members of the Board may be eligible to
receive official credit for school and community service hours for their
participation with the Board if permitted by the overseeing authority.
   (F)   Frequency of meetings. The Board shall meet one time each month during
the school year, or more frequently if desired by the Board.
   (G)   Scholarship. Any Board member serving on the Board for two or more
years shall, at graduation, be eligible for a city scholarship of up to $1,000.
(Ord. 2000, passed 11-16-22; Am. Ord. 2013, passed 11-15-23)
§ 32.198 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The powers and duties of the Youth Advisory Board shall be advisory in
nature to the City Commission, but solely by and through the professional staff
of the Recreation & Cultural Arts Department, and the City's Administration.
The duties of the Board shall include but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   Identifying, researching, and analyzing issues impacting youth in
the community;
      (2)   Advising the City Commission on matters impacting youth residing in
and attending schools within the city;
      (3)   Recommending social, educational, cultural and recreational
activities for youth within the city, and to assist with implementing those
activities;
      (4)   Assisting with any other matters assigned to the Board by the City
Manager; and
      (5)   Organizing or performing services or functions approved and
directed by the City Manager.
   (B)   Service events. Board members shall participate in various events held
by the city which give back to the community.
(Ord. 2000, passed 11-16-22)
CODE OF ETHICS
§ 32.200 CODE OF ETHICS FOR QUASI-JUDICIAL ADVISORY BOARD MEMBERS.
   (A)   Statement of policy. It is the policy of the City of Pembroke Pines
that the members of the city's quasi-judicial advisory boards work for the
benefit of the citizens and residents of the city. It is the responsibility of
each quasi-judicial advisory board member to act in a manner that promotes
public trust and confidence in government with complete transparency and
honesty in their services, and to avoid even the appearance or perception of
impropriety.
   (B)   Financial disclosure. Each quasi-judicial advisory board member,
contemporaneous with the filing of the Form 1 Statement of Financial Interests
with the Supervisor of Elections, shall file such form with the City Clerk.
Form 1 filed pursuant to this section shall be made available on the city's
website for public inspection.
   (C)   Lobbyists. Quasi-judicial advisory board members should avoid even the
appearance of impropriety in their interaction and dealings with lobbyists
registered under the city's lobbyist registration system and with the
principals or employers of such lobbyists.
      (1)   To promote full and complete transparency, lobbyists and their
principals or employers who intend to meet or otherwise communicate with a
member of a quasi-judicial advisory board for the purpose of engaging in
lobbying activities, either at City Hall or elsewhere on city property, must
legibly complete a contact log listing each board member with whom the
lobbyist, principal or employer meets or intends on meeting or communicating.
         (a)   The information stated on the contact log shall include the
lobbyist's name; the name of the entity by which the lobbyist is employed; the
name of the person or entity for whom or which he or she is lobbying; the name
of each board member with whom he or she is meeting or communicating; the date
and time of each such meeting; and the specific purpose and subject matter of
each such meeting.
         (b)   The contact log shall be completed contemporaneously with the
meetings and shall be made available for inspection on the city's website.
      (2)   To further propose full and complete transparency, quasi-judicial
board members must disclose any and all lobbying activities that knowingly
occurs between themselves and individual lobbyists or their principals or
employers outside of City Hall or off city-owned property. This shall include
communicating by any form of telephonic or electronic media.
         (a)   The disclosure shall be made on a form provided by the City
Clerk's Office. This disclosure shall include the lobbyist's name; the name of
the entity by which the lobbyist is employed; the name of the person or entity
for whom or which he or she is lobbying; the date, time. and location of the
meeting; and the specific purpose and subject matter of the meeting.
         (b)   The disclosure shall be made within ten business days of the
lobbying activity; but must, in any event, be made prior to any vote on the
matter that was the subject of the lobbying activity.
         (c)   The disclosure shall be made available for inspection on the
city's website.
   (D)   Any member of a quasi-judicial advisory board who fails to comply with
this section shall be deemed non-qualified to serve and removed from the board.
(Ord. 1766, passed 12-18-13)
CHAPTER 33: GENERAL CITY POLICIES
Section
Public Records
   
33.01   Definition
   
33.02   City Clerk to be custodian; duties
   
33.03   Inspection by public
   
33.04   Removal, concealment, and the like prohibited
   
33.05   Fees for copying and research of public documents
   
33.06   Recording costs
Insurance Coverage
   
33.10   Liability insurance
   
33.11   Uninsured motorist coverage
   
33.12   Nonownership liability coverage
   
33.13   Authority of city to choose insurance options
   
33.14   Indemnification of city officers and employees; legal counsel to be
provided
Conflicts of Interest
   
33.20   Definitions
   
33.21   Conflicts of interest prohibited
   
33.22   Application, scope of regulations
Safety Program
   
33.30   Adoption; amendment
Penalty on Past-Due Invoices
   
33.40   Penalty imposed; due date
   
33.41   Plan imposed by Finance Director
   
33.42   Dishonored check service fee
Bond Issuance
   
33.50   Procedure
   
33.51   Derivative Debt Management Policy
   
33.52   Post-Issuance Tax Disclosure Compliance Policy
Investment of Funds
   
33.60   Definition
   
33.61   Custodian duties
   
33.62   Investment policy
   
33.63   All fees to Finance Director
   
33.64   Investment of General Employees Pension Funds
   
33.65   Debt Management Policy
   
33.66   (Reserved)
   
33.67   Fund Balance Policy
Workplace Violence
   
33.70   Purpose
   
33.71   Definitions
   
33.72   Prevention of workplace violence
   
33.73   Reporting threats - internal and external
   
33.74   Threat management team
   
33.75   Early warning signals
   
33.76   Sanctions
   
33.77   Employee Assistance Program (EAP)
Additional Homestead Exemption
   
33.85   Additional homestead exemption for persons 65 and older
 
   
33.99   Penalty
PUBLIC RECORDS
§ 33.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC RECORDS. The books, records, docu- ments, letters, memoranda, written
proceedings, minutes, instruments, ordinances, resolutions, or copies or
reproductions, prepared by, enacted, or received by any city official group,
body, committee, or board of the City Commission of the city pertaining to city
business, with the exception, however, of confidential employment records
provided for in this code.
(‘69 Code, § 2-2) (Ord. 89, passed 4-15-63)
§ 33.02 CITY CLERK TO BE CUSTODIAN; DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the public records of the
city. Any public record coming into the possession of any officer, official,
employee, agent, or servant of the city shall be filed with the City Clerk
within 72 hours of receipt or if the same falls on a day that the City Hall is
not open for conduct of Municipal business, than by noon of the first ensuing
business day.
   (B)   All public records received by the City Clerk shall have placed
thereon an appropriate designation as to the time and date of receipt.
   (C)   Duplicates of any instruments or records of which the City Clerk has
the original need not be filed with the City Clerk.
(‘69 Code, § 2-3) (Ord. 89, passed 4-15-63; Am. Ord. 242, passed 12-7-70)
§ 33.03 INSPECTION BY PUBLIC.
   The public records of the city shall be open for personal inspection of any
interested person or party during the customary business hours of the City
Clerk’s office; subject however to the proper rules and regulations for the
efficient conduct of the Clerk’s business.
(‘69 Code, § 2-4) (Ord. 89, passed 4-15-63)
§ 33.04 REMOVAL, CONCEALMENT, AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall remove, conceal, withhold, retain, or keep any public record
from the lawful custody of the City Clerk.
(‘69 Code, § 2-5) (Ord. 89, passed 4-15-63; Am. Ord. 242, passed 12-7-70)
Penalty, see §
33.99
§ 33.05 FEES FOR COPYING AND RESEARCH OF PUBLIC DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CHARGE. The amount which the city may bill a member of the public
requesting documents held by the city.
      (2)   LABOR CHARGE. The hourly rate of pay for the individual researching
of copying documents together with a 30% employee benefit surcharge.
      (3)   PUBLIC. Residents or non-residents of the city requesting documents
held by the city.
   (B)   The public shall be charged for copying and research of city documents
pursuant to the following formula:
   (labor charge x time spent) + (number of copies x $.15 per copy) = total
charge to requesting party.
(Ord. 703, passed 8-1-84; Am. Ord. 935, passed 10-17-90)
§ 33.06 RECORDING COSTS.
   The city shall be entitled to collect from any person or entity those fees
necessary to record legal documents in the public records of the county, for,
including, but not limited to, acceptance of deeds, easements, and rights-of-
way by the city. The city, in addition to the actual costs of recording
collected under this section, shall be entitled to an administrative fee of $25
to be paid by the person or entity requesting that the documents be recorded.
(Ord. 811, passed 11-5-86)
INSURANCE COVERAGE
§ 33.10 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The city shall carry liability insurance coverage, including automobile
liability coverage, of not less than $500,000 per occurrence bodily injury and
property damage combined single limit. In no event shall required limits be
less than state law waiver limits.
(‘69 Code, § 2-6(a)) (Ord. 297, passed 10-16-72; Am. Ord. 414, passed 2-23-76;
Am. Ord. 454, passed 9-19-77; Am. Ord. 460, passed 12-5-77)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to self-insure, see F.F. § 111.072
§ 33.11 UNINSURED MOTORIST COVERAGE.
   The city shall carry uninsured motorist coverage of not less than $10,000
for each person and $20,000 for each occurrence.
(‘69 Code, § 2-6(b)) (Ord. 297, passed 10-16-72; Am. Ord. 414, passed 2-23-26;
Am. Ord. 460, passed 12-5-77; Am. Ord 454, passed 9-19-77)
§ 33.12 NONOWNERSHIP LIABILITY COVERAGE.
   The city shall carry nonownership liability coverage for not less than
$250,000 each person and $500,000 per occurrence bodily injury and property
damage combined single unit. In no event shall required limits be less than
state law waiver units.
(‘69 Code, § 2-6(d)) (Ord. 297, passed 10-16-72; Am. Ord. 414, passed 2-23-76;
Am. Ord. 454, passed 9-19-77; Am. Ord. 460, passed 12-5-77)
§ 33.13 AUTHORITY OF CITY TO CHOOSE INSURANCE OPTIONS. 
   The city may, through action by the City Commission, be self-insured, enter
into risk management programs, or purchase liability insurance for whatever
coverage it may choose, or have any combination thereof, for any claim,
judgment, and claims bill which it may be liable to pay.
(‘69 Code, § 2-6(e)) (Ord. 297, passed 10-16-72; Am. Ord. 414, passed 2-23-76;
Am. Ord. 454, passed 9-19-77; Am. Ord. 460, passed 12-5-77)
§ 33.14 INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; LEGAL COUNSEL TO BE
PROVIDED.
   (A)   The city shall save harmless and indemnify all elected or appointed
officials, officers and employees of the city from financial loss arising out
of any claim, demand, suit or judgment for damages suffered as a result of any
act, event or omission of action in the scope of employment of such officer or
employee unless such officer or employee acted in bad faith or with malicious
purpose or in a manner exhibiting wanton and willful disregard of human rights,
safety or property; provided, however, that such indemnification shall not
apply to any claim, demand, suit or judgment for punitive damages.
   (B)   The definition of an officer, as used in this section, shall include
and not be limited to any appointed members of any board or committee created
by the city, the City Attorney and any assistant city attorneys. For purposes
of this section only, employees shall mean any regular, full-time or part-time
employee of the city and any instructional or non-instructional employees
governed by the City of Pembroke Pines Charter Schools and Early Learning
Centers Handbook as established by Ordinance 1342, as amended.
   (C)   (1)   The city does hereby undertake to bear the expense of providing
for the defense of any city official, officer or employee, whether elective or
appointed, and to specifically provide legal representation by the City
Attorney, if possible, for any city official, officer or employee, whether
elective or appointed.
      (2)   In providing for this defense, the city shall be responsible for
all attorney fees and suit costs which shall include expenses through the
appellate level in any legal action brought by any person, firm or corporation,
other than the city, against any official, officer or employee, based upon acts
taken or performed by city officials or employees in the performance of their
official duties.
   (D)   The city specifically reserves unto itself the right to seek
reimbursement of any legal fees or costs or other expenses paid by the city, or
for the reasonable value of the legal services provided by the City Attorney in
the event that a judge, jury, arbitrator, hearing examiner or other trier of
fact makes a final determination, which is not subject to further appeal, that
a city official, officer or employee, whether elective or appointive, was found
to have committed a malicious, willful, or wanton act, or an act in bad faith
or beyond the scope of the city official’s, officer’s or employee’s official
duties or capacity.
   (E)   The indemnification and provision of legal counsel shall also be
provided to all officials, officers and employees with regard to matters
brought against such officials, officers or employees or which shall be
prosecuted by such officials, officers and employees in the defense and
maintenance of their position as may be provided for by F.S. Chapter 112, as
amended, or such other applicable special or general law affecting the position
and the muniment of office held by such official, officer or employee.
(Ord. 989, passed 3-4-92; Am. Ord. 1463, passed 10-15-03)
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
§ 33.20 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CLERICAL. Actions which do not involve discretion, judgment, or
evaluation. For example, an action taken on an application, even where all
applications which satisfy clearly defined criteria contained in the applicable
law must be approved, shall not be considered a CLERICAL action.
      (2)   COMPENSATION. Any money, thing of value, or economic benefit
conferred on or received by any person in return for services rendered or to be
rendered by himself or another, including without limitations, a promise of
future employment.
      (3)   EMPLOYEE. Every person engaged in any employment with the city
under any appointment or contract of hire, express or implied, oral or written,
for compensation, including without limitation, all full- time, part-time,
seasonal, probationary, and temporary EMPLOYEES.
      (4)   FINANCIAL INTEREST. Having an interest as owner, member, partner,
officer, employee, stockholder, or other participant of or in any private
business, enterprise, or profession.
      (5)   IMMEDIATE FAMILY. An individual who is related to the public
official or employee as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, aunt,
uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, father- in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, or
half sister.
      (6)   MATERIAL ECONOMIC EFFECT. An action or decision shall be deemed to
have a material effect on an economic interest if, by reason of the action or
decision, an investment or interest in real property may increase or decrease
in value other than negligibly, or a business entity or person will gain or
lose monetarily, other than negligibly.
      (7)   OFFICER. Any OFFICER of the city, specifically excluding members of
noncompensated advisory or quasi-judicial boards of the city.
   (B)   The terms AFFECT, PARTICIPATE, INFLUENCE, or ATTEMPT TO INFLUENCE the
decision of the city or pertinent agency or department thereof, shall be deemed
to include, without limitation the following:
      (1)   Participation in debate of deliberations or voting on the decision;
      (2)   Preparation of oral or written reports concerning the decision;
      (3)   Rendition of oral or written advice concerning the decision;
      (4)   Testimony before a public agency concerning the decision;
      (5)   Discussion concerning the decision with any officer or employee who
participates in making the decision;
      (6)   Submission of letters or other documents to nay officer or employee
who participates in making the decision;
      (7)   Issuance or denial of official approvals.
(‘69 Code, § 2-83) (Ord. 402, passed 7-21-75)
§ 33.21 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No officer or employer of the city shall engage in private employment
with, or render services for compensation for the following:
      (1)   Any private person who has any business transactions with the city.
However, this provision shall not apply if the officer or employee does not
have any position of employment, appointment, or authority with the city to
affect in any material way or to participate in, or in any way materially
influence or attempt to influence:
         (a)   The decision by the city to enter into such transactions or
relationships;
         (b)   The composition, supervision, or enforcement of any of the terms
and conditions of the transactions or relationships;
         (c)   Any other action or decision by the city relating in any
material way to such transactions or relationships, except merely clerical
action.
      (2)   Any private person who requires, or it is reasonably foreseeable
will require, in the ordinary conduct of his business, enterprise, or
profession, or any business, enterprise, or profession in which he has a
financial interest, any kind of review, approval, permits permission, or
licenses form the city or any department or agency thereof. However, this
provision shall not apply if the officer or employee does not have any portion
of employment, appointment, or authority with the city to affect in any
material way or to participate in, or in any way materially influence or
attempt to influence:
         (a)   The decision by the city, or pertinent department or agency
thereof, to approve such permits, licenses, review, or permission;
         (b)   Any other action or decision by the city, or department or
agency thereof, relating in any material way to such permits, licenses, review,
or permission, except merely clerical action.
   (B)   No officer or employee of the city shall participate in, influence, or
affect in any material way, any action of or decision b the city or pertinent
department or agency thereof, relating, directly or indirectly, to any matter
which would have a material economic effect on any person, business,
enterprise, or profession in which such officer or employee or any member of
his immediate family has a financial interest.
   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) shall not apply to any officer or employee of
the city with respect solely to any matter which could not legally, in the
written opinion of the City Attorney, be acted on or decided by the city or
pertinent department or agency thereof, without his participation, as long as
the officer or employee specifically discloses in writing to the City Attorney,
as a matter or official public record, the existence of the interest or
relationship prohibited by divisions (A) or (B) and describes with
particularity the nature of such interest or relationship before he acts,
decides, or participates in any action or decision. However, he may in no way
attempt to influence any other public official with respect to the matter.
   (D)   Division (B) shall not apply if the action or decision affects an
economic interest of the officer or employee as a member of the public, or a
significant segment of the public, or as a member of an industry, profession,
or occupation, to no greater extent that any other such member of the public,
segment of the public, or an industry, profession, or occupation, as opposed to
the officer’s or employee’s particular private economic interest.
   (E)   None of the provisions of this subchapter shall operate or be
construed to prohibit:
      (1)   Members of the City Commission from having a financial interest in,
representing, or having business transactions with any private person requiring
action or decision from the city as specified in division (A)(2), provided such
action or decision is not to be taken or made by the City Commission and
further provided that such members do not affect, influence, attempt to
influence, or participate in the action or decision by the city;
      (2)   Any officer or employee directly involved in a matter as an
applicant or otherwise in his private capacity form providing whatever
information is necessary and performing any other steps which are required of
other citizens in the same situation, individually or by representative,
providing he does not otherwise affect, influence, attempt to influence, or
participate in the action or decision of the city concerning such matter.
   (F)   No officer or employee of the city shall appoint or vote for
appointment of any person within his immediate family as defined in §
33.20 to any office, position, employment, or duty, when the salary, wages,
pay, or compensation is to be paid out of public funds.
   (G)   Any officer or employee of the city who is unsure of the prohibitions
contained in this subchapter may secure a written opinion from the City
Attorney. When the opinion is complied with in the good faith belief that it is
consistent with the provisions of this subchapter, the person shall thereafter
be entitled to rely on the opinion in discharging his official duties and shall
be exempt from the penalties and sanctions of this subchapter.
(‘69 Code, § 2-84) (Ord. 402, passed 7-21-75; Am. Ord. 482, passed 12-18-78;
Am. Ord. ) Penalty, see §
33.99
Cross-reference:
   City officials, see
Ch. 31
§ 33.22 APPLICATION, SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   This subchapter shall not affect any employee holding employment upon
the effective date of this section (July 21, 1975).
   (B)   The City Manager shall approve all outside employment by any employee
of the city from and after the effective date of this section (July 21, 1975).
(‘69 Code, § 2-86) (Ord. 412, passed 1-19-76)
SAFETY PROGRAM
§ 33.30 ADOPTION; AMENDMENT.
   (A)   The safety program, which is made a part hereof by reference, is
adopted as and for the city’s safety program. The employees and officials of
the city shall be governed by the terms and provisions of the safety program.
   (B)   The terms and provisions of the program may be amended from time to
time by the City Commission.
(‘69 Code, § 5-139) (Ord. 515, passed 8-6-79; Am. Ord. 993, passed 4-15-92; Am.
Ord. 1131, passed 9-6-95)
PENALTY ON PAST-DUE INVOICES
§ 33.40 PENALTY IMPOSED; DUE DATE.
   The City Commission permits the imposing of a 1% penalty per month on past-
due invoices owing to the city. The penalty shall be imposed on the thirtieth
day after the invoice becomes first due and payable. The penalty shall be
imposed each month until the invoice is fully paid to the city.
(Ord. 737, passed 5-1-85)
§ 33.41 PLAN IMPOSED BY FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   The 1% penalty shall be imposed by the Finance Director or one of his
designees pursuant to a plan established by that office.
(Ord. 737, passed 5-1-85)
§ 33.42 DISHONORED CHECK SERVICE FEE.
   A service fee in the amount as provided for in F.S. § 166.251 (and as it is
amended from time to time) shall be imposed upon all checks, drafts or orders
for the payment of money tendered to the city for the payment of anything
whatsoever to the city when said instrument is dishonored for any reason. This
fee shall be in addition to any and all other penalties imposed by law or this
code.
(Ord. 1397, passed 2-20-02)
BOND ISSUANCE
§ 33.50 PROCEDURE.
   The city may from time to time issue bonds in accordance with applicable
federal and state laws. Prior to issuance, the City Commission shall by
resolution authorize the issuance of bonds.
(Ord. 979, passed 1-8-92)
§ 33.51 DERIVATIVE DEBT MANAGEMENT POLICY.
   The city hereby provides a Derivative Debt Management Policy, incorporated
by reference herein, to establish guidelines for the use and management of all
interest rate exchange agreements incurred in connection with the incurrence of
debt obligations. Copies of the Policy are to be kept by the City Clerk and are
to be available for public inspection.
(Ord. 1781, passed 6-18-14)
§ 33.52 POST-ISSUANCE TAX AND DISCLOSURE COMPLIANCE POLICY.
   The city hereby provides a Post-Issuance Tax and Disclosure Compliance
Policy, incorporated by reference herein, to establish policies and procedures
to facilitate compliance with the federal tax law applicable to the city’s
outstanding debt issuance and to ensure the city provides timely and consistent
dissemination of financial information in accordance with its continuing
disclosure agreements entered into in order for the underwriters to satisfy
their obligations under Securities and Exchange Commission Rule 15c2-12. Copies
of the Policy are to be kept by the City Clerk and are to be available for
public inspection.
(Ord. 1782, passed 6-18-14)
INVESTMENT OF FUNDS
§ 33.60 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FUNDS. Those funds held in any municipal account which are not
restricted.
(Ord. 1099, passed 11-2-94)
§ 33.61 CUSTODIAN DUTIES.
   The City Finance Director is designated as custodian of the funds of the
city, and is empowered, within the confines of this section, to prudently
invest the funds of the city. Any investment advisor or manager retained by the
city shall invest city funds in accordance with the Investment Policy through a
custodian bank or trustee approved by the city.
(Ord. 1099, passed 11-2-94)
§ 33.62 INVESTMENT POLICY.
   Funds of the city may be invested by the Finance Director, or investment
advisor or manager retained by the city, in accordance with the Investment
Policy (“Policy”) and incorporated by reference herein. Copies of the Policy
are to be kept by the City Clerk and are to be available for public inspection.
(Ord. 1099, passed 11-2-94; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 11-1-95; Am. Ord. 1384,
passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1446, passed 6-18-03; Am. Ord. 1493, passed 9-1-04; Am.
Ord. 2015, passed 12-6-23)
§ 33.63 ALL FEES TO FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   No officer or employee of the city shall retain any fee or cost for any
service he performs, nor shall he receive any compensation other than the
salary fixed by ordinance except as hereinafter prescribed, and all fines shall
be part of the revenue of the city, and shall be paid to the Finance Director
by the officer receiving the same.
(Ord. 1099, passed 11-2-94)
§ 33.64 INVESTMENT OF GENERAL EMPLOYEES PENSION FUNDS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      FUNDS. Those funds held by the General Employees Pension Plan.
   (B)   Custodian duties. The Principal Financial Group or its successor is
hereby designated as custodian of the funds of the Plan and is hereby
empowered, within the confines of this section, to prudently invest the funds.
   (C)   Investment policy. Funds of the city may be invested by the investment
advisor or manager retained by the city, in accordance with the Investment
Policy of the city (“Policy”), as may be revised from time to time. Copies of
the Policy will be kept by the City Clerk and be available for public
inspection. (Ord. 1216, passed 6-18-97; Am. Ord. 1227, passed 9-3-97; Am. Ord.
1350, passed 9-6-00; Am. Ord. 1383, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1515, passed 5-18-
05; Am. Ord. 2016, passed 12-6-23)
§ 33.65 DEBT MANAGEMENT POLICY.
   The city hereby provides a Debt Management Policy, incorporated by reference
herein, to provide structure and regulation to the city’s debt process. Copies
of the policy are to be kept by the City Clerk and are to be available for
public inspection.
(Ord. 1560, passed 11-1-06)
§ 33.66 (RESERVED).
§ 33.67 FUND BALANCE POLICY.
   The City Commission adopts the city's Fund Balance Policy to provide for
consistency with the Governmental Accounting Standards Board Statement 54.
Copies of the policy are to be kept by the City Clerk and are to be available
for public inspection.
(Ord. 1562, passed 11-1-06; Am. Ord. 1699, passed 9-7-11)
WORKPLACE VIOLENCE
§ 33.70 PURPOSE.
   The city maintains a zero tolerance policy toward workplace violence, or the
threat of violence, by any of its employees, customers, the general public,
and/or anyone who conducts business with the city. It is the intent of the city
to provide a workplace which is free from physical attacks, harassment,
property crimes, threats, or any other violent acts.
(Res. 2524, passed 12-10-97)
§ 33.71 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WORKPLACE VIOLENCE. Includes but is not limited to physical attacks,
harassment, or property damage.
   HARASSMENT. Often involving verbal abuse, including unwanted telephone
calls, involves acts or language by a party designed to damage or harm a second
party. Often this practice is initiated with the purpose of testing a person’s
“boundaries” but can evolve into more serious abuses. This behavior causes
emotional harm or distress to another.
   PHYSICAL ATTACKS. Unwanted or hostile physical contact with another person
such as shoving, pushing, hitting, fighting, throwing objects or worse, or any
other aggressive or unsolicited and unwanted contact occurring between two more
parties. By their nature, PHYSICAL ATTACKS often involve breaking criminal
laws.
   PROPERTY DAMAGE. Intentional damage to property, which includes property
owned by the city, employees, or others. Violent people sometimes express their
aggression in acts of property damage, crime, sabotage, theft, or destruction.
   THREATS. The expression of an intent to cause physical or mental harm
regardless of whether the person communicating the threat has the present
ability to carry out the threat and regardless of whether the threat is
contingent, conditional, or future. THREATS are significant because they may
precede actual acts of violence. By their nature threats, which include
incidents of stalking, often involve breaking criminal laws.
(Res. 2524, passed 12-10-97)
§ 33.72 PREVENTION OF WORKPLACE VIOLENCE.
   (A)   The city strongly subscribes to the concept of a safe work environment
and supports the prevention of workplace violence. Prevention efforts include
but are not limited to informing employees of this policy, instructing
employees regarding the dangers of workplace violence, communicating the
sanctions imposed for violating this policy, and providing a reporting
hierarchy within which to report incidents of violence, or threats of violence,
without fear of reprisal.
   (B)   The department head or his/her designee will orient all new employees
to department procedures regarding reporting incidents of violence, what to do
if the employee is threatened or if an incidence of violence actually takes
place, and dealing with the after effects of an act of violence.
(Res. 2524, passed 12-10-97)
§ 33.73 REPORTING THREATS - INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL.
   (A)   Internal. Any employee who becomes aware of an incident of violent
behavior, whether the incident is committed by another employee or an external
individual such as a customer, vendor, or citizen must:
      (1)   Report such incident to the department head. Management will assess
and investigate the incident and determine the appropriate action to be taken.
Department heads will inform the personnel department of all reported incidents
of workplace violence.
      (2)   In critical incidents in which serious threats or injury occurs,
call 911 immediately to obtain emergency responders such as police, fire and/or
ambulance personnel.
   (B)   External.
      (1)   City employees may sometimes be involved in personal disputes with
family members, friends, or neighbors that can sometimes escalate to the point
that injunctions, restraining orders, and other court orders are sought. We,
therefore, request that employees include their work locations, as well as
their place of residence, in that court order. To provide for the safety of the
employee and others, we suggest that employees notify their supervisor and the
police department of the issuance of such a court order and provide a
description of the individual cited in the court order.
      (2)   In the case wherein an employee has not secured a court order but
fears for his/her safety, we ask the employee to notify his/her supervisor and
the Police Department as stated above in division (A).
(Res. 2524, passed 12-10-97)
§ 33.74 THREAT MANAGEMENT TEAM.
   (A)   As necessitated by the seriousness of the incident, the personnel
department may assemble a Threat Management Team that may consist of staff from
the personnel department, risk management, police, employee assistance
provider, and the “Victim’s Advocate.” The Threat Management Team will
investigate reported incidents and recommend to the City Manager any actions to
be taken as a result of the investigation.
   (B)   The Threat Management Team is responsible for establishing the
protocol in the event of a threat or violent incident that may include but is
not limited to:
      (1)   Evaluating potential violence problems.
      (2)   Assessing an employee’s fitness for duty through medical
professionals.
      (3)   Selecting intervention techniques.
      (4)   Establishing a plan for protection of co- workers and other
potential targets.
      (5)   Coordinating with affected parties, such as victims, families,
employees, or law enforcement personnel.
      (6)   Referring victims to appropriate assistance and community service
programs.
      (7)   Assuring that immediate, within 24 hours, and on-going counseling
is available to traumatized individuals.
   (C)   Any employee who acts in good faith by reporting real or implied
violent behavior will not be subject to any form of retaliation or harassment.
Any action of this type resulting from a report of violence must be reported to
the appropriate management staff for investigation and decision regarding
proper action.
(Res. 2524, passed 12-10-97)
§ 33.75 EARLY WARNING SIGNALS.
   (A)   Based upon the application of the following indicators and behavior,
any individual perceived to be a potential risk should be reported to the
department head/supervisor who in turn will report to the personnel department.
   (B)   (1)   A potentially violent intruder who could or might appear at the
workplace.
      (2)   Employee behavior which may indicate a potential for violence:
            Statements that support irrationality
            Comments that suggest little regard or concern for the future
            Description and knowledge of violence at work
            Fascination with weapons and their capabilities to harm
            Emotional outbursts
            Continually blaming others for problems and failures
            Delusional statements
            Abusive or derisive talk about workers and others
            Expressions of feelings of being persecuted
            Statements that reflect exceptional anger and hostility
            Increased frequency of aggressive acts or veiled conditional
threats
            Signs of impairment by drugs or alcohol
            Withdrawal or signs of a hostile attitude
            Deteriorating or strained relationships with co-workers
            Uncooperative or defensive
            Irritable or depressed
            Stealing or destroying of city property
            Demonstrated acts of low level acts of violence and aggression
      (3)   Known risk factors that can trigger violence:
            Relationship friction or failure
               (separation/divorce)
            Not receiving a promotion or raise
            Deteriorating financial condition
            Being shunned or ostracized by co-workers
            Forthcoming formal disciplinary action
(Res. 2524, passed 12-10-97)
§ 33.76 SANCTIONS.
   All alleged violations will be investigated. It is a violation of this
policy to engage in any act of workplace violence. Any employee who has been
determined to be in violation of this policy will be subject to disciplinary
action up to and including termination and, depending upon the violent act, may
be subject to criminal sanctions.
(Res. 2524, passed 12-10-97)
§ 33.77 EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (EAP).
   (A)   Should an employee violate this policy and it is determined in the
investigation that the employee did, in fact, commit a violent act, he/she may
be formally referred to the EAP by the Threat Management Team or other
authorized city management representative. In these cases, failure by the
employee to keep any appointments with the EAP may result in disciplinary
action up to and including termination.
   (B)   Should an employee become the victim of an incident of workplace
violence, the Threat Management Team or other authorized city management
representative may offer the services of the EAP to assist in coping with any
effects of the incident.
(Res. 2524, passed 12-10-97)
ADDITIONAL HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION
§ 33.85 ADDITIONAL HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR PERSONS 65 AND OLDER.
   Florida Statutes § 196.075, as amended from time to time, provides the
requirements for additional homestead exemptions for persons 65 years of age
and older.
   (A)   Definitions.
      (1)   HOUSEHOLD. A person or group of persons living together in a room
or group of rooms as a housing unit, but the term does not include persons
boarding or renting a portion of a dwelling, as defined in F.S. § 196.075(1),
as amended from time to time.
      (2)   HOUSEHOLD INCOME. The adjusted gross income, as defined in section
62 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, of all members of the household, as
defined in F.S. § 196.075(1), as amended from time to time.
   (B)   General.
      (1)   Pursuant to and in accordance with F.S. § 196.075, the additional
homestead exemptions as set forth in this section shall apply only to taxes
levied by the city, including, if any, dependent special districts and
municipal service taxing units.
      (2)   Amount of additional homestead exemption. Any person who meets the
requirements set forth in division (2)(a) of this section, shall be eligible
for an additional homestead exemption in an amount up to $50,000. Such
additional homestead exemption granted hereunder shall not exceed $50,000 in
accordance with F.S. § 196.075, as amended from time to time.
         (a)   Requirements to obtain additional homestead exemption. Any
person who has attained the age of 65 years will be entitled to an additional
homestead exemption if:
            1.   The person has legal or equitable title to real estate;
            2.   The person maintains thereon the permanent residence of the
owner;
            3.   The person's household income does not exceed $20,000 as
adjusted annually per division (F) of this section; or
      (3)   Alternate additional homestead exemption. Any person who meets the
requirements set forth in division (3)(a) of this section, shall be eligible
for an additional homestead exemption based on the amount of the assessed value
of the property in accordance with F.S. § 196.075, as amended from time to
time.
         (a)   Requirements to obtain alternate additional exemption. Any
person who has attainted the age of 65 years will also be entitled to an
additional homestead exemption if:
            1.   The person has legal or equitable title to real estate with a
just value less than $250,000;
            2.   The person has maintained thereon the permanent residence as
the owner for at least 25 years;
            3.   The person’s household income does not exceed $20,000, as
adjusted annually per division (F) of this section.
   (C)   The taxpayer claiming either exemption submits annually to the Broward
County Property Appraiser, not later than March 1, a sworn statement of
household income on a form prescribed by the Florida Department of Revenue;
   (D)   In accordance with rules of the Florida Department of Revenue, the
filing of the statement is supported by copies of any federal income tax
returns for the prior year, any wage and earnings statements (W-2 forms), any
request for extension of time to file returns, and any other documents which
the Florida Department of Revenue, finds necessary, for each member of the
household, is submitted by June 1. The taxpayer's statement shall attest to the
accuracy of such copies; and
   (E)   Property appraiser approval. The property appraiser may not grant the
exemption without the required documentation.
   (F)   Household income. For purposes of division (B)(2)(a)3. and (B)(3)(a)3.
of this section, beginning January 1, 2001, the $20,000 household income
limitation shall be adjusted annually, on January 1, by the percentage change
in the average cost-of-living in the period January 1 through December 31 of
the immediate prior year compared with the same period for the year prior to
that. The index is the average of the monthly consumer-price-index figures for
the stated 12-month period, relative to the United States as a whole, issued by
the United States Department of Labor.
   (G)   If title is held jointly with the right of survivorship, the person
residing on the property and otherwise qualifying may receive the entire amount
of the additional homestead exemption. (Ord. 1334, passed 2-16-00; Am. Ord.
1582, passed 5-16-07; Am. Ord. 1861, passed 11-2-16)
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates §
33.04 shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or
both.
(‘69 Code, § 1-8)
   (B)   Any person found guilty of the willful violation of §
33.21 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $250, or by
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. The
violation of §
33.21 shall further constitute malfeasance and any person found guilty of
violation of §
33.21 shall forfeit his office, position, or employment, including all benefits
or rights applicable thereto.
(‘69 Code, § 2-85)
CHAPTER 34: EMPLOYMENT POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Payments on account of sickness, disability
   
34.02   Employment memorandum required upon hiring any new employee
   
34.03   Evaluation of employees not subject to Employees’ Handbook
   
34.04   Employment benefits for married couples
   
34.05   The Pembroke Pines Domestic Partnership Act
   
34.06   Non-discrimination policy
   
34.07    Volunteer background screening requirements
Social Security
   
34.10   Adoption of coverage
   
34.11   Exclusion of those covered by other systems
   
34.12   Authority to execute all necessary agreements
   
34.13   Salary, wage withholding; payment over to appropriate state agency
   
34.14   Appropriation for city contributions authorized
   
34.15   Required records, reports
   
34.16   City Treasurer designated fund custodian, reporting and records agent
Employees’ Handbook
   
34.25   Adoption
   
34.26   Amendment
Pension Fund for Firefighters and Police Officers
   
34.35   Creation
   
34.36   Definitions
   
34.37   Source of funds
   
34.38   Eligibility
   
34.39   Eligible employees to complete contract form
   
34.40   Duration of pension; pension revocation
   
34.41   Pension may not violate any wage control law
   
34.42   Change of beneficiary
   
34.43   Normal retirement
   
34.44   Early retirement
   
34.45   Early retirement incentive program
   
34.46   Disability
   
34.47   Pre-retirement death
   
34.48   Conviction of felony
   
34.49   Incompetence
   
34.50   Termination of employment
   
34.51   Military service
   
34.52   Optional benefits
   
34.53   Contributions
   
34.54   Retiree benefit recomputations
   
34.55   Pensions not assignable, subject to garnishment, or the like
   
34.56   Board established; powers and duties
   
34.57   Employees, agents of Board
   
34.58   Establishment of Medical Board
   
34.59   Financial records to be kept; duties of City Finance Director
   
34.60   Actuarial date to be furnished
   
34.61   Annual reports to be made to state
   
34.62   Approval of Board, city required to make changes in system
   
34.63   Termination of system
   
34.64   Tax provisions
Retiree Health Insurance Program
   
34.65   Creation
   
34.66   Definitions
   
34.67   Program and source of funds
   
34.68   Eligibility and disqualification
   
34.69   Employees obligations
   
34.70   Termination of program
   
34.71   Excess benefit plan
Expenses and Reimbursements
   
34.75   Short title
   
34.76   Definitions
   
34.77   Compliance with state law
   
34.78   Travel expenses
   
34.79   Method of transportation
   
34.80   Travel by privately-owned vehicle
   
34.81   Travel within Dade, Broward, or Palm Beach Counties
   
34.82   Broward County League of Cities dinners, seminars
   
34.83   Other expenses
   
34.84   Reimbursement procedure
   
34.85   Advancement procedure
Drug Free Workplace
   
34.89   Policy statement
   
34.90   Definitions
   
34.91   General procedures
   
34.92   Policy requirements
   
34.93   List of drugs by trade or common names
   
34.94   Over-the-counter and prescription drugs which could alter or affect the
outcome of a drug test
Drug and Alcohol Policy for Safety Sensitive Employees
   
34.95   Introduction
   
34.96   Purpose
   
34.97   Applicability
   
34.98   Prohibited substances
   
34.99   Prohibited conduct
   
34.100   Testing for prohibited substances
   
34.101   Safeguards and assurances
   
34.102   Employee assessment
   
34.103   Consequences, penalties and sanctions
   
34.104   System contact
   
34.105   Employee receipt
Donation of Accrued Sick/Vacation Leave
   
34.115   Purpose and scope
   
34.116   Policy
   
34.117   Procedures
457 Deferred Compensation Plan
   
34.130   Establishment
401(A) Retirement Plan
   34.140   Establishment
Money Purchase Retirement Plan
   
34.150   Establishment
Donation of Accrued Sick/Vacation Leave for Charter School and Early Learning
Center Employees
   
34.160   Purpose and scope
   
34.161   Policy
   
34.162   Procedures
Other Post-Employment Benefit Trust Fund
   
34.170   Creation, purpose and intent
   
34.171   Definitions and rules of construction
   
34.172   Trust and Trust administration
   
34.173   Deposits and disbursements from the Trust Fund
   
34.174   Accounts and investments
   
34.175   Powers and duties of the Trustees
   
34.176   Limitations of responsibility and indemnification
   
34.177   Accounts and recordkeeping
   
34.178   Reliance on communications
   
34.179   Amendment and termination
   
34.180   Miscellaneous
City Holidays
   
34.185   City holidays
Cross-reference:
   Retirement Plan for general city employees, see
Ch. 38
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 PAYMENTS ON ACCOUNT OF SICKNESS, DISABILITY.
   (A)   The city is authorized to provide for the expenditure of public funds
for payment to city employees on account of sickness or disability, in excess
of those amounts already paid pursuant to worker’s compensation, and pursuant
to the State of Florida Rules, Section 22C-202(I), “Payments on Account of
Sickness.”
   (B)   The City Manager shall submit a copy of this section to the Division
of Retirement, State of Florida.
(‘60 Code, § 5-1) (Ord. 565, passed 5-6-81)
§ 34.02 EMPLOYMENT MEMORANDUM REQUIRED UPON HIRING ANY NEW EMPLOYEE.
   (A)   Upon hiring, all department heads, including but not limited to the
individuals recited herein, shall have signed memorandums concerning the terms
and conditions of their employment. All current officials shall, immediately on
passage and adoption of this section, be required to enter such signed
understandings of the terms and conditions of their employment.
   (B)   No conditions of employment other than as set forth in the memorandums
of understanding referred to herein shall be considered to be in effect for any
department heads.
   (C)   The City Manager shall furnish copies of these signed memorandums to
the City Commission for the ratification by the Commission.
   (D)   In no way shall this section interfere with the City Manager’s
specific rights, authority, and duties as set forth in the City Charter.
(‘69 Code, § 5-7) (Ord. 617, passed 8-18-82)
Cross-reference:
   City Manager, see Charter §§
4.02 and
4.03
§ 34.03 EVALUATION OF EMPLOYEES NOT SUBJECT TO EMPLOYEES’ HANDBOOK.
   (A)   All employees of the city not currently subject to evaluation in
accordance with the Employees’ Handbook rules and regulations shall be
evaluated by the City Commission on a semi-annual basis. This shall include the
City Manager, Finance Director, and the City Attorney. These reviews and
evaluations shall be conducted during a specific City Commission meeting,
conducted for the purpose of complying with this section. No other business
shall be presented at that specific Commission meeting.
   (B)   The evaluation form known as Exhibit “A” and incorporated herein by
reference, shall be the basis form to be utilized by the City Commission,
subject to change and revision by the City Commission at any time in order to
supplement the form.
(‘69 Code, § 5-8)
Cross-reference:
   Employees’ Handbook, see §§
34.25 and
34.26
§ 34.04 EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS FOR MARRIED COUPLES.
   The city shall provide equal employment benefits to all couples, regardless
of gender, legally married under the laws of any state within the United States
of America or any other jurisdiction under which such marriage is legally
recognized. (Ord. 1778, passed 6-3-14)
§ 34.05 THE PEMBROKE PINES DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP ACT.
   (A)   The section may be cited as the “The Pembroke Pines Domestic
Partnership Act.”
   (B)   Findings and intent.
      (1)   The City Commission finds that there are many individuals who
establish and maintain a significant personal, emotional and economic
relationship with another individual but who choose not to marry. Individuals
forming such domestic partnerships often live in a committed family
relationship. Domestic partners are often denied public and private sector
benefits because there is no established system for such relationships to be
registered and/or recognized. In addition, because of the status of their
relationship, domestic partners in many cases are not extended certain
employment benefits that are otherwise made available to employees who have
entered into traditional, state-sanctioned marriages.
      (2)   The City Commission finds that the provision of domestic partner
benefits promotes employee recruitment, employee retention, and employee
loyalty.
      (3)   The provision of this section shall be liberally construed to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens,
residents and employees of the city. This act shall not be construed to
supersede any federal, state or city laws or regulations, nor shall this
section be interpreted to bring it into conflict with federal, state or city
laws. Any rules developed to implement the provisions of this section shall be
liberally construed to accomplish the policies and purposes stated in this
section.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY EMPLOYEE.  Currently employed or retired employees of the City of
Pembroke Pines, Florida, who are eligible for benefits pursuant to federal,
state, or city laws, city administrative rules, or collective bargaining
agreements.
      DECLARATION OF DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP.  A declaration prepared by the
Department and signed under penalty of perjury, which affirms that the
individuals referenced in the declaration meet the requirements of a domestic
partnership relationship as described in division (D). The Declaration of
Domestic Partnership shall only be valid as it relates to the City of Pembroke
Pines employee benefit program.
      DEPARTMENT.  The City of Pembroke Pines Human Resources Department.
      DEPENDENT.  As used with regard to domestic partnership benefits,
pursuant to division (G), means the domestic partner of a city employee.
      DEPENDENT OF DOMESTIC PARTNER OR DEPENDENT OF EMPLOYEE.  As used with
regard to domestic partnership benefits, pursuant to division (G), means a
person who is eligible for coverage under the city's insurance plans.
      DOMESTIC PARTNERS.  Only two adults who are parties to a domestic
partnership relationship and who meet the requisites for a valid domestic
partnership relationship as established pursuant to division (D).
      JOINTLY RESPONSIBLE.  Each domestic partner mutually agrees to provide
for the other partner's basic food and shelter living expenses while the
domestic partnership relationship is in effect, except that partners need not
contribute equally or jointly to said basic food and shelter.
      MUTUAL RESIDENCE.  A residence shared by the registered domestic
partners; it is not necessary that the legal right to possess the place of
residence be in both of their names. Two people may share a mutual residence
even if one or both have additional places to live. Domestic partners do not
cease to share a mutual residence if one leaves the shared place but intends to
return.
   (D)   Registration of a domestic partnership relationship.
      (1)   A valid domestic partnership relationship may be registered by two
persons, one of whom is a city employee by filing a declaration of domestic
partnership with the Department, which declaration shall comply with all
requirements for establishing such domestic partnership. The director of the
Department, or his or her designee, shall file the declaration of domestic
partnership and issue a certificate reflecting the registration of the domestic
partnership relationship in city.
      (2)   A declaration of domestic partnership shall contain the name and
address of each domestic partner, the signature of each partner, and each
partner shall swear or affirm under penalty of perjury that:
         (a)   Each person is at least 18 years old and legally competent to
contract;
         (b)   Neither person is in a current marriage recognized by the State
of Florida nor currently a partner to another domestic partnership or civil
union with any individual other than the other person signing the declaration
of domestic partnership;
         (c)   Neither partner is related to the other by blood;
         (d)   Consent of either person to the domestic partnership
relationship has not been obtained by force, duress or fraud;
         (e)   Each person agrees to be jointly responsible for each other's
basic food and shelter;
         (f)   Each partner considers himself or herself to be a member of the
immediate family of the other partner;
         (g)   The partners reside in a mutual residence;
         (h)   Each domestic partner agrees to immediately notify the
Department, in writing, if the terms of the Declaration of Domestic Partnership
are no longer applicable or if one of the domestic partners wishes to terminate
the domestic partnership.
      (3)   Any partner to a domestic partnership may file an amendment to the
domestic partnership certificate issued by the city to reflect a change in his
or her legal name. All other amendments must be filed by both domestic partners
with the same formality as the original declaration, however only one party of
the domestic partnership is required to file a termination of the valid
domestic partnership.
   (E)   Termination of registered domestic partnership relationship.
      (1)   Either partner to a registered domestic partnership relationship
may terminate such relationship by filing a notarized declaration of
termination of domestic partnership relationship with the Department. The
director of the Department shall file the declaration and issue a certificate
of termination of domestic partnership relationship to each partner of the
former relationship. The termination shall become effective immediately from
the date the certificate of termination is issued.
      (2)   If any partner to a domestic partnership relationship enters into a
legal marriage, the domestic partnership relationship shall terminate
automatically, and all rights, benefits, and entitlements thereunder shall
cease as of the effective date of the marriage. The marrying domestic partner
shall file a declaration terminating the domestic partnership relationship
within five days after entering into a legal marriage that is recognized by the
State of Florida.
      (3)   The death of either domestic partner shall automatically terminate
the domestic partnership relationship. The surviving partner shall continue to
be entitled to receive all benefits otherwise provided to a surviving spouse.
   (F)   Maintenance of records. The Department shall, by administrative rule,
prescribe the form of all declarations, amendments, and certificates required
to be filed under this section. The Department shall maintain a record of all
declarations, amendments, and certificates filed pursuant to this act. The
records shall be maintained so that all declarations, amendments, and
certificates shall be filed with the registered domestic partnership to which
they apply.
   (G)   City employees; extension of benefits.
      (1)   Any city employee who is a party to a registered domestic
partnership relationship, pursuant to division (D) of this section, shall be
entitled to elect insurance coverage for his or her domestic partner or a
dependent of such domestic partner on the same basis in which any city employee
may elect insurance coverage for his or her spouse or dependents. A city
employee's right to elect insurance coverage for his or her domestic partner,
or the partner's dependent, shall extend to all forms of insurance provided by
the city to the spouses and dependents of city employees, unless such coverage
is prohibited by state or federal law. All elections of coverage shall be made
in accordance with the requirements of applicable city ordinances,
administrative rules, and policies. A city employee must make application for
insurance within 30 days of the establishment of a domestic partnership
relationship or will have to wait until the open enrollment period, as
established by the city. The establishment of a domestic partnership
relationship, as provided by the section, shall constitute a "qualifying event"
for the purposes of adding dependents to the insurance plan outside of the Open
Enrollment Period.
      (2)   Any city employee who is a party to a registered domestic
partnership relationship, pursuant to division (D) of this act, shall be
entitled to use all forms of leave provided by the city including, but not
limited to, sick leave, annual leave, family illness leave and bereavement
leave to care for his or her domestic partner or the dependent of the domestic
partner as applicable. The use of leave authorized in this section shall be
consistent with the applicable requirements in city ordinances, administrative
rules, and city policies.
      (3)   Unless prohibited by state or federal law, all other benefits
available to the spouses and dependents of city employees shall be made
available on the same basis to the domestic partner, or dependent of such
domestic partner, of a city employee who is a party to a registered domestic
partnership relationship pursuant to division (D).
      (4)   The City Manager is authorized to take all actions necessary to
implement the provisions of this section on October 1, 2014.
   (H)   Notification of family members. In any situation providing for
mandatory or permissible notification of family members, including notification
of family members in an emergency, or when permission is granted to inmates to
contact family members, "notification of family" shall include domestic
partners.
   (I)   Additional regulations.
      (1)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to contravene the
general laws of the State of Florida.
      (2)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to impose
liability or impose a private cause of action upon a domestic partner for the
health or health expenses of his or her domestic partner.
      (3)   When the term "spouse" or "married" or marriage" is used in other
city ordinances and documents, it shall be interpreted to include a registered
domestic partner. When the term "family" or "dependent" is used in other city
ordinance, it shall be interpreted to include domestic partnerships and
dependents of registered domestic partnerships. When the term "divorce" or
"legal separation" is used in other city ordinances and documents, it shall be
interpreted to mean termination of a registered domestic partnership.
(Ord. 1779, passed 6-18-14)
§ 34.06 NON-DISCRIMINATION POLICY.
   The City of Pembroke Pines shall not discriminate against any person in its
hiring, promotion, operation or sponsorship of any activities or programs, or
engage in any other discriminatory practice against any person based on race,
age, religion, color, gender, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity
and expression, national origin, marital status, physical or mental disability,
political affiliation or any other factor. (Ord. 1796, passed 11-5-14)
§ 34.07 VOLUNTEER BACKGROUND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Findings and intent. It is the intent of the City of Pembroke Pines to
utilize all resources available to ensure the safety and protection of the
community, especially the youth, seniors and other vulnerable populations
within the city. In furtherance of this objective, it is the policy of the city
to require all covered individuals, as defined herein, to successfully complete
a background screening prior to engaging in any city-operated or city-sponsored
activity involving youth, seniors and other vulnerable populations within the
city.
   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
      (1)   APPELLANT. A screening individual who has requested an appeal
pursuant to subsection (G).
      (2)   CITY-OPERATED or CITY- SUPERVISED. Any program operated, sponsored
or conducted by the City of Pembroke Pines or any other entity or organization
using facilities owned or operated by the city, including, but not limited to
sports and youth programs and related facilities, senior programs and senior
facilities.
      (3)   COMMITTEE. Two sworn law enforcement officers who shall be
appointed by the Police Chief and the City's Human Resources/Risk Management
Director.
      (4)   COVERED INDIVIDUALS. Any and all volunteers, coaches, referees,
concessionaires and other individuals who have access to youth, seniors or
other vulnerable populations in all city-operated or city-supervised programs.
      (5)   FDLE RULES. Any and all applicable rules, regulations and policies
promulgated by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement related to background
screening, criminal history reports, and the Volunteer and Employee Criminal
History Checks system, as may be amended from time to time.
      (6)   SCREENED, SCREENING or SCREENED INDIVIDUAL. Any individual who has
taken a Level 2 background screening pursuant to F.S. § 435.04, as may be
amended from time to time, by the police department.
      (7)   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The City of Pembroke Pines Police Department.
   (C)   Background screening requirements. All individuals seeking to serve as
a covered individual shall be screened. The results of the screening shall be
used by the Committee to determine whether a screened individual may serve as a
covered individual pursuant to the criteria set forth in subsection (D) and
subsection (E). Individuals who have been approved to serve as a covered
individual pursuant to this section shall be screened every year for as long as
they continue to serve in such capacity.
   (D)   The following screened individuals shall not serve as covered
individuals:
      (1)   Any individual that has failed a Level 2 background screening and
has not received an exemption from disqualification pursuant to subsection (F);
      (2)   Any individual that has two or more arrests for crimes that
demonstrate a propensity for violence, regardless of conviction unless the
person has been adjudicated not guilty of all offenses;
      (3)   Any individual who has been arrested for a crime where the victim
was a juvenile, senior, or member of a vulnerable population, regardless of
conviction unless the person has been adjudicated not guilty;
      (4)   Any individual who has been arrested for any felony crime related
to illegal narcotics, regardless of conviction unless that person has been
adjudicated not guilty;
      (5)   Any individual arrested for any one of the offenses set forth in
F.S. § 435.07(4), as may be amended from time to time, regardless of conviction
unless the person has been adjudicated not guilty;
      (6)   Any individual who is subject to a protective order, restraining
order or temporary restraining order, unless the individual has been approved
by the Committee; or
      (7)   Any individual that the Committee determines shall not serve based
on the individual's criminal/arrest history. The Committee may request screened
individuals to provide additional information related to their criminal/arrest
history, including, but not limited to certified copies from the clerk of the
court of any criminal disposition from the jurisdiction where an incident
occurred. The burden to provide additional information shall be on the person
seeking to serve as a covered individual. Failure to provide such information
may disqualify the person from serving as a covered individual.
   (E)   The following screened individuals may serve as covered individuals:
      (1)   Any individual that has passed a Level 2 background screening and
has never been arrested;
      (2)   Any individual that has passed a Level 2 background screening and
has been approved by the Committee to serve as a covered individual; or
      (3)   Any individual that has failed a Level 2 background screening and
has received an exemption from disqualification pursuant to subsection (F).
   (F)   Exemptions from disqualification. Any screened individual who has been
disqualified from serving as a covered individual pursuant to subsection (D)
may apply for an exemption from disqualification. Unless otherwise provided for
herein, the city shall utilize the exemption from disqualification process set
forth in F.S. § 435.07, as may be amended from time to time. No person may be
eligible for an exemption from disqualification unless at least ten years have
elapsed since the individual seeking an exemption has completed or been
lawfully released from confinement, supervision, or any nonmonetary condition
imposed by the court for the disqualifying offense. The City Manager, or his/
her designee, upon receiving a recommendation from the Committee, shall
determine whether any screened individual shall be granted an exemption from
disqualification. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, any individual not
eligible for an exemption from disqualification pursuant to this section may
appeal their disqualification to the special magistrate pursuant to subsection
(G).
   (G)   Appeals. Any screened individual who has requested and been denied an
exemption from disqualification pursuant to subsection (F) may appeal the City
Manager's decision to a special magistrate in accordance with the following
procedures:
      (1)   A request for an appeal shall be submitted in writing to the City
Clerk's Office, and a special magistrate hearing shall be scheduled as soon as
practicable following the city's receipt of a request.
      (2)   The appellant shall be given an opportunity to present any relevant
testimony and evidence to the special magistrate for consideration, which may
include, but not be limited to, arrest report records, court records, and
character witnesses. The appellant may request a privileged communication with
the special magistrate and the City Manager, or his/her designee, to review the
appellant's criminal history background screening report being considered by
the special magistrate during the appeal, subject to the FDLE Rules.
      (3)   The City Manager, or his/her designee, shall be given an
opportunity to present any relevant testimony and evidence, including
information related to the screened individual's disqualification, subject to
the FDLE Rules.
      (4)   The formal rules of evidence shall not apply to appeal hearings,
however all testimony shall be given under oath. All appeal hearings shall be
subject to the FDLE Rules. The special magistrate shall determine, among other
things, the weight, relevancy and credibility afforded to any testimony and
evidence presented during a hearing.
      (5)   In rendering a decision on appeal, the special magistrate shall
consider: (i) the testimony and evidence presented, (ii) the gravity of offense
(s) which resulted in the appellant's initial disqualification, (iii) any
mitigating or intervening factors, including the conduct of the appellant in
the time since the offense(s) occurred, and (iv) any other factors deemed
relevant by the magistrate.
      (6)   At the conclusion of the hearing, or within ten days thereafter,
the special magistrate shall issue a written order. Orders of the special
magistrate shall be final and appealable only to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
      (7)   Unless otherwise provided by law, including the FDLE Rules, all
documents, testimony and evidence presented to the special magistrate shall be
a public record subject to F.S. Ch. 119.
   (H)   Exceptions. It is not the express intent of this section to hinder
youth athletic programs in the city. In the event that a covered individual's
noncompliance with this section would compel a youth athletic team to forfeit a
competition, the team(s) may promptly and timely designate an unscreened
covered individual to serve in a position which would otherwise require
screening pursuant to this section subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The unscreened covered individual's participation in the youth
athletic program is limited to a one-time, public and supervised setting;
      (2)   The unscreened covered individual has no unsupervised contact with
members of the youth athletic teams; and
      (3)   The unscreened covered individual's participation in the youth
athletic program is limited to one particular sports event and the unscreened
covered individual may not participate in any future youth athletic programs
without successfully completing the requirements of this section.
   (I)   City contractors. All contracts and contract renewals between the city
and third-party contractors who perform a service that places the contractors'
employees in contact with youth, seniors or other vulnerable populations in any
city-operated or city-supervised programs shall include a provision subjecting
the contractors' employees to this section. For purposes of this subsection,
"city contractors" shall include any subcontractors engaged by city contractors
to perform such services.
   (J)   Interpretation. The City of Pembroke Pines shall be solely responsible
for all interpretations and applications of this section. Notwithstanding any
provision to the contrary, the City of Pembroke Pines shall have the inherent
right to refuse the authority of any person from serving as a covered
individual in any city-operated or city-sponsored activity involving youth,
seniors and other vulnerable populations within the city.
(Ord. 1835, passed 11-12-15; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 11-14-16; Am. Ord. 1880,
passed 6-21-17)
SOCIAL SECURITY
§ 34.10 ADOPTION OF COVERAGE.
   (A)   It is declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend,
effective January 18, 1960, to the employees and officials thereof not excluded
by law nor excepted herein, the benefits of the system of old- age and
survivors insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and
amendments thereto, and by F.S. Chapter 650, as amended; and to cover by such
plan all services which constitute employment as defined in F.S. § 650.02,
performed in the employ of the city by employees and officials thereof, except
employees or agent of the city who perform emergency services.
(‘69 Code, § 5-40)
   (B)   The city hereby adopts the terms, conditions, requirements,
reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto
appertaining, of Title II of the Social Security Act as amended, for and on
behalf of all officers and employees of its departments and agencies to be
covered under the agreement.
(‘69 Code, § 5-46) (Ord. 40, passed 11-16-61)
§ 34.11 EXCLUSION OF THOSE COVERED BY OTHER SYSTEMS.
   There is excluded from this subchapter any authority to include in any
agreement entered into under §
34.12, Any service, position, employee, or official now covered by or eligible
to be covered by an existing retirement system.
(‘69 Code, § 5-41) (Ord. 40, passed 11-16-61)
§ 34.12 AUTHORITY TO EXECUTE ALL NECESSARY AGREEMENTS.
   The Mayor is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and
amendments thereto with the State Industrial Commission, as state agency, for
the purpose of extending the benefits provided by such system of old-age and
survivors insurance to the employees and officials of this city as provided in
this subchapter, which agreement shall provide for such methods of
administration of the plan by the city as are found by the state agency to be
necessary and proper. It shall be effective with respect to services in
employment covered by such agreement performed on and after January 18, 1960.
(‘69 Code, § 5-42) (Ord. 40, passed 11-16-61)
§ 34.13 SALARY, WAGE WITHHOLDING; PAYMENT OVER TO APPROPRIATE STATE AGENCY.
   Withholdings from salaries, wages, or other compensation of employees and
officials for the purpose provided in this subchapter are authorized to be
made, and shall be made, in the amounts and at such times as may be required by
applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the
state designated by the laws or regulations to receive such amounts.
(‘69 Code, § 5-43) (Ord. 40, passed 11-16-61)
§ 34.14 APPROPRIATIONS FOR CITY CONTRIBUTIONS AUTHORIZED.
   There shall be appropriated from available funds derived from general
revenues, such amounts, at such times, as may be required to pay promptly the
contribution and assessments required of the city as employer by applicable
state or federal laws or regulations, which shall be paid over to the lawfully
designated state agency at the times and in the manner provided by law and
regulation.
(‘69 Code, § 5-44) (Ord. 40, passed 11-16-61)
§ 34.15 REQUIRED RECORDS, REPORTS.
   The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by
applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall adhere to the
regulations of the state agency.
(‘69 Code, § 5-45) (Ord. 40, passed 11-16-61)
§ 34.16 CITY TREASURER DESIGNATED FUND CUSTODIAN, REPORTING AND RECORDS AGENT.
   The City Treasurer is designated the custodian of all sums withheld from the
compensation of officers and employees and of the appropriated funds for the
contribution of the city. The City Treasurer is made the withholding and
reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining personnel records for
the purposes of this subchapter.
(‘69 Code, § 5-47) (Ord. 40, passed 11-16-61)
EMPLOYEES’ HANDBOOK
§ 34.25 ADOPTION.
   (A)   The City Commission hereby repeals the current career service rules
and regulations in its entirety and, in accordance with the provisions of §
4.08 of the City Charter, adopts the revised regulations, to be entitled
“Employees’ Handbook,” which is hereby adopted by reference and made part of
this subchapter the same as if set forth in full herein, and as may be amended
from time to time in accordance with the terms and conditions of §
34.26.
   (B)   The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to develop
applicable administrative policies regarding payment of recognition and
incentive cooperation in accordance with F.S. § 166.021, as amended from time
to time.
(Ord. 1395, passed 1-16-02, Am. Ord. 1415, passed 6-19-02)
Cross-reference:
   Evaluation of employees not subject to career Employees’ Handbook, see §
34.03
§ 34.26 AMENDMENT.
   The Employees’ Handbook may be amended from time to time based on
recommendations from the city administration, the City Commission, employees,
or interested citizens. The proposed amendment shall be submitted in written
form and shall become effective on a majority vote of the City Commission, by
resolution and in conformity with all requirements relating to the adoption of
resolutions within the city.
(Ord. 1395, passed 1-16-02; Am. Ord. 1415, passed 6-19-02)
PENSION FUND FOR FIREFIGHTERS AND POLICE OFFICERS
§ 34.35 CREATION.
   (A)   There is created a special fund to be known as the City Pension Fund
for Firefighters and Police Officers in the city. This fund is to be used
exclusively for the purpose provided for in this subchapter. The Fund shall be
collected, administered, and disbursed according to the provisions of this
subchapter.
(‘69 Code, § 5-150)
   (B)   As part of the system, there is established the Pension Fund for
Firefighters and Police Officers, into which shall be deposited all of the
contributions and assets whatsoever attributable to the system. The actual
custody and supervision of the Fund (and assets thereof) shall be vested in the
Pension Board of Trustees. Payments of benefits and disbursements from the Fund
shall be made only on authorization from the Pension Board.
   (C)   Money shall be withdrawn from the Pension Fund created by this
subchapter only on warrants executed by a majority of the Board. The Board
shall have exclusive charge of the investment of any surplus in the Fund not
needed for the current obligations thereof by investment of the same. Monies
needed for the meeting of the current obligations of the Fund may be deposited
in a depository recognized by law for the deposit of funds of the state and on
posting of similar security to that required for state deposits in accordance
with §
34.56(N)(1). The Board of Trustees shall appoint a custodian who shall have
custody of and the responsibility for all stocks, bonds, and funds of this
system. The custody shall be for the purpose of safekeeping only, without any
discretion in the city regarding the propriety of any withdrawal or transfer of
any stocks, bonds, or funds.
(‘69 Code, § 5-169) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.36 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT OR ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENCE. The equivalent value
of a benefit beginning at normal retirement in the normal form of benefit when
computed on the basis of 7 ½% interest assumption and a 1983 Group Annuity
mortality table with beneficiaries set back six years. Effective October 1,
2010, the equivalent value of a benefit beginning at normal retirement is the
normal form of benefit when computed on the basis of a 7-1/2% interest
assumption and the RP-2000 Combined Mortality Table with Blue Collar
Adjustment, projected to 2010, based upon a fixed blend of 50% male mortality
rates - 50% female mortality rates, set forward five years for impaired lives.
      (2)   AGREEMENT. This subchapter and the contract setting forth the
provisions of the retirement system.
      (3)   AVERAGE MONTHLY EARNINGS.
         (a)   For firefighter members, one-twelfth of the arithmetic average
of annual earnings for the highest two years of service preceding the actual
retirement or termination date of a member.
         (b)   For police officer members, one–twelfth of the arithmetic
average of annual earnings for the highest two years of service preceding the
actual retirement or termination date of a member calculated as follows:
            1.   For any year ending prior to October 1, 2006, the member's
average monthly earnings shall be calculated to include all overtime paid
during such year.
            2.   For any year ending on or after October 1, 2006, the member's
average monthly earnings shall be calculated to include only the first 300
hours of overtime paid during such year.
            3.   For any year that includes a portion before October 1, 2006,
and portion on or after October 1, 2006, the member's average monthly earnings
shall be calculated to include the greater of the following:
               A.   The overtime paid during the portion of the year ending
before October 1, 2006; or
               B.   The first 300 hours of overtime paid during the entire 12
month period.
            4.   Employee pension contributions shall be made on the first 300
hours of overtime paid each fiscal year.
      (4)   AVERAGE MONTHLY REGULAR WAGES. One-twelfth of the arithmetic
average of annual regular wages coinciding with the highest two years of
service preceding the actual retirement or termination date of a member, used
in the average monthly earnings above.
      (5)   BENEFICIARY. The person or persons entitled to receive any benefits
hereunder at the death of a member who has been designated in writing by the
member and filed with the Board. If no designation is in effect at the time of
death of the member, or if no person designated is living at that time, the
benefit shall be paid to the estate of the member.
      (6)   BOARD.   The Pension Board of Trustees which shall administer and
manage the system provided for in this subchapter, and serve as trustees of
this Fund.
      (7)   CITY. The City of Pembroke Pines.
      (8)   CONTINUOUS SERVICE. Uninterrupted service by a member (expressed as
years and completed months) from the date he last entered employment as an
employee until the date his employment is terminated by death, retirement,
discharge, or resignation. However, the CONTINUOUS SERVICE of any member shall
not be deemed to be interrupted by:
         (a)   Any authorized leave of absence or vacation, provided all
members in similar circumstances are treated alike pursuant to uniform non-
discriminatory rules.
         (b)   Any service, voluntary or involuntary, in the armed forces of
the United States, provided the member is legally entitled to re- employment
under the provisions of the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment
Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA) (or any predecessor thereto), and any amendments
thereto, or any law applicable to re- employment, and provided the member
applies for within one year following termination of service.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary, effective as of
December 12, 1994, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to
qualified military service will be provided in accordance with Section 414(u)
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, USERRA or Chapters 175 and
185, Florida Statutes.
   Military optional service selection. Continuous service for members may also
purchase up to four years of active duty service in the Armed Forces or
Merchant Marine of the United States prior to employment by the city. Police
officer members may purchase up to four years prior to service as a certified
police officer or a certified correctional officer in the United States. The
maximum credit for purchased service credit shall be four years. Credit for
such purchased service credits may be awarded so long as such service is not
used towards creditable service for any other retirement plan, provided that
the member pays into the Pension Fund the full actuarial cost of such service,
as computed by the Pension Fund’s actuary. Payments for such service may be
made, at the member’s option, by a lump sum payment, direct in-service transfer
from a member’s deferred compensation account pursuant to Section 457(e)(17) of
the Internal Revenue Code, or periodic payments bearing interest at the
system’s actuarially assumed rate of return made according to an installment
payment schedule approved by the Board of Trustees, or a combination of the
foregoing. Credit shall be awarded only for that service purchased and only
upon receipt of payment. While military service credit may be purchased at any
time upon becoming a member in the system, credit for purchased service shall
only be awarded after the member has completed ten years of service with the
city. If the member separates from service with the city prior to completing
ten years of service, all monies paid towards the purchase of military service
shall be refunded to the member.
      (9)   EARLY RETIREMENT DATE. The date on which a member is eligible for
an early retirement benefit under §
34.44.
      (10)   EARNINGS. Shall include wages, regular longevity paid to a member,
and overtime includable in gross income of the member, voluntary deductions, or
deferred compensation plans in accordance with Internal Revenue Code Section
457 and Chapters 175 and 185, Florida Statutes. A member's earnings may include
payment of up to 1,000 hours of accrued unused leave earned by the member as of
April 30, 2010 for those members who opt to select the benefits as provided in
§
34.52. Effective May 1, 2010, accrued leave earned by a member on or after May
1, 2010 shall not be included as part of the member's "earnings" for purpose of
calculating the member's benefits under the system.
      (11)   EFFECTIVE DATE. The date on which this subchapter became
effective, February 19, 1991.
      (12)   EMPLOYEE. All regular EMPLOYEES of the city under the city’s
classification plan and in effect October 1, 1980, as a certified firefighter
and certified police officer of the Fire Department and Police Department as
defined in Chapters 175 and 185, Florida Statutes. For this purpose, the term
regular EMPLOYEE shall be those EMPLOYEES that work more than 30 hours per week
annually. Excluded by the above definitions are those in the Fire and Police
Departments having a civilian rank. The Chiefs of the Fire and Police
Departments shall be considered EMPLOYEES.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing, an EMPLOYEE shall not include any individual
(i) classified by the city as an independent contractor and not as an employee
at the time of any determination, (ii) classified by the city as a temporary
employee, (iii) being paid by or through an employee leasing company or other
third party agency, or (iv) classified by the city as a leased employee, during
the period the individual is so paid or classified; any such individual shall
not be an employee even if he or she is later retroactively reclassified as a
common-law employee of the city during all or any part of such period pursuant
to applicable law or otherwise.
      (13)   FISCAL AGENT. Any person or entity designated to serve as
investment agent or custodian of the fund.
      (14)   FUND. The trust fund established by this subchapter as a part of
the pension plan.
      (15)   MEMBER. An employee who fulfills the prescribed participation
requirements of regular service.
      (16)   MEMBER CONTRIBUTIONS. A contribution to the plan made by a member
as required under §
34.53(1).
      (17)   NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE. The date on which a member is eligible for
a normal retirement benefit under §
34.43.
      (18)   REGULAR WAGES. Regular wages for firefighter members shall be
defined as base pay including any incentive pay, regular longevity, assignment
pay, and any current or future additional pensionable compensation, but
excluding overtime, or accrued unused leave. Regular wages shall be used to
calculate the maximum retirement benefit for members hired on or after April 1,
2006.
      (19)   SPOUSE. Any person to whom a member is legally married under the
laws of any state at the time of a determination.
      (20)   STATE. The State of Florida.
      (21)   SYSTEM. The city firefighters’ and police officers’ retirement
system as contained in this subchapter and all amendments thereto.
   (B)   For service incurred, total and permanent disability final earnings
will be no less than 66-2/3% of the salary or wages of the member at the time
of disability retirement of the member.
(‘69 Code, § 5-152) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 829, passed 3-4-87; Am.
Ord. 967, passed 9-19-91; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00; Am. Ord. 1443, passed
6-18-03; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04; Am. Ord. 1572, passed 2-21-07; Am. Ord.
1581, passed 5-16-07; Am. Ord. 1669, passed 8-4-10)
§ 34.37 SOURCE OF FUNDS.
   The Pension Fund shall consist of monies derived from the following sources:
   (A)   There shall be transferred to the Pension Fund of this system all
monies paid by the city and employees into any other pension and retirement
system of the city on account of employees of the Fire and Police Departments
who are eligible for membership in this system on February 19, 1981 and who
elect to become members according to the terms of this subchapter. The funds to
be transferred, together with interest thereon to the date of transfer, shall
be credited against the city’s liability for creditable service prior to
February 19, 1981 of persons who become members of the system created by this
subchapter.
   (B)   The city shall, in lieu of any other annual prior service payments set
forth, pay into this Fund, in payments no less than quarterly, the amount that
is actuarially determined to be necessary to amortize the unfunded prior
service liability for all benefits provided for under this subchapter, at a
uniform rate, over a period not exceeding 40 years. So long as this system is
in effect, the city shall make quarterly contributions for the year plus state
contributions for the year and the amount necessary for the year to maintain
the system on a sound actuarial basis as shown by the most recent actuarial
valuation report. The total cost of any year shall be defined as the total of
normal cost plus the additional amount sufficient to amortize the accrued past
service liability over a 40-year period on October 1, 1990.
   (C)   Member contributions shall be deposited to the Fund each pay period.
      (1)   The member contribution shall be equal to 10.4% of the annual
earning of the eligible employees.
      (2)   Effective October 1, 2015, the contribution for police officer
members hired on or after May 1, 2010 will be reduced from 10.4% to 7.0% of the
annual earnings of such eligible police officer members.
   (D)   Any monies received or receivable by reason of laws of the state, for
the purpose of providing for and funding of benefits for firefighters and
police officers of the city shall be deposited immediately and in no event more
than five days after receipt, in the Trust Fund comprising part of the system.
   (E)   There shall be an actuarial valuation prepared by the actuary at least
every three years. The city shall make adjustments in its contributions as
shall be shown to be required by obligations of this Pension Fund, over and
above the personal contributions forthcoming from the members, which are
declared to be the liability and obligation of the city.
   (F)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the City
Commission from appropriating monies from the General Funds or from any Special
Funds of the city. Furthermore, the city shall have the right and power to
designate the sources of revenue from the Pension Fund created by this
subchapter, including certain fines and forfeitures for violations of the city
ordinances. No monies raised by taxation or otherwise provided for the Pension
Fund shall be used other than for the purpose of this subchapter.
   (G)   The city and the unions that represent members have entered into
mutual agreements regarding the use of Insurance Premium Tax Revenue (“IPTR”)
as required by the Chapter No. 2015-39. Laws of Florida such that all IPTR,
whether base premium tax revenue or additional premium tax revenue, received by
the city will be used to reduce the city’s annual required contribution to the
City Pension Fund for Firefighters and Police Officers.
(‘69 Code, § 5-151) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 829, passed 3-4-87; Am.
Ord. 967, passed 9-19-91; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00; Am. Ord. 1480, passed
3-17-04; Am. Ord. 1824, passed 9-16-15; Am. Ord. 1915, passed 9-17-18)
§ 34.38 ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   Employees, as defined in §
34.36, who are covered under the retirement program provided by the city and
funded in part by Chapters 175 and 185, Florida Statutes, as of February 19,
1981, shall become members of the system. At the time of adoption of this
retirement system, the city shall transfer into the Pension Fund of this system
all of the accumulated total credit on the pension account of each transferring
member with interest to date.
   (B)   Any other police officer or firefighter shall be eligible to become a
member if at least 18.
   (C)   Each present and future employee who is eligible to become a member of
this system in accordance with the eligibility provisions of divisions (A) and
(B) above, shall be required to become a member as a condition of continued
employment by the city. However, the Police Chief and Fire Chief have the
option whether to participate in the plan.
   (D)   Re-entry into the system after discontinuance of prior participation
shall be permitted on a uniform, nondiscriminatory basis and on compliance with
the provisions of (B) above. In no circumstances shall re-entry of any member
result in duplication of benefits or rights.
   (E)   All employees in similar circumstances shall be treated alike on a
uniform, nondiscriminatory basis.
(‘69 Code, § 5-153) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1325, passed 1-19-00;
Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00; Am. Ord. 1443, passed 6-18-03; Am. Ord. 1480,
passed 3-17-04; Am. Ord.1767, passed 1-15-14)
§ 34.39 ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEES TO COMPLETE CONTRACT FORM.
   Employees hired on or after May 1, 2010 shall not be eligible for individual
employee contracts as set forth in this section. Each eligible employee
employed prior to May 1, 2010 shall execute such employee contracts as are
required by this section. Failure to execute such contract shall result in the
employee being eligible to receive only those minimum benefits provided in
Chapters 175 and 185, Florida Statutes. The employee contract shall be in
substantially the following form:
   (A)   As to certified police officer employees:
      The employee contract shall be in substantially the following form:
THIS IS A CONTRACT between the CITY of Pembroke Pines, Florida, “CITY”
hereinafter, and (EMPLOYEE’S name), “EMPLOYEE” hereinafter,
WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, CITY is authorized, and EMPLOYEE is required to enter into this
Contract in order to be eligible to participate in the CITY’s Firefighters’ and
Police Officers’ Retirement System “System” established by Ordinance No. 557 as
amended; and
WHEREAS, it is beneficial to both parties to have EMPLOYEE protected by the
terms and provisions of the System on the date hereof, and EMPLOYEE is desirous
of participating or continuing participation in the System;
IT IS UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED by and between the parties that the EMPLOYEE does
hereby allot, out of the Earnings paid to him or her by the CITY 10.4% of his/
her Earnings as of April 1, 1991. The EMPLOYEE does hereby authorize and direct
the disbursing officer or officers of CITY to retain out of his/her Earnings
the percentage or amount such as is required to be in compliance with the terms
of this Ordinance.
IT IS FURTHER UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED by and between the parties that the System
will accept said allotment or deduction from the earnings of the EMPLOYEE and
when under the terms of the Ordinance, EMPLOYEE or other beneficiary of
EMPLOYEE shall be entitled to receive the benefits from the Fund, and the
System will pay said sum or sums from the Fund and all other benefits so
authorized to the EMPLOYEE or beneficiaries, in accordance with the terms of
Ordinance, without diminution or deduction.
IT IS UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED that this Contract shall remain in full force and
effect without change, and that the percentage of allotment of, or deduction
from the EMPLOYEE’S earnings on the date hereof shall not be changed, provided,
EMPLOYEE understands and hereby agrees to waive, for now and in the future, the
right to bargain a reduction in the benefits provided by the System on the date
hereof in exchange for other employment benefits, in the event that a future
ratified collective bargaining agreement results in changes to the System.
IT IS FURTHER UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED that it is the intent of the parties hereto
to create vested rights in the respective parties not to be hereinafter
impaired except as expressly provided for in this Contract.
IT IS FURTHER UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED that the terms of the Ordinance
establishing the System, as it exists on the date hereof, is declared to be a
part of this Contract and this Contract shall be construed with reference
thereto.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto caused these presents to be executed,
signed and dated.
   EMPLOYEE            DATE
   CITY               DATE
   (B)   As to certified firefighter EMPLOYEES:
The employee contract shall be in substantially the following form:
   THIS IS A CONTRACT between the CITY of Pembroke Pines, Florida, “CITY”
hereinafter, and (EMPLOYEE’S name), “EMPLOYEE” hereinafter,
WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, CITY is authorized, and EMPLOYEE is required to enter into this
Contract in order to be eligible to participate in the CITY’s Firefighters’ and
Police Officers’ Retirement System “System” established by Ordinance No. 557 as
amended; and
WHEREAS, it is beneficial to both parties to have EMPLOYEE protected by the
terms and provisions of the system on the date hereof, and EMPLOYEE is desirous
of participating or continuing participation in the system;
IT IS UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED by and between the parties that the EMPLOYEE does
hereby allot, out of the Earnings paid to him or her by the CITY, 10.4% of his/
her Earnings as of April 1, 1991. The EMPLOYEE does hereby authorize and direct
the disbursing officer or officers of CITY to retain out of his/her earnings
the percentage or amount such as is required to be in compliance with the terms
of this Ordinance.
IT IS FURTHER UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED by and between the parties that the System
will accept said allotment or deduction from the earnings of the EMPLOYEE and
when under the terms of the Ordinance, EMPLOYEE or other beneficiary of
EMPLOYEE shall be entitled to receive the benefits from the Fund, and the
System will pay said sum or sums from the Fund, and all other benefits so
authorized to the EMPLOYEE or beneficiaries, in accordance with the terms of
this Ordinance, without diminution or deduction.
IT IS FURTHER UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED that this Contract shall remain in full
force and effect without change, and that the percentage of allotment of, or
deduction from the EMPLOYEE’S earnings on the date hereof shall not be changed,
provided, EMPLOYEE understands and hereby agrees to waive, for now and in the
future, the right to bargain a reduction in the benefits provided by the System
on the date hereof in exchange for other employment benefits, in the event that
a future ratified collective bargaining agreement results in changes to the
System.
IT IS FURTHER UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED that it is the intent of the parties hereto
to create vested rights in the respective parties not to be hereinafter
impaired except as expressly provided for in this Contract.
IT IS FURTHER UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED that the terms of the Ordinance
establishing the System, as it exists on the date hereof, is declared to be a
part of this Contract and this Contract shall be construed with reference
thereto.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto caused these presents to be executed,
signed and dated.
   EMPLOYEE            DATE
   CITY               DATE   
   (C)   In addition to the specific contract requirements set forth in
divisions (A) and (B) above, each employee is responsible for designating
beneficiaries as prescribed by the Plan. Furthermore, an employee’s execution
of the aforementioned contract constitutes acceptance of the terms and
conditions of the retirement system, including an initialing of any declaration
of ineligibility for disability benefits.
(‘69 Code, § 5-154) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 967, passed 9-19-91;
Am. Ord. 1014, passed 11-4-92; Am. Ord. 1198, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. 1353,
passed 9-20-00; Am. Ord. 1443, passed 6-18-03; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04;
Am. Ord. 1669, passed 8-4-10)
§ 34.40 DURATION OF PENSION; PENSION REVOCATION.
   (A)   A pension granted to retired members shall be paid to them for 120
months and the remainder of their life thereafter and shall not be revoked nor
in any way diminished except as provided in this subchapter. The payments of
the member to the Pension Fund shall cease upon his retirement and acceptance
of his pension.
(‘69 Code, § 5-177) (Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00)
   (B)   The Pension Board of Trustees shall have the power to examine into the
facts on which any pension has heretofore been granted under any prior existing
law, or shall hereafter be granted or obtained erroneously, fraudulently, or
illegally for any reason. The Board is empowered to purge the pension roll of
any person heretofore granted a pension under prior or existing law or
hereafter granted under this section, if it is found to be erroneous,
fraudulent, or illegal for any reason, and to reclassify any pensioner who
heretofore under any prior or existing law, or who shall hereafter under this
section be erroneously, improperly, or illegally classified.
(‘69 Code, § 5-178) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.41 PENSION MAY NOT VIOLATE ANY WAGE CONTROL LAW.
   No payment or any benefit, contribution, or other sum which would constitute
a violation of any applicable wage control law or Chapters 175 and 185, Florida
Statutes, shall be made.
(‘69 Code, § 5-181) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00;
Am. Ord. 1443, passed 6-18-03; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.42 CHANGE OF BENEFICIARY.
   A member may from time to time change his designated beneficiary by written
notice to the Board, in accordance with Chapters 175 and 185, Florida Statutes,
on forms provided by the Board. Upon a change, the rights of all previously
designated beneficiaries to receive any benefit under the system shall cease.
(‘69 Code, § 5-155) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00;
Am. Ord. 1443, passed 6-18-03; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.43 NORMAL RETIREMENT.
   (A)   Eligibility for retirement under this section shall be defined as
“Normal Retirement Status.” A member may elect to retire as follows:
      (1)   On the first day of any month if coincident with, following with,
or following the attainment of his or her fiftieth birthday and completion of
20 years of continuous service;
      (2)   Effective on or after March 12, 1999, on the first day of any month
coincident with or following the attainment of his or her fifty-fifth birthday
and completion of 10 years of continuous service;
      (3)   For an employee who is eligible to and becomes a member as of
February 19, 1981, on the attainment of his or her fifty-fifth birthday,
regardless of the number of years of continuous service;
      (4)   For a police officer member, after completion of 20 years of
continuous service regardless of age;
      (5)   Effective on or after October 1, 2000, for a police officer member,
on the attainment of his or her fiftieth birthday and completion of 10 years
continuous service;
      (6)   Effective on or after December 15, 1999, for a firefighter member,
after completion of 20 years of continuous service regardless of age;
      (7)   Effective on or after December 15, 1999, for firefighter members,
on the first day of any month coincident with or following the attainment of
his or her fiftieth birthday and completion of 10 years of continuous service.
      (8)   Effective March 17, 2004, a police officer member who has completed
16 years of service, but no more than 20 years of service, may purchase an
increase to the benefit multiplier to achieve a final retirement benefit not to
exceed 80% of his or her average monthly earnings. Payment for such increase in
the multiplier may be made, at the member’s option, by a lump sum payment,
direct in-service transfer from a member’s deferred compensation account
pursuant to Section 457(e)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code, or periodic
payments bearing interest at the Plan’s actuarially assumed rate of return made
according to an installment payment schedule approved by the Board of Trustees,
or a combination of the foregoing. Credit shall be awarded only for that
service purchased and only upon receipt of payment. Credit for purchased
service shall only be awarded upon the member’s vesting. If the member
separates from service with the city prior to vesting, all monies paid towards
the purchase of such service shall be refunded to the member.
   (B)   A member retiring hereunder on his normal retirement date shall
receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on his normal retirement date
and be continued thereafter during his lifetime. Effective only for
terminations on or after March 12, 1999, in the event that the member dies
after retirement but before receiving retirement benefits for a period of 120
months, 100% of the member’s benefit will be paid to his beneficiary for the
balance of the 120-month period. Upon his death, or, if applicable, expiration
of the 120-month guarantee period, the full retirement benefit shall be
continued to his spouse for one year and 50% of the amount continued thereafter
until spouse’s death.
   (C)   As of November 4, 1992, the amount of the benefit shall be 3% of
average monthly earnings for the highest two years of continuous service
multiplied by years of continuous service, subject in any event to a maximum of
80% of average monthly earnings for the highest two years of continuous
service. However, members as of February 19, 1981 shall receive at their normal
retirement date (age 55, regardless of years of continuous service) the greater
of the benefit provided by the formula above or 50% of average monthly earnings
for the highest two years of continuous service. In any event, effective as of
March 12, 1999, the benefit cannot be less than 2% of average monthly earnings
for each year of continuous service.
   (D)   (1)   As of October 1, 2000, the amount of the benefit multiplier for
all police officer members shall increase to 4% for every year after the
member's twentieth anniversary of participation in the pension system up to a
maximum benefit as provided in §
34.43(C) of the Code of Ordinances. For police officer members hired prior to
May 1, 2010, the benefit multiplier for all continuous service earned after
April 30, 2010 shall be 3.5% and the maximum benefit shall be 80% of the police
officer's average monthly earnings for the member's highest two years of
continuous service.
      (2)   For police officer members hired after April 30, 2010, the benefit
multiplier for all continuous service shall be 3% and the maximum benefit shall
be 80% of the police officer's average monthly earnings for the member's
highest two years of continuous service.
   (E)   Retired police officers, and those disabled police officers receiving
a benefit pursuant to §
34.46 prior to October 1, 2006, or their beneficiaries, may be eligible to
receive a supplemental pension distribution, the amount of which shall be
determined as of September 30 each year. For police officer members who retired
prior to October 1, 2003, the amount of the distribution shall be equal to the
actuarial present value of future pension payments to such police office
retirees, multiplied by the positive difference, if any, between the investment
rate of return and 8%, up to a maximum of 2%, divided equally among all police
officer retirees determined by their years of service. For police officer
retirees who retire on or after October 1, 2003 but before October 1, 2006, or
their beneficiaries, the amount of the distribution shall be equal to the
actuarial present value of future pension payments to such police officer
retirees multiplied by the positive difference, if any, between the investment
rate of return and 9%, up to a maximum of 2%, divided equally among all such
police officer retirees determined by their years of service. No supplemental
benefit shall be available for members who retire, enter the DROP or are
disabled on or after October 1, 2006 or their beneficiaries. The determination
of whether there may be a supplemental pension distribution shall be based upon
the following factors:
      (1)   The actuary for the Pension Fund shall determine the rate of
investment return earned on the pension fund assets during the 12 month period
ending each September 30 and shall be the rate reported in the most recent
actuarial report.
      (2)   The actuary for the Pension Fund shall, as of September 30,
determine the actuarial present value of future pension payments to current
police officers.
      (3)   The supplemental pension distribution amount shall not exceed
accumulated net actuarial experience from all pension liabilities and assets.
      (4)   If there shall be a supplemental distribution, the Board of
Trustees shall authorize a supplemental pension distribution, unless the
administrative expenses of distribution exceed the amount available for
distribution.
      (5)   The eligible persons to receive a supplemental distribution are
retired police officers, including retired police officers participating in the
DROP, and their beneficiaries.
      (6)   The supplemental pension distribution shall be allocated among
eligible persons, based upon years of service in the proportion that the
eligible person’s years of service bear to the aggregate amount of years of
service of all eligible persons.
      (7)   Each eligible person retired for less than a year is entitled to a
pro rata share of their supplemental pension distribution based on the number
of months retired. Such pensioner’s beneficiary is entitled to a pro rata share
of the deceased retiree’s supplemental pension distribution for that year based
on the number of months that the deceased retiree received a pension during the
year ending the September 30 prior to the retiree’s death.
      (8)   For members who participate in the DROP as provided in §
34.43, the supplemental pension distribution, if distributed, shall be
deposited in the member’s DROP account during their term of participation in
the DROP.
   (F)   Retired police officer members entitled to receive a supplemental
check pursuant to §
34.43(E) and who are not receiving a cost of living adjustment to their
retirement benefit as of October 1, 2006 shall have a one time opportunity to
make an irrevocable election to retain the right to continue to receive the
supplemental check pursuant to §
34.43(E) or an annual 2% cost of living increase to their retirement benefit in
lieu of such supplemental check. The election must be made by December 31,
2006. If the retired member elects the cost of living adjustment such election
shall apply retroactively to October 1, 2004.
   (G)   Police officer members who retired before October 1, 2006 or who are
DROP participants as of October 1, 2006, who are entitled to receive a
supplemental check pursuant to §
34.43(E) and an annual 1.5% cost of living adjustment to their retirement
benefit shall have a one time opportunity to make an irrevocable election to
either retain the right to receive the supplemental check pursuant to §
34.43(E) and the annual 1.5% cost of living adjustment to their retirement
benefit or elect the option of receiving an annual 2.5% cost of living
adjustment in lieu of the supplemental check and the annual 1.5% cost of living
adjustment. This election must be made by December 31, 2006. If the retired
member elects the increased annual cost of living adjustment in lieu of the
right to receive the supplemental check as provided in §
34.43(E), the cost of living adjustment shall apply retroactively to October 1,
2004.
   (H)   Effective April 1, 2005 and April 1 of each year thereafter,
firefighter retirees, their beneficiaries and DROP participants who were
receiving benefits or enrolled in the DROP on June 18, 2003 will receive either
a 2% increase to their retirement benefit or an adjustment equal to the total
percentage increase in base wages, excluding performance or merit adjustments,
provided in the collective bargaining agreement to bargaining unit members, for
the city fiscal year commencing the preceding October 1, whichever is greater.
This increase shall be applied to all monthly benefit payments for all
participants (including retirees and DROP participants) and beneficiaries who
were receiving benefits for at least one year prior to June 18, 2003. For those
receiving benefits for less than one year prior to June 18, 2003, the increase
shall be prorated. Members retiring or entering the DROP after June 18, 2003
will not receive annual adjustments to their benefits unless they elect the
optional benefit set forth in §
34.52(D).
   (I)   Effective October 1, 2009, and October first of each year thereafter,
police retirees who retired or entered the DROP on or after October 1, 2003, or
their beneficiaries, will receive a 1.5% increase to their retirement benefit.
Effective October 1, 2009, and October first of each year thereafter, police
retirees who retired or entered the DROP on or after October 1, 2006, or their
beneficiaries, will receive a 3.0% increase to their retirement benefit. This
increase shall be applied to all monthly benefit payments for all participants
(including retirees and DROP participants) and beneficiaries who were receiving
benefits for at least one year from March 17, 2004. For those receiving
benefits for less than one year from March 17, 2004, the annual increase shall
be prorated.
   (J)   All firefighter members hired on or after April 1, 2006 will have the
retirement benefit calculated to equal 4%, rather than the 3% set forth in
division (C) of this section for continuous service prior to May 1, 2010, of
average monthly earnings for the highest two years of continuous service
multiplied by years of continuous service, subject in any event to a maximum of
80% of average monthly earnings for the highest two years of continuous
service, but in no event shall the benefit exceed 98% of average monthly
regular wages.
   (K)   For all firefighter members, effective May 1, 2010:
      (1)   If a firefighter member was hired on or prior to June 18, 2003, the
benefit multiplier shall be 4% for each year of continuous service accrued
prior to May 1, 2010 and the benefit multiplier shall be 3.5% for each year of
continuous service accrued on or after May 1, 2010. The firefighter shall be
eligible to retire or enter the DROP, as set forth in §
34.52. upon reaching a benefit of 80% of average earnings; attainment of age 50
with a minimum of ten years of continuous service; or upon completion of 20
years of service regardless of age. If the firefighter's service with the city
terminates prior to the earlier of: (1) reaching age 50 with at least ten years
of continuous service, or (2) completion of 20 years of continuous service
regardless of age, the firefighter's benefit multiplier for each year of
creditable service shall be reduced to 3%, and the ten year vesting requirement
shall continue to apply. By way of example only, a firefighter member hired at
age 35 after June 18, 2003, would have been eligible to retire at age 50 with
15 years of credited service with a 4% multiplier resulting in a benefit equal
to 60% of earnings. The same employee would remain eligible for active
participation until such 60% benefit is achieved with the reduced multiplier of
3.5% for credited service earned after April 30, 2010.
      (2)   If a firefighter member is hired after June 18, 2003, and prior to
May 1, 2010, the benefit multiplier shall be 4% for each year of continuous
service accrued prior to May 1, 2010, and the benefit multiplier shall be 3.5%
for each year of continuous service accrued on or after May 1, 2010. The
firefighter shall remain eligible to be an active employee of the city until
such time as the firefighter's benefit equals the maximum benefit the
firefighter would have been entitled to under the provisions of the Plan in
effect prior to April 30, 2010. (By way of example only, a firefighter member
hired at age 35 after June 18, 2003 would have been eligible to retire at age
50 with 15 years of credited service with a 4% multiplier resulting in a
benefit equal to 60% of earnings. The same employee would remain eligible for
active participation until such 60% benefit is achieved with the reduced
multiplier of 3.5% for credited service earned after April 30, 2010.) The
firefighter is eligible to retire or enter the DROP upon reaching the maximum
benefit calculated in accordance with the preceding sentence or attainment of
age 50 with a minimum of ten years of continuous service. If the firefighter's
service with the city is terminated prior to reaching the earlier of: (1) age
50 with at least ten years of continuous service; or (2) completion of 20 years
of service regardless of age, the firefighter's benefit multiplier for each
year of creditable service shall be reduced to 3% and the ten-year vesting
requirement shall continue to apply.
      (3)   If a firefighter member is hired after April 30, 2010, the amount
of the benefit multiplier shall be 3% of average monthly earnings for the
highest two years of continuous service and the maximum benefit shall be 80% of
the firefighter's average monthly earnings for the highest two years of
continuous service.
   (L)   Police officers actively employed by the City on April 30, 2010, who
retire or enter the DROP on or after May 1, 2010, or their beneficiaries, shall
receive a 2% cost-of-living adjustment to their retirement benefit on October
1, 2010 and on each October 1 thereafter. Police officers hired on or after May
1, 2010 who retire or enter the DROP, or their beneficiaries, shall receive a
1.5% cost-of-living adjustment to their retirement benefit on October 1 of each
year. For those receiving benefits for less than one year, the increase shall
be prorated.
   (M)   Firefighters actively employed by the City on April 30, 2010, who
retire or enter the DROP on or after May 1, 2010, or their beneficiaries, shall
receive a 2% cost-of-living adjustment to their retirement benefit on April 1,
2011 and on each April 1 thereafter. Firefighters hired on or after May 1, 2010
who retire or enter the DROP, or their beneficiaries, shall receive a 1.5%
cost-of-living adjustment to their retirement benefit on April 1 of each year.
For those receiving benefits for less than one year, the increase shall be
prorated.
   (N)   For police and firefighter members hired on or after October 1, 2018
the retirement benefits shall be as follows:
      (1)   The benefit multiplier will be 3.0% for each complete year of
service.
      (2)   The maximum retirement benefit shall not to exceed 80% of average
monthly earnings.
      (3)   The member’s Average Compensation Calculation will be determined by
using the best five out of last ten years of service.
      (4)   When calculating the employees retirement benefits, up to 300 hours
per year in overtime compensation may be included but payments for accrued
unused sick or annual leave or other unused leave may not be included.
      (5)   The maximum DROP participation period is not to exceed eight years
from the first date of eligibility for normal retirement.
      (6)   The member’s DROP account interest rate will be the same rate as
other Plan members as is in effect for Plan members at the time the member
enters DROP based on their date of hire.
      (7)   The member will not have an individual pension contract with the
city.
      (8)   The member’s retirement payment will not be adjusted for cost of
living adjustments (COLAs).
      (9)   The member’s normal form of pension payment is limited as follows:
ten years certain and life (other options will be available at time of
retirement for “spouse” as defined by city ordinance (irrevocable selection),
such as 50%, 66%, 75% and 100% survivorship options), such options shall be
actuarially calculated based on sound actuarial practices including, but not
limited to gender and age.
      (10)   The member’s pension contribution will be 3% of pensionable
earnings.
(‘69 Code, § 5-156) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 967, passed 9-19-91;
Am. Ord. 1014, passed 11-4-92; Am. Ord. 1067, passed 3-16-94; Am. Ord. 1249,
passed 1-7-98; Am. Ord. 1321, passed 12-15-99; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00;
Am. Ord. 1360, passed 12-20-00; Am. Ord. 1443, passed 6-18-03; Am. Ord. 1480,
passed 3-17-04; Am. Ord. 1572, passed 2-21-07; Am. Ord. 1581, passed 5-16-07;
Am. Ord. 1669, passed 8-4-10; Am. Ord. 1915, passed 9-17-18)
§ 34.44 EARLY RETIREMENT.
   (A)   An early retirement date is (I) when a member retires on the first day
of any month following the completion of 20 years of continuous service or (ii)
effective as of March 12, 1999, when a member retires on the first day of any
month coincident with or following the attainment of his or her fiftieth
birthday and completion of 10 years of continuous service.
   (B)   A member retiring hereunder on his early retirement date shall receive
either a deferred or an immediate monthly retirement benefit as follows:
      (1)   A deferred monthly retirement benefit, which shall commence on his
earliest normal retirement date and shall be continued on the first day of each
month thereafter during a ten year period and his/her remaining lifetime
thereafter. The amount of the deferred monthly retirement benefit shall be
determined in the same manner as for retirement at his/her normal retirement
date, except that continuous service and average monthly earnings shall be
determined as of his early retirement date; or
      (2)   Subject to approval by the Board an immediate monthly retirement
benefit which shall commence on his early retirement date or any date prior to
his normal retirement date as requested by the member, and shall be continued
on the first day of each month thereafter during his lifetime. The benefit
payable shall be as determined in division (B)(1) above, but reduced
actuarially so that only actuarially equivalent benefits shall be payable;
provided, however, that in no event will the early retirement reduction be
greater than 3% per year that his or her retirement precedes age 52 (if the
member has at least 25 years of continuous service) or precedes age 55 (if the
member does not have at least 25 years of continuous service).
   (C)   Early retirement shall have applicable to it the same survivorship
benefit percentages as for normal retirement.
(‘69 Code, § 5-157) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1321, passed 12-15-99;
Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.45 EARLY RETIREMENT INCENTIVE PROGRAM.
   (A)   (1)   The City Commission hereby creates an early retirement incentive
program for certain full-time city employees who are police officers employed
with the city as of September 1, 2011 and:
         (a)   Have completed a minimum of 18 years of credited service under
the City of Pembroke Pines Police and Fire Pension Plan; and
         (b)   Are 41 years of age; and
         (c)   Are not in the Deferred Retirement Option Program (DROP).
      (2)   Employees who meet all criteria for participation are hereinafter
referred to as eligible employees.
   (B)   Eligible employees may participate in the early retirement incentive
program only if they execute, and do not subsequently rescind, an Agreement for
Participation and Waiver, the form of which shall be created by the city, and
must be submitted to the city and received by the city Human Resources
Department no later than 6:00 p.m. December 5, 2011 designating a last date of
employment not later than December 12, 2011. The last day of employment must be
coordinated with and is subject to the consent of the City Manager.
   (C)   Eligible employees who elect to participate will receive a retirement
benefit that shall not be reduced by the application of the early retirement
reduction factors as contained in the Police and Fire Pension Plan for not
achieving normal retirement age. Eligible employees who elect a benefit option
under §
34.52(D) of this code of ordinances may only include payment for a maximum of
690 hours of unused, accumulated leave toward their pensionable earnings. For
any eligible employee who elects to participate in the retiree health insurance
program, the city will not pay retiree health insurance premiums until they
reach normal retirement age of 50.
   (D)   No eligible employee who has executed a Participation Agreement is
eligible for promotion during the balance of their employment with the city.
   (E)   The City Commission adopts, issues and certifies as its own, the final
statement of actuarial impact and analysis prepared by Gabriel Roeder Smith &
Co. of the proposed early retirement incentive program for the Police and Fire
Pension Plan, copies of which are attached to Ordinance 1709 as Exhibit A and
incorporated herein by this reference.
   (F)   The Plan Administrators of the Police and Fire Pension Plan, in
accordance with F.S. Ch. 112 and Florida Administrative Rule 60T-1.004 are
directed to certify and furnish a copy of this section together with the
statement of actuarial impacted referenced herein to the Florida Division of
Retirement. The Plan Administrator is authorized to make such supplemental
filings with the Division of Retirement as is necessary to effectuate this
early retirement incentive program.
   (G)   The City Commission hereby authorizes city administration to execute
agreements for participation in the early retirement incentive program and
waiver of rights forms with eligible employees as prepared by the city.
(Ord. 1709, passed 11-16-11)
§ 34.46 DISABILITY.
   (A)   Service-incurred. Any member who receives a service-connected injury,
disease, or disability, excluding alcohol and drug abuse, which injury,
disease, or disability totally and permanently incapacitates him, physically or
mentally, from regular and continuous duty as a firefighter or police officer,
shall receive in equal monthly installments an amount equal to the greater of
3% of average monthly earnings for each year of continued service or 66 2/3% of
final monthly earnings in effect at the date of disability retirement, but in
no event will (s)he receive less than his accrued benefit under §
34.43.
   (B)   Nonservice-incurred. Any member with ten years of continuous service
who receives a nonservice- incurred injury, disease, or disability, excluding
alcohol and drug abuse, and which injury, disease, or disability totally and
permanently incapacitates him, physically or mentally, from regular and
continuous duty as a firefighter or police officer, shall receive in equal
monthly installments an amount equal to 3% of his average monthly earnings for
each year of continuous service, subject in any event to a maximum of 80% of
monthly earnings in effect at the date of disability, but in no event will he
receive less than the greater of 35% of his average monthly earnings or his
accrued benefit. The benefit shall be payable for a period of 10 years certain
and the remainder of his/her life thereafter or until recovery from the
disability.
   (C)   Determination of disability. All questions relating to eligibility for
initial payment or continuance of disability benefits, including, without
limitation, whether a disability was service-incurred, shall be determined by
the Board, taking into consideration the recommendations of the medical board,
and based on the methods and procedures established by the Board. The
determination as to whether a disability is service-incurred shall be made
applying the presumptions of Section 185.34 or Section 175.231, as applicable,
and other sections of the Florida Statutes.
   (D)   Benefit offsets. Effective prior to March 12, 1999, the service-
incurred and nonservice-incurred disability benefits described in divisions (A)
and (B) above shall be reduced or offset by the regular monthly amounts to
which the disabled member is entitled under Worker’s Compensation and under the
primary, non-family benefit provision of social security to the extent
permitted by law. Subsequent to said date such offsets shall be permitted only
to the extent allowed by the Florida Statutes.
   (E)   Service and nonservice disability shall have applicable to it the same
survivorship benefit percentages as for normal retirement. However, benefits
shall cease upon the determination of the Board, based on evidence that the
disabled employee is no longer eligible for benefit under this section.
   (F)   The System may allow a public safety officer to elect a tax free
distribution of up to $3,000 annually directly to a retiree medical plan or
long term care insurance on a pre-tax basis, so long as the public safety
officer separates from service either at the System’s normal retirement age or
due to his or her disability. Insurance premiums may be paid for the public
safety officer, his spouse or his dependents while he is alive, but once he is
decreased, the benefit ceases and may not be used by his spouse or
beneficiaries to pay for their insurance premiums. Insurance premium payments
may only to made directly to the insurance company. “Public safety officers”
include law enforcement officers, firefighters, chaplains, rescue crew members
or ambulance crew members.
(‘69 Code, § 5-158) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 829, passed 3-4-87; Am.
Ord. 967, passed 9-19-91; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00; Am. Ord. 1480, passed
3-17-04; Am. Ord. 1819, passed 5-6-15)
§ 34.47 PRE-RETIREMENT DEATH.
   (A)   Service incurred. A death benefit shall be payable on behalf of any
member who dies as a direct result of an occurrence arising in the performance
of service. These benefits are not to be limiting to other benefits available
under state law. The benefits shall be payable as follows:
      (1)   Spousal and Child Benefit:
         (a)   The member’s spouse shall be entitled to a monthly benefit equal
to 50% of the member’s average monthly earnings until the spouse’s death or,
effective prior to March 12, 1999, the earlier of death or remarriage.
         (b)   Each unmarried child until (s)he has reached the age of 18
years, and for each unmarried child from age 18 until age 22 who is a full-time
student in a fully accredited high school, college, or university, there shall
be paid in equal monthly installments, an amount equal to 5% of the average
monthly earnings, subject to an overall limitation of a total of 60% of average
monthly earnings for the spouse and children combined. The non-student child’s
pension shall terminate on the earlier of death, marriage, or the attainment of
age 18; the pension of a child who is a student shall terminate on the earlier
of death, marriage or attainment of age 22. Legally adopted children shall be
eligible the same as natural children. Upon the remarriage or death of the
spouse, the 5% child allowance shall be increased to 10% for each child, not to
exceed a combined total of 35% of the member’s average monthly earnings. The
trusteeship and disbursements of the pension to any child or children shall be
determined by the Board.
         (c)   The benefits provided in subsections (a) and (b) shall be
reduced to no less than zero by the actuarial equivalent of any benefits paid
pursuant to subsection (2) below.
      (2)   Effective as of March 12, 1999, if a member had at least 10 years
of continuous service, his or her designated beneficiary shall be entitled to
the benefits otherwise payable to the member at his early retirement date or
normal retirement date, but no less than the member’s member contributions,
plus simple interest, at the rate of 3% per annum. If the member did not have
at least 10 years of continuous service, his or her designated beneficiary
shall be entitled to the member’s member contributions, plus simple interest,
at the rate of 3% per annum.
   (B)   Nonservice incurred. If any member dies in active service from causes
not attributable to active duty or service, a death benefit shall be payable as
follows:
      (1)   With less than five years of continuous service, to the designated
beneficiary a lump sum payment of $2,500, or return of the member’s member
contributions plus simple interest, at the rate of 3% per annum, whichever is
greater.
      (2)   With five years of continuous service:
         (a)   To the spouse until death in equal monthly payments a pension
equal to 50% of the member’s accrued pension as of the date of death, subject
to a minimum of 20% of monthly earnings; plus
         (b)   To the child or children of the deceased member, the same
benefits as are payable for reason of service-incurred death, subject however,
to a maximum combined limitation of monthly payments to the spouse and children
of 50% of average monthly earnings and 35% after death of spouse; plus
         (c)   To the designated beneficiary a lump sum payment of $2,500 or,
effective March 12, 1999, if greater, the member’s member contributions,
without interest.
      (3)   Effective as of March 12, 1999, if a member having at least 10
years of continuous service dies prior to retirement, his or her designated
beneficiary is entitled to the benefits otherwise payable to the member at his
early retirement date or normal retirement date.
       (4)   The monthly nonservice-incurred benefits payable to the spouse or
beneficiary shall have applicable to it the same survivorship benefit
percentages as for normal retirement.
(‘69 Code, § 5-159) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00;
Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.48 CONVICTION OF FELONY.
   (A)   The pension provided for in this subchapter shall cease on conviction
of a felony and actual incarceration in the state penitentiary of a member
receiving the benefits, when the pension shall be paid to the wife or children
as prescribed for a deceased member in §
34.47. Upon his official release from incarceration, the pension will be paid
to the pensioned member again.
   (B)   Effective as of March 12, 1999, upon conviction for a violation of §
175.195(1) or § 185.185(1), Florida Statutes, related to false, misleading, or
fraudulent statements made to obtain public retirement benefits, a member or
beneficiary may, in the discretion of the Board, be required to forfeit the
right to receive any or all benefits to which the person would otherwise be
entitled under this chapter. For purposes of this paragraph, “conviction” means
a determination of guilt that is the result of a plea or trial, regardless of
whether adjudication is withheld.
(‘69 Code, § 5-175) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00;
Am. Ord. 1443, passed 6-18-03; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.49 INCOMPETENCE.
   If any participant or beneficiary is a minor or is, in the judgement of the
Board, otherwise incapable of personally receiving and giving valid receipt for
any payment due him under the plan, or the Board has reason to so believe, the
Board may, unless and until claims are made by a duly appointed guardian or
committee of the person, make a payment or any part thereof to the person’s
spouse, children, or other persons deemed by the Board to have incurred
expenses or assumed responsibility for the expenses of the person. In its sole
discretion, the Board may delay any such payment until the appointment of a
guardian by an appropriate court. Any payment so made shall be a complete
discharge of any liability under the plan for the payment.
(‘69 Code, § 5-179) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00;
Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.50 TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   If a member terminates his employment with the Police or Fire
Departments, either voluntarily or by lawful discharge, and is not eligible for
any other benefits under this system, he shall be entitled to the following:
      (1)   With less than ten years of continuous service, refund of the
member’s member contributions, plus simple interest, at the rate of 3% per
annum payable only upon a written request by the member in a form and manner
determined by the Board.
      (2)   With ten or more years of continuous service:
         (a)   Provided he does not elect to withdraw his member contributions,
the pension benefit accrued to his date of termination, payable commencing at
his otherwise earliest normal retirement date, or, effective as of March 12,
1999, his early retirement date with the appropriate early retirement reduction
calculated in accordance with §
34.44; or
         (b)   Refund of the member's member contributions, plus simple
interest, at the rate of 3% per annum payable only upon a written request by
the member in a form and manner determined by the Board.
   (B)   Any member of this system, who, for what- ever reason, has his
employment with the city as a police officer or firefighter terminated, but who
remains with or was previously employed by the city in some other capacity so
that his total period of employment with the city is ten years or more, shall
have all benefits accrued under this system preserved, provided he does not
elect to withdraw his member contributions. The accrued benefits shall be
payable at his otherwise normal retirement date, in accordance with the
provisions of this system. For purposes of determining normal retirement date
under this vesting provision, continuous service shall include all continuous
employment with the city as employee as defined in §
34.36, as well as the period of time subsequent to termination as a member of
this system. However, the benefits shall not be payable under this system
during any period of continued employment by the city. Any amounts attributable
to city contributions which are forfeited by reason of non-vested terminations
of employment shall remain in the Fund. Any member of this system as of April
15, 1988, who, for whatever reason, has his employment with the city as a
firefighter or police officer involuntarily terminated, and who withdraws his
member contributions from this fund, but is subsequently reinstated to his
position, shall be allowed re-entry into the system in accordance with §
34.38(E), provided that such member shall repay his withdrawn contributions
including the 3% interest paid to the member upon separation plus interest
thereon, at a rate equal to the interest assumption rate then in effect. Said
repayments with interest shall be made within four years of re-employment, but
in any event prior to retirement. If member does not buy back into the system
prior to retirement, he or she will be treated as a new member for purposes of
benefit calculation.
(‘69 Code, § 5-160) (Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00)
   (C)   Members entitled to a pension shall not forfeit it upon dismissal from
the Department, but shall be retired as prescribed by this subchapter.
   (D)   In the event a member who has been retired on a pension on account of
permanent and total incapacity regains his health and is found, by the medical
board designated by the Board of this system, to be in a physical and mental
condition to meet the requirements of the Personnel Department for service
acceptable to the city, the Board shall order his pension discontinued. He
shall then be ordered to resume active service in the Department from which he
was retired at the same or similar work as that at which he was employed prior
to his disability retirement, or at other work within the limits of the
physical or mental capabilities at the current rate of compensation for that
classification.
      (1)   Upon request of the City Manager, the Board shall review the
condition of any member receiving a pension for disability and shall submit to
the City Manager a report thereon.
      (2)   If there is substantial evidence that the retired member is capable
of performing service acceptable to other police and fire agencies, he shall be
ordered to resume active duties or his pension shall be discontinued.
(‘69 Code, § 5-176) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 967, passed 9-19-91;
Am. Ord. 1014, passed 11-4-92; Am. Ord. 1067, passed 3-16-94; Am. Ord. 1353,
passed 9-20-00; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04; Am. Ord. 1669, passed 8-4-10;
Am. Ord. 1767, passed 1-15-14)
§ 34.51 MILITARY SERVICE.
   (A)   Any member of the system created by this subchapter or any
probationary employee in the Fire or Police Department who enlists while the
United States is in any armed conflict whether by, or as a result of, a
declaration of war, or while the United States is in an active combatant under
the direction of the United Nations, or any member who is involuntarily called
into active military service with any branch of the Army of the United States,
the Coast Guard of the United States, the United States Navy, the United States
Air Force, the Merchant Marine, or the Marine Corps of the United States, shall
be entitled to preserve all retirement rights and privileges under this
subchapter.
   (B)   Differential wage payment. For years beginning after December 31,
2008, (i) an individual receiving a differential wage payment, as defined in
Section 3401(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code, shall be treated as an
employee of the employer making the payment, (ii) the differential wage payment
shall be treated as compensation, and (iii) the plan shall not be treated as
failing to meet the requirements of any provision described in Section 414(u)
(1)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code by reasons of any contribution or benefit
which is based on the differential wage payment.
   (C)   Death during qualified military service. In the case of a death or
disability occurring on or after January 1, 2007, if a participant dies while
performing qualified military service (as defined in Section 414(u) of the
Internal Revenue Code), the survivors of the participant are entitled to any
additional benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of
qualified military service) provided under the plan as if the participant had
resumed and then terminated employment by the city on account of death.
(‘69 Code, § 5-163) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00;
Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04; Am. Ord. 1819, passed 5-6-15)
§ 34.52 OPTIONAL BENEFITS.
   (A)   Each member entitled to a normal, early, or disability retirement
benefit shall have the right at any time prior to his retirement to elect to
have his benefit payable under any one of the options set forth below in lieu
of benefits otherwise provided herein, and to revoke those elections at any
time prior to actual retirement. The value of optional benefits shall be
actuarially equivalent to the value of benefits otherwise payable. The member
shall not be entitled to change a benefit option after the date of cashing or
depositing the first retirement check.
   (B)   The member shall make the election by written request to the Board the
request being retained in the Board’s file.
      (1)   Option 1: Joint and contingent survivor option. A retiring member
may elect to receive a retirement benefit during his lifetime and have the
retirement benefit (or a designated percentage of 25%, 50%, 66-2/3% or 75%
thereof) continued after his death to and during the lifetime of his designated
beneficiary. The election of Option 1 shall be null and void if the designated
beneficiary dies before the member’s retirement.
      (2)   Option 2: Ten years certain and life thereafter. A retiring member
may elect to receive a retirement benefit with 120 monthly payments guaranteed.
If, after retiring, the member should die before the 120 monthly payments are
made, benefits will continue to be paid to his beneficiary for the balance of
the 120-month period. After expiration of the 120 monthly payments guaranteed,
should the retired member be then alive, payments shall be continued during his
remaining lifetime. Effective for terminations on and after March 19, 1999,
this shall be the normal form of benefit.
      (3)   Option 3: Life-only annuity option. Effective as of March 12, 1999,
a retiring member may elect to receive a monthly retirement benefit during his
lifetime, with no survivor benefits payable.
      (4)   Option 4: Joint and last survivor option. Effective as of March 12,
1999, a retiring member may elect to receive a monthly retirement benefit
during the joint lifetime of the member and his designated beneficiary and,
following the death of either the member or his designated beneficiary, a
percentage (either 50%, 66-2/3%, 75% or 100%, as elected) of such monthly
benefit continued to the survivor for the life of the survivor.
      (5)   Option 5: Other. Retirement benefits may be paid in any form,
excluding lump sum, approved by the Board, so long as actuarial equivalence
with benefits otherwise payable is maintained.
   (C)   A deferred retirement option plan (“DROP”) is hereby created at no
cost and with no liability to the city. An employee who is a member of the
pension system and would be eligible to receive a service retirement pension
under the city’s retirement system and has attained “Normal Retirement Status,”
as specified in §
34.43 of this code, shall be eligible to participate in the Deferred Retirement
Option Plan (“DROP”). A member who elects to enter the DROP shall have no
recourse against the city for any claims with respect to the DROP payments or
the DROP plan. Upon entering the DROP plan, a member will be required to
provide to the city a letter of resignation dated the last day allowed by the
DROP ordinance.
      (1)   Election to participate in the DROP must be exercised within the
first five years of eligibility for the DROP for a maximum number of years as
specified in subsection (3) below. Election to participate must be made in
writing in a time and manner determined by the Board.
      (2)   A DROP account shall be created for each member who elects to
participate in the DROP. A DROP account shall consist of amounts transferred to
the DROP under §
34.52(C)(5) and earnings on those amounts, plus after-tax contributions to the
DROP by employees under §
34.52(C)(6) and earnings on those amounts. Amounts transferred to the
employee’s DROP accounts, under §
34.52(C)(5), shall be accounted for separately from amounts contributed to his
DROP account under §
34.52(C)(6).
      (3)   The duration and participation in the DROP shall be specified and
shall not exceed eight years from the first date of eligibility for normal
retirement, as chosen by the member, pursuant to §
34.43 of this subchapter. Firefighter members who attain eligibility for normal
retirement before reaching their 50th birthday may elect entry into the DROP no
later than the date of their 50th birthday in order to enjoy a full eight years
of participation in the DROP. For firefighter members employed as of the date
of this amendment, and who were hired after the attainment of their 30th
birthday, DROP entry for such members shall be no later than the date upon
which they have completed 20 years of eligible service in order to enjoy a full
participation in the DROP. For police officers employed as of the date of this
amendment and who were hired after the attainment of their 25th birthday, DROP
entry for such members shall be no later than the date upon which they have
completed 25 years of eligible service in order to enjoy a full participation
in the DROP.
         (a)   A member, who would be ineligible to participate in the DROP
because he/she exceeded the final date of participation based on subsection (3)
above, may nevertheless participate in the DROP for a maximum of two years if
he/she elects to participate in the DROP within one year of the adoption of
this section and incorporation of the DROP into the System.
         (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (3) above, employees who elect to
participate in the DROP within 30 calendar days of the adoption of this section
and would be entitled to participate in the DROP for more than two years, but
less than five years, the duration of their participation shall be calculated
as of October 1, 1996 for determining the eligible term of participation.
      (4)   Election to participate in the DROP shall preclude a member from
accruing additional benefits under the Pension Fund and shall cease the accrual
of the number of credited years of continuous service under the System, as of
the date of such election. For pension benefit purposes, all calculations for
average monthly earnings shall be based on the continuous years of credited
service preceding the commencement of participation in the DROP.
      (5)   Upon election to participate in the DROP, monthly retirement
benefits that would have been payable had the member terminated employment and
elected to receive monthly pension payments shall be made into the member's
DROP account. Payments to the member's DROP account shall be made on a monthly
basis for the term of a member's participation in the DROP, but shall not
exceed 60 months. DROP payments contributed to a member's DROP account shall,
as chosen by the member or upon election to participate in the DROP, which may
be changed annually during the month of September. A member's DROP account
shall earn or lose interest as follows:
         (a)   Members participating in the DROP on April 30, 2010, shall be
eligible to elect between earning at the same rate and frequency as in the
Pension Fund, less reasonable and necessary administrative expenses, or an
annual fixed interest rate of 8% on future payments to the member's DROP
account and on all or any portion of the member's DROP account balance.
         (b)   Members hired prior to May 1, 2010, and not currently
participating in the DROP on April 30, 2010, shall be eligible to elect between
earning at the same gross rate and frequency as the Pension Fund or guaranteed
return based upon the Pension Funds gross rate of return. The guaranteed return
shall be calculated as follows:
            1.   If the Pension Fund's gross rate of return is less than 5%,
then the member's DROP account shall earn 5%.
            2.   If the Pension Fund's gross rate of return is more than 8%,
then the member's DROP account shall earn 8%.
            3.   If the Pension Fund's gross rate of return is between 5% and
8%, then the member's DROP account shall earn the same as the Pension Fund's
gross rate of return.
         (c)   For members hired after April 30, 2010, the member's DROP
account shall earn or lose interest at the same gross rate of return and
frequency as the Pension Fund.
         During a member’s participation in the DROP, he or she shall not be
paid any amounts from the System, except as otherwise provided in §
34.52(C)(11) below.
      (6)   A member may make after-tax contributions to the DROP only during
the first calendar year of his/her participation in the DROP. After-tax
contribution shall be made in a time and manner determined by the Board.
      (7)   After-tax contributions made to the DROP shall be invested by the
Board. Such contributions shall be credited quarterly to the member’s DROP
account with the actual net investment return on the assets in which such
amounts are invested by the Board. After-tax contributions and the earning
thereon shall be accounted for separately from the contributions by the Pension
Fund to the DROP. Members or their beneficiaries may withdraw, at their
discretion, the amounts of the after-tax contributions, with earnings, any time
on or after termination of employment, but no later than the required beginning
date, as defined in §
34.64(E).
      (8)   Termination of participation in the DROP shall occur when a member
participating in the DROP:
         (a)   Elects in writing, in a time and manner determined by the Board,
to cease participation in the DROP. A member who elects to terminate his
participation in the DROP under this subsection shall not be permitted to again
become a participant in the DROP.
         (b)   Realizes the maximum participation period. If a member’s
employment is not terminated at the end of the maximum participation period,
authorized by this section, interest credits and DROP payments into the
member’s DROP account shall cease.
         (c)   Terminates his employment as a police officer or firefighter; or
         (d)   Dies. A member who dies prior the commencement of his/her
distribution of DROP payments shall be treated as a member who dies after
becoming vested prior to the commencement of retirement under the pension plan,
pursuant to §
34.47 of this subchapter. The Board may require and rely upon proof of death
and such evidence of the right of any beneficiary or other person to receive
the value of a deceased member’s DROP account as the Board may deem proper and
its determination of the right of that beneficiary or other person to receive
payment shall be conclusive.
      (9)   Upon termination of participation in the DROP, amounts shall cease
to be transferred from the Retirement System to the member’s DROP account. Upon
termination, a member of the DROP may choose to receive the balance of their
DROP account either immediately after such termination or to defer such payment
until the latest date permitted under 26 USC 401(a)(9), as may be amended from
time to time. Payments may not be made from the DROP until a member’s
employment is terminated. After termination of employment, members may obtain
DROP payments in the form of a lump sum, installment, or an annuity.
Distribution of a member’s DROP account shall begin as soon as administratively
practicable following the member’s termination of employment.
      (10)   The assets of the DROP shall be managed by the Board. The Board
may appoint a subcommittee with such powers as they shall determine; may adopt
such administrative procedures and regulations as they may deem desirable for
the conduct of the affairs and duties if under the DROP. A member of the Board
shall not vote on any question relating exclusively to himself. The Board shall
maintain or cause to be maintained records showing the operations and
conditions of the DROP, including records showing the individual balances in
each DROP account. The Board shall prepare or cause to be prepared and
distributed to employees participating in the DROP and other individuals or
filed with the appropriate governmental agencies, as the case may be, all
necessary descriptions, reports, and date required to be distributed or filed
for the DROP pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code, and any other applicable
laws. The Board may pay reasonable and necessary expenses of administering
DROP's assets, from funds of the DROP.
      (11)   DROP loans authorized. A DROP loan program is hereby approved for
members who are DROP participants and retirees at the maximum amount permitted
by IRS regulations. The DROP loan program shall be administered in accordance
with a loan policy adopted by the Board of Trustees. The loan policy shall
comply with all applicable IRS rules and regulations governing such loans. No
interest shall be earned or paid by the Plan on funds loaned from a DROP
account for the period of withdrawal until repaid. Members or retirees shall
pay interest as determined by the Plan on any outstanding loan balance amount.
      (12)   Compliance with Internal Revenue Code Sections 414(k) and 414(i).
To the extent required under the Internal Revenue Code, the DROP under the
System shall be treated as a defined contribution plan to the extent that the
member's benefits under the System are based on the member's DROP account. The
amount of "annual additions" (as such term is defined in Section 415(c)(2) of
the Internal Revenue Code and Treasury Regulations §1.415(c)-1(b)) which may be
allocated under the DROP to a member's DROP account for a "limitation year" may
not exceed the maximum permissible amount under Section 415(c)(1) of the
Internal Revenue Code and Treasury Regulations §1.415(c)-1(a)(1) (the "Annual
Maximum Amount"). For purposes hereof, the term "limitation year" means the 12-
month period beginning on January 1. In addition, for purposes of determining a
member's Annual Maximum Amount, the member's compensation shall be determined
in compliance with Treasury Regulations §1.415(c)-2.
   (D)   Career Anniversary Pension Retirement Incentive Option.
      (1)   For police officer members who elect to retire or enter the DROP
upon, no earlier than attainment of age 50 with ten years of service and no
later than completion of 20 years of service regardless of age as set forth in
§
34.43, shall receive the benefits as set forth below.
      (2)   In order to receive the following benefits, firefighter members who
were members of the plan on June 18, 2003, when Ordinance No. 1443 took effect,
must retire or enter the DROP upon but not after attaining 20 years of service
unless they, before attaining 20 years of service, have attained age 50 with
ten years of service, in which case the member must retire or enter the DROP no
earlier than attainment of age 50 with ten years of service and no later than
attainment of 20 years of service. Firefighter members who entered the pension
fund after June 18, 2003 will receive the following benefits if they elect to
retire or enter the DROP upon, but not after, attaining the earlier of the
normal retirement age of 20 years of service or age 50 with ten years of
service as set forth in §
34.43.
         (a)   The amount of the benefit shall be 4%, rather than the 3% set
forth in §
34.43(C), of average monthly earnings for the highest two years of continuous
service multiplied by years of continuous service, subject in any event to a
maximum of 80% of average monthly earnings for the highest two years of
continuous service.
      For police officer members hired on or before April 30, 2010, the benefit
multiplier shall be 4% for continuous service accrued on or before April 30,
2010 and 3.5% for continuous service accrued after April 30, 2010.
      For police officer members hired after April 30, 2010, the benefit
multiplier shall be 3% for each year of continuous service and average final
compensation shall be the average of the highest two years of continuous
service, subject in any event to a maximum of 80% of average final
compensation.
      For firefighter members, effective April 30, 2010, the benefit multiplier
shall be 4% for service accrued on or before April 30, 2010. For any continuous
service accrued by a firefighter on or after May 1, 2010:
            1.   If a firefighter member was hired on or prior to June 18,
2003, the benefit multiplier shall be 4% for each year of continuous service
accrued prior to May 1, 2010 and the benefit multiplier shall be 3.5% for each
year of continuous service accrued on or after May 1, 2010. The firefighter
shall be eligible to retire or enter the DROP, as set forth in §
34.52, upon reaching a benefit of 80% of average earnings; attainment of age 50
with a minimum of ten years of continuous service; or upon completion of 20
years of service regardless of age. If the firefighter's service with the city
terminates prior to either: (1) reaching age 50 with at least ten years of
continuous service; or (2) completion of 20 years of continuous service
regardless of age, the firefighter's benefit multiplier for each year of
creditable service shall be reduced to 3%, and the ten-year vesting requirement
shall continue to apply.
            2.   If a firefighter member is hired after June 18, 2003, and
prior to May 1, 2010, the benefit multiplier shall be 4% for each year of
continuous service accrued prior to May 1, 2010, and the benefit multiplier
shall be 3.5% for each year of continuous service accrued on or after May 1,
2010. The firefighter shall remain eligible to be an active employee of the
city until such time as the firefighter's benefit equals the maximum benefit
the firefighter would have been entitled to under the provisions of the Plan in
effect on April 30, 2010. (By way of example only, a firefighter member hired
at age 35 after June 18, 2003 would have been eligible to retire at age 50 with
15 years of credited service with a 4% multiplier, resulting in a benefit equal
to 60% of earnings. The same employee would remain eligible for active
participation until such 60% benefit is achieved with the reduced multiplier of
3.5% for credited service earned after April 30, 2010.) The firefighter is
eligible to retire or enter the DROP upon reaching the maximum benefit
calculated in accordance with the preceding sentence or attainment of age 50
with a minimum of ten years of continuous service. If the firefighter's service
with the city terminates prior to either: (1) reaching age 50 with at least ten
years of continuous service; or (2) completion of 20 years of continuous
service regardless of age, the firefighter's benefit multiplier for each year
of creditable service shall be reduced to 3%, and the ten-year vesting
requirement shall continue to apply.
            3.   If a firefighter member is hired after April 30, 2010, the
amount of the benefit multiplier shall be 3% of average monthly earnings for
the highest two years of continuous service and the maximum benefit shall be
80% of the firefighter's average monthly earnings for the highest two years of
continuous service.
         (b)   For firefighter members hired on or after April 1, 2006 the
amount of the benefit shall be as calculated in division (D)(1)(a) of this
section and shall in no event exceed 98% of average monthly regular wages for
the same highest two years of continuous service selected above and as defined
in §
34.36(A)(4) and (18).
      (3)   Prior to May 1, 2010, "earnings," for purposes of calculating any
benefits pursuant to the Career Anniversary Pension Retirement Incentive Option
set forth in this section, shall include paymentfor up to 1,000 hours of
accrued unused leave as set forth in "earnings" as defined in §
34.36(A)(10). Effective May 1, 2010, accrued leave earned by a member on or
after May 1, 2010 shall not be included as part of the member's "earnings" for
purposed of calculating the member's benefit under the system.
      (4)   Negotiated Adjustment to Pension Income.
         (a)   For firefighter retirees:
            1.   Effective April 1, 2005, and April 1st of each year
thereafter, retirees, their beneficiaries and DROP participants will receive
either a 2% increase to their retirement benefit or an adjustment equal to the
total percentage increase in base wages, excluding performance or merit
adjustments provided in the collective bargaining agreement to bargaining unit
members, for the city fiscal year commencing the preceding October 1st,
whichever is greater. This increase shall be applied to all monthly benefit
payments for all participants (including retirees and DROP participants) and
beneficiaries who were receiving benefits for at least one year from June 18,
2003.
            2.   Upon retirement, firefighter members who were hired on or
after April 1, 2006 shall receive a fixed 3% increase to their monthly
retirement benefit on April 1 of each year following retirement. Effective May
1, 2010, firefighters who were hired prior to May 1, 2010 and retire or enter
the DROP after April 30, 2010, or their beneficiaries, shall receive a 2% cost-
of-living adjustment on April 1 of each year following retirement. Firefighters
hired on or after May 1, 2010, and retire or enter the DROP, or their
beneficiaries, shall receive a 1.5% cost-of-living adjustment on April 1 of
each year following retirement.
            3.   Firefighter members who were hired prior to April 1, 2006 and
retirees and DROP participants who were hired prior to April 1, 2006 shall
within 60 days from the effective date of this section irrevocably elect to
receive the negotiated adjustment to pension income as set forth in either
division (D)(3)(a) or (b) of this section.
         (b)   For police officer retirees:
            1.   Effective October 1, 2009, and October 1 of each year
thereafter, retirees who retired on or after October 1, 2003, or are
participating in the DROP on or after October 1, 2003, or their beneficiaries,
will receive a 1.5% increase to their retirement benefit. This increase shall
be applied to all monthly benefit payments for all participants (including
retirees and DROP participants) and beneficiaries who were receiving benefits
for at least one year from March 17, 2003. For those receiving benefits for
less than one year from the first cost of living adjustment, the increase shall
be prorated.
            2.   Effective October 1, 2009, and October 1st of each year
thereafter, retirees who retired or entered the DROP on or after October 1,
2006 or their beneficiaries will receive a 3% increase to their retirement
benefit. This increase shall be applied to all monthly benefit payments for all
participants (including retirees and DROP participants) and beneficiaries who
were receiving benefits for at least one year from October 1, 2008. Effective
May 1, 2010, police officers who were hired prior to May 1, 2010, and retire or
enter the DROP after April 30, 2010, and their beneficiaries, shall receive a
2% cost-of-living adjustment on October 1 each year following retirement.
Police officers hired on or after May 1, 2010, who retire or enter the DROP,
and their beneficiaries, shall receive a 1.5% cost-of-living adjustment on
October 1 of each year following retirement.
         (c)   For those firefighter and police officer retirees receiving
benefits for less than one year from the first cost of living adjustment, the
annual increase shall be prorated.
      (5)   Enhanced benefit incentive.
         (a)   Firefighter members who, as of June 18, 2003, have already
attained the normal retirement age set forth in §
34.43(A)(6) shall have 60 days from June 18, 2003 to irrevocably elect the
incentive set forth in divisions (D)(1) through (D)(3) above. Firefighter
members who, as of June 18, 2003, have attained the normal retirement age set
forth in §
34.43(A)(7) but have not yet attained 20 continuous years of service shall have
the option of electing this incentive any time between June 18, 2003 and
attaining the normal retirement age set forth in §
34.43(A)(6). Election of the incentive shall be irrevocable and require a
firefighter member with more than 20 continuous years of service, at his or her
option, to participate in the DROP retroactively to normal retirement age or
five years, whichever is less. This will result in the immediate retirement
(termination of fire department employment) of those firefighter members who,
upon June 18, 2003, elect this incentive and have 25 or more continuous years
of service. In the event a firefighter member who has already attained the
normal retirement age set forth in §
34.43(A)(6) decides not to elect this incentive, then retirement benefits shall
remain as set forth prior to this amendment.
         (b)   Police officer members who, as of March 17, 2004, have already
attained the normal retirement age of 20 years of service or 50 years of age
and ten years of service shall have 30 days from March 17, 2004 to irrevocably
elect the incentive set forth in subsections (D)(1) through (3) above. Police
officer members who, as of March 17, 2004, have attained the normal retirement
age of 50 years of age and ten years of service, but have not yet attained 20
continuous years of service shall have the option of electing this incentive
any time between March 17, normal retirement age of 20 years of service.
Election of the incentive shall be irrevocable and require a police officer
member with more than 20 continuous years of service, at his or her option, to
participate in the DROP retroactively to normal retirement age or five years,
whichever is less. This will result in the immediate retirement (termination of
police department employment) of those police officer members who, upon March
17, 2004, elect this incentive and have 25 or more continuous years of service.
In the event a police officer member who has already attained the normal
retirement age decides not to elect this incentive, then retirement benefits
shall remain as set forth prior to this amendment.
      (6)   Firefighter members enrolled in the DROP as of June 18, 2003 shall
have the option, within 60 days of that date, and police officer members
enrolled in the DROP as of March 17, 2004 shall have the option within 30 days
of March 17, 2004, to elect this incentive, excluding §
34.52(D)(2), retroactively to their attainment of normal retirement age or five
years, whichever is less (including the period of DROP participation). In the
event a current DROP participant decides not to elect this incentive, then the
member's retirement benefits and DROP terms shall remain unchanged.
      (7)   Firefighter members who did not contribute 10.4% as of October 1,
2002, shall have the option to receive the incentive above if they make an
irrevocable election in writing within ten days of March 19, 2003 to
retroactively pay contributions at the net rate of 10.4% plus interest at 8%,
compounded annually. The payment must be made in a lump sum by certified check
or trustee to trustee transfer received by the system within 30 days following
notification of amount due. If the member has reached normal retirement age set
forth in §
34.43(A)(6), the incentive will be applied retroactively. This will result in
the immediate retirement (termination of fire department employment) of those
firefighter members who, upon June 18, 2003, elect this incentive and have 25
or more years of credited service.
      (8)   For purposes of this division (D) only, “termination of fire
department employment” shall mean termination of fire department employment
from a bargaining unit position and thereafter not being rehired, retained,
engaged, employed or contracted by the city to perform duties that were
previously performed by the member or by other firefighter members while the
member was employed by the city in said bargaining unit covered position.
      (9)   For purposes of this division (D) only, “Termination of Police
Department Employment” shall mean termination of Police Department employment
and thereafter not being rehired, retained, engaged, employed or contracted
with the city to perform duties that were previously performed by the police
officer member or by other police officer members while the police officer
member was employed by the city.
   (E)   In service distribution. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Code of Ordinances to the contrary:
      (1)   A retired member who has terminated employment with the city may be
re-employed by the city in a “non-bargaining unit position”, provided the
retired member has satisfied the conditions for full retirement under §
34.43 (“normal retirement age”) based solely on satisfaction of one of the
service requirements set forth therein (e.g. 20 years of continuous service
regardless of age) and is re-employed by the city after such retirement in a
non-bargaining unit position. In such an event, the re-employed member shall
continue to receive retirement benefits from this Plan and continued earnings
on the member’s DROP account, and may also elect to receive payments from the
member’s DROP account.
      (2)   In the event that any such re-employed member shall be returned to
employment as a certified police officer or firefighter as defined in F.S. Ch.
175 and Ch. 185 in a position requiring more than 30 hours of work per week and
52 weeks of schedules work per year, the re-employed member shall continue to
receive retirement benefits from this Plan as provided in division (E)(1)
above, shall again become a contributing member of the Plan for the period of
re-employment. Upon separation from the city following the period of re-
employment, the benefits earned during the period of re-employment shall be
calculated separately and shall be in addition to the benefits earned during
the initial period of employment. No benefits earned during any period of full
time re-employment shall affect the level of benefits earned during the initial
period of employment.
      (3)   A member shall become 100% vested in his or her benefits provided
by the system upon attaining normal retirement age.
   (F)   (1)   The City, effective April 1, 2018, will offer an eight year DROP
to a Police Officer Member who has not already entered DROP or those currently
in DROP. The DROP account balance, for the first five years of the DROP
("Bucket 1") would be based on your date of hire (hires prior to May 1, 2010,
may elect either):
         (a)   The range of 5% to 8% based on gross market return guaranteed;
or
         (b)   Gross market return; or for hires on or after May 1, 2010, gross
market return).
      (2)   For years six and beyond, the rate would be gross market return
("Bucket 2"). All Police Officer DROP participants hired prior to May 1, 2010,
who do not elect to participate beyond the initial 60 month plan, may elect
either:
         (a)   The range of 5% to 8% based on gross market return guaranteed;
or
         (b)   Gross market return as currently included in the city's pension
plan.
      (3)   All Police Officer DROP participants hired prior to May 1, 2010,
who elect to participate beyond the initial 60 month plan, may elect either:
         (a)   The range of 5% to 8% based on gross market return guaranteed;
or
         (b)   Gross market return on Bucket 1 and shall be eligible to elect
between earning at the same gross rate and frequency as the Pension Fund or
guaranteed return based upon the Pension Funds gross rate of return, until the
tenth anniversary of separation of service from the city.
      (4)   For those Police Officer members who elect to participate in the
DROP program beyond 60 months, shall either withdraw all DROP funds from their
plan by the tenth anniversary of separation of service from the city, or have
the option to leave the DROP balance in the city pension plan and receive the
net plan rate of return (market rate of return - gross investment return less
investment/administrative expenses) (all DROP funds remaining within the Plan
would move to “Bucket 2”). By the tenth anniversary of separation of service,
members will make the decision regarding how much, if any, DROP funds remain
within the plan.
      (5)   For those Police Officer members who elect to participate in the
DROP program beyond 60 months, a new pension contract would have to be executed
by the city and the member. Members must notify the city a minimum of three
months prior to close of the 60 month DROP period, if they elect to extend
their DROP participation beyond the initial 60 month DROP period.
   (G)   A 401(a) Retirement Plan for the city’s police officer and firefighter
members is hereby established pursuant to F.S. §§ 175.351 and 185.35. The city
and the applicable collective bargaining groups have agreed that the city shall
be allowed to utilize all premium tax revenues to offset the city’s funding of
its annual required contribution of the Plan, thus no funds will be deposited
into the 401(a) Plan unless mutually agreed to by the city and each of the
collective bargaining units. To the extent the city and the respective
collective bargaining groups agree that any premium insurance tax revenues are
to be deposited in the 401 (a) Plan in accordance with F.S. § 175.351(6) and
F.S. § 185.35(6), the city and the respective collective bargaining groups will
determine the terms of distribution, investment, and vesting in such funds. At
all times, the 401(a) Plan shall be administered in compliance with all state
and federal laws, rules, and regulations applicable to such plans, including
but not limited to the Internal Revenue Code, the U.S. Department of Labor, or
other such applicable regulatory agencies.
(‘69 Code, § 5-161) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1198, passed 12-18-96;
Am. Ord. 1249, passed 1-7-98; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00; Am. Ord. 1360,
passed 12-20-00; Am. Ord. 1443, passed 6-18-03; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04;
Am. Ord. 1509, passed 2-17-05; Am. Ord. 1521, passed 8-3-05; Am. Ord. 1572,
passed 2-21-07; Am. Ord. 1581, passed 5-16-07; Am. Ord. 1669, passed 8-4-10;
Am. Ord. 1693, passed 6-15-11; Am. Ord. 1705, passed 10-5-11; Am. Ord. 1767,
passed 1-15-14; Am. Ord. 1774, passed 4-9-14; Am. Ord. 1900, passed 3-21-18;
Am. Ord. 1915, passed 9-17-18; Am. Ord. 1916, passed 9-17-18)
§ 34.53 CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   There shall be three kinds of contributions to the system:
      (1)   Member contributions. For certified firefighters members of the
retirement system shall make regular contributions to the Pension Fund as a
rate equal to the greater of 10.4% of their respective annual earnings or the
actuarially determined amount for buyback. For certified police officer members
of the retirement system shall make regular contributions to the Pension Fund
at a rate equal to 10.4% of their respective annual earnings as of April 1,
1991. The contributions attributable to the period from April 1, 1991 to
October 1, 1992 shall be paid to the pension fund in accordance with the
payment schedule approved by the Pension Board, provided, however, repayment
shall be completed within 24 months from the effective date of this section.
All eligible employees, as a condition of membership, shall agree in writing on
becoming a member to make the member contributions specified herein. These
contributions shall be deducted from earnings before the earnings are paid,
until the member had completed 26 and 2/3 years of continuous service, at which
time payments stop. Member contributions shall be deposited into the fund each
pay period.
      (2)   State contributions. Any monies received or receivable by reason of
the laws of the state for the express purpose of funding and paying for
retirement benefits for police officers and firefighters of the city shall be
deposited, immediately and in no event more than five days after receipt, in
the Pension fund comprising part of this system.
      (3)   City contributions. So long as this system is in effect, the city
shall make an annual contribution to the Pension Fund in an amount equal to the
difference in each year as between the total of aggregate member contributions
for the year plus state contributions for the year, and the total cost for the
year as shown by the most recent actuarial valuation and report for the system,
such contributions shall be deposited into the fund in accordance with §
34.37(B) herein. The total cost for any year shall be defined as the total
normal cost for and expenses of the Board, plus the additional amount
sufficient to amortize the unfunded accrued past service liability over not
more than a 40-year period commencing with the effective date of this system,
and not more than a 30-year period for additional (new) benefits. The City
Commission and the Board will undertake a study of funding alternatives that
will reduce the cost to the city.
   (B)   Buyback. Subject to the limitations of Internal Revenue Code Section
415(n), a member shall be provided with credit for periods of service not
otherwise taken into account under the plan if the member voluntarily
contributes to the plan in an amount (as determined by the Board, in its sole
discretion) equal to the amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to
such period of service reduced by any city contribution with respect to such
service. Buyback shall be permitted only with respect to periods of service
with the city during which time the member was not permitted to participate in
the plan because he/she had attained age 36. To receive credit for such
service, the member must submit a written election indicating his intent to do
so, along with the payment representing the appropriate amount of the required
contribution. Service shall not become effective prior to full payment of such
contribution.
   (C)   All retirement, death, and disability benefits payable under this
system are in lieu of a refund of member contributions. In any event, however,
each member shall be guaranteed the payment of benefits at least equal in total
amount to his accumulated member contributions plus 3% simple interest.
   (D)   All monies which have been funded by member contributions and the
city’s contributions, and monies from all outside sources such as private
contributions or those contributions made by the state or any other firms,
corporations, or companies invested into any basic or secondary pension plan
for the retirement of any employee who shall be included in the Pension Fund,
including any interest gathered by these monies, shall be transferred into the
Pension Fund to be known more fully as the Pembroke Pines Firefighter’s and
Police Officer’s Retirement Fund. All beneficiaries and retired members
presently receiving benefits from Bankers Life shall continue to receive these
benefits under this system.
(‘69 Code, § 5-1612 (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 967, passed 9-19-91;
Am. Ord. 1014, passed 11-4-92; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00; Am. Ord. 1480,
passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.54 RETIREE BENEFIT RE-COMPUTATIONS.
   (A)   Any person who is receiving a retirement, death, or disability payment
under the terms of this system and who had not begun receiving retirement,
death, or disability benefits from any city-sponsored pension program before
February 19, 1981, will have his benefits recalculated with such recalculated
benefits to commence as of the payment due on the first day of the month on or
after the effective date of this section.
   (B)   The recalculation will be performed using the same benefit formula,
continuous service, and earnings as applied when payments under this system
commenced; however, average monthly earnings used will be equal to one-twelfth
of the arithmetic average of annual earnings for the highest two years of
continuous service preceding the actual retirement or termination date of the
person. In addition, if the benefit payment is as a result of service-incurred
total and permanent disability, the recalculation will be performed using a 66-
2/3% factor instead of a 40% factor.
(‘69 Code, § 5-1612 (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 829, passed 3-4-87; Am.
Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.55 PENSIONS NOT ASSIGNABLE, SUBJECT TO GARNISHMENT, OR THE LIKE.
   (A)   No pension provided for in this subchapter shall be assignable or
subject part of the corpus or income of the Pension Fund be used for, or
diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of members and their
beneficiaries and until those liabilities are satisfied, all city contributions
will remain in the Fund for the benefit of the members or beneficiaries in the
event the system is terminated or city contributions cease.
   (B)   Upon the termination of the system or on the complete discontinuance
of contributions under the system, each member shall have nonforfeitable, 100%
vested rights to benefits accrued to date of the termination or discontinuance
to the extent funded at that time.
(‘69 Code, § 5-183) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00;
Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.56 BOARD ESTABLISHED; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The general administration and responsibility for the proper operation
of the system and for making effective the provisions of this subchapter are
hereby vested in a Board consisting of nine persons, as follows:
      (1)   Three members, other than firefighters or police officers, to be
appointed as provided in division (C) below;
      (2)   Three members of the Fire Department to be elected as provided in
division (D) below; and
      (3)   Three members of the Police Department to be elected as provided in
division (D) below.
   (B)   The term of each trustee shall be two years except that the initial
terms of the trustees of each class shall commence on the day after the
ordinance amendment approving and authorizing this change in term shall become
law.
   (C)   The appointive trustees shall be appointed by the City Commission from
a list of candidates submitted by the City Manager.
   (D)   The elective trustees shall be elected in the following manner: by per
capita vote of all members of each of the respective departments who come
within the purview of this section, both active and retired, at places
designated by the Board, provided that all qualified members entitled to vote
shall be notified in person or by mail as required by applicable law. The
candidate receiving the highest number of votes for each office shall be
declared elected and shall take office immediately on commencement of the term
of office for which elected, or as soon thereafter as he shall qualify
therefor. All elections shall be held not more than 30 and not less than ten
days prior to the commencement of the terms for which trustees are to be
elected. The Board shall meet, organize, and elect one of their members as
Chairman, and one member as Vice Chairman, within ten days after the trustees
are elected and duly qualified.
   (E)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of trustee, the vacancy shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the office was previously
filled.
   (F)   The trustees shall serve without compensation but they may be
reimbursed from the Expense Fund for all necessary, reasonable. and proper
expenses, such as travel, which they may actually expend in the performance of
their duties as a member of the Board. Expenditures are not to exceed the
limits placed by law including, but not limited to, § 112.061, Florida
Statutes.
   (G)   Each trustee shall, within ten days after his appointment or election,
take an oath of office before the City Clerk, that so far as it develops on him
he will diligently and honestly administer the affairs of the Board, and that
he will not knowingly violate or willingly permit to be violated any of the
provisions of the law applicable to the retirement system. The oath shall be
subscribed to by the members making it and certified by the Clerk and filed in
his office.
   (H)   Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on the Board. A majority of
the Board shall constitute a quorum in order to conduct a meeting of the Board.
Five votes shall be necessary for a decision by the trustees at any meeting of
the Board. The Chairman shall have the right to one vote only.
   (I)   Subject to the limitations of this section, the Board shall from time
to time establish uniform rules and regulations for the administration of funds
created by this section and for transactions of its business, which shall have
the force of law. Board meetings shall be held in accordance with Robert’s
Rules of Order.
   (J)   The Board shall, by majority vote of its members, elect a secretary,
who shall be one of its members. It shall engage the actuarial and other
services as shall be required to transact the business of the retirement
system. The compensation of all persons engaged by the Board of Trustees and
all other expenses of the Board necessary for the operation of the retirement
system shall be paid at those rates and in those amounts as the Board shall
agree. The projected expenses shall be presented for budget consideration,
subject to approval by the City Commission. All funds shall be disbursed by the
Board. The secretary and any trustee authorized to handle or disburse funds or
assets or sign checks shall be bonded for a minimum of 10% of the assets of the
fund, the premium for the bond to be paid out of this Fund.
   (K)   Any trustee who neglects the duties of his office shall be removed by
any method available by law.
   (L)   The city may authorize employees to provide secretarial and clerical
assistance to the Board, with approval of the Board of Trustees.
(`69 Code, § 5-166) (Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00)
   (M)   The duties, responsibilities, and powers of the Board shall include
but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   To construe the provisions of the system and determine all
questions arising thereunder;
      (2)   To determine all questions relating to eligibility and
participation;
      (3)   To determine and certify amount of all retirement allowances or
other benefits hereunder;
      (4)   To establish uniform rules and procedures to be followed for
administrative purposes, benefit applications, and all matters required to
administer the plan;
      (5)   To distribute to employees at regular intervals information
concerning the plan as required by law;
      (6)   To receive and process all applications for participation and
benefits;
      (7)   To authorize all payments whatsoever from the Fund;
      (8)   To approve of any and all changes in the provisions of the system;
      (9)   To have performed an annual independent audit of the system’s
financial operations, books, and Pension Fund; and
      (10)   To sue and be sued.
(`69 Code, § 5-167)
   (N)   The Board shall have the following investment powers and authority:
      (1)   The Board of Trustees may invest and reinvest the assets of the
system in any lawful investment. In making that determination, the Board and a
person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity to whom investment
authority is delegated shall be governed in their actions by the applicable
provisions of F.S. Chs. 112, 175, 185, 215 and 518, provided however, there is
hereby established a stock equities investment limitation of 80% at cost. The
Board shall be vested with full legal title to the Fund. All contributions from
time to time paid into the Pension Fund, and the income thereof, without
distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the
Board or its agent in the Fund, and the Board shall not be required to
segregate or invest separate any portion of the Fund.
      (2)   The Board of Trustees shall adopt a written investment policy
consistent with the requirements of F.S. Ch. 112, Part VII, as it may be
amended from time to time. The investment policy shall be reviewed annually and
shall be structured to maximize the return on investment of system assets
consistent with the risks incumbent in each investment and subject to
appropriate diversification of investment strategies. No investment shall be
permitted which is not authorized by the investment policy.
      (3)   The Board may retain such asset managers as it deems necessary to
implement its investment policy and may delegate to those managers any part or
all of the investment functions that a prudent investor might delegate under
the circumstances. In making such delegation, the Board shall exercise the
reasonable care, judgment, and caution in selecting the investment manager; in
establishing the scope of the delegation; and in periodically reviewing the
investment managers' actions in order to monitor overall performance and
compliance with the scope and terms of the delegation.
      (4)   The Board shall retain the services of a professionally qualified
independent investment consultant as defined in F.S. §§ 175.071 and 185.06, or
an equivalent successor statute, separate and apart from an full-time employee
of the Board, to assist the Board in the development of its written investment
policy; the selection of investment managers and investment strategies; to
perform continuing due diligence on investment managers; and measure their
performance. This Investment Advisor shall meet the minimum standards and
possess the registrations and licenses as prescribed by law.
      (5)   The Board shall undergo a competitive selection process for the
selection of its investment consultant. Such competitive selection process
shall be undertaken at least every five years thereafter.
      (6)   The Board may retain in cash and keep income productive in any
amounts as it may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of
the system.
      (7)   Neither the Board nor any person or entity shall be liable for the
making, retention, or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as herein
provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the Fund, except that due to his
own negligence, willful misconduct, or lack of good faith.
      (8)   The Board may have any investment in securities held by it to be
registered in or transferred into its name as trustee or into the name of the
nominee as it may direct, or it may retain them unregistered and in a form
permitting transferability. However, the books and records shall at all times
show that all investments are part of the Fund.
      (9)   The Board is empowered, but is not required, to vote on any stocks,
bonds, or securities of any corporation, association, or trust and to give
general or specific proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of
substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, recapitalizations,
consolidations, and similar transactions with respect to the securities; to
deposit stock or other securities in any voting trust or any protective or like
committee or with the trustees or with depositaries designated thereby; to
amortize or fail to amortize any part or all of the premium or discount
resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and generally, to
exercise any of the powers of any owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other
investments comprising the Fund which it may deem to be the best interest of
the Fund to exercise.
       (10)   The Board shall not be required to make any inventory or
appraisal or report to any court, nor to secure any order of court for the
exercise of any power herein contained.
      (11)   Where any action which the Board is required to take or any duty
or function which it is required to perform, either under the terms herein or
under the general law applicable to it as trustee under this agreement, can
reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, the
city or any person or entity, of specific information, certification,
direction, or instructions, the Board shall incur no liability in failing to
take that action or perform the duty or function until the information,
certification, direction, or instruction has been received by it.
      (12)   Any overpayments or underpayments from the Fund to a retired
member or beneficiary caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted with
interest at the rate per annum approved by the Board. Overpayment shall be
charged against retirement payments next succeeding the correction.
Underpayments shall be made up from the Fund.
      (13)   In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only
the city and the Board shall be necessary parties, and no member or other
person having an interest in the Pension Fund shall be entitled to any notice
of service or process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action
shall be conclusive on all persons.
      (14)   Any of the foregoing powers and functions reposed in the Board may
be performed and carried out by the Board through a duly authorized agent,
provided the Board at all times maintains continuous supervision over the acts
of any agent, and that title to the Fund shall always remain in the Board.
   (O)   Any of the foregoing powers and functions reposed in the Board may be
performed and carried out by the Board through a duly authorized agent,
provided the Board at all times maintains continuous supervision over the acts
of any agent, and that title to the Fund shall always remain in the Board. (`69
Code, § 5-172) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1133, passed 9-6-95; Am.
Ord. 1318, passed 11-17-99; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00; Am. Ord. 1443,
passed 6-18-03; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 9-18-24)
§ 34.57 EMPLOYEES, AGENTS OF BOARD.
   The Board may hire and appoint those persons, agents, entities (including
corporate fiduciaries), or attorneys as in its discretion may be required or
advisable to enable it to perform its custodial and investment duties
hereunder. The Board may enter into agency, investment, advisory, and custodial
agreements for the purpose of securing investment and custodianship services
for the system and the Fund.
(`69 Code, § 5-170) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00;
Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.58 ESTABLISHMENT OF MEDICAL BOARD.
   The Board shall designate a Medical Board to be composed of one or more
physicians or surgeons, who shall arrange for and pass on all medical
examinations required under the provisions of this subchapter, investigate all
essential statements or certificates made by or on behalf of a member in
connection with an application for disability or retirement, and report in
writing to the Board all conclusions and recommendations upon all matters
referred to it. Such conclusion and recommendations shall not be binding on the
Board. Payment for these services shall be determined by the Board.
(`69 Code, § 5-173) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00;
Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.59 FINANCIAL RECORDS TO BE KEPT; DUTIES OF CITY FINANCE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   All funds and securities of the system may be commingled in the Fund,
provided accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial
composition of the Fund, including accurate current accounts and entries as
regards the following:
      (1)   Current amounts of accumulated contributions of employees on both
an individual and aggregate account basis;
      (2)   Receipts and disbursements;
      (3)   Payments to retirees;
      (4)   Current amounts clearly reflecting all monies, funds, and assets
whatsoever attributable to contributions and deposits from the city, including
a valuation of all of them, as well as other assets of the fund on a market
value basis;
      (5)   All interest, dividends, and gains (or losses) whatsoever; and
      (6)   Any other entries as may be properly required so as reflect a clear
and complete financial report of the Fund.
(`69 Code, § 5-171) (Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00)
   (B)   Upon request, and as specified in the request by the Board, the
Finance Department shall maintain any or all records and data necessary for the
proper administration of this system, and shall make the records and data
available to the Board of Trustees. The records shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to the following list and any other similar items
necessary for proper administration of the system:
      (1)   Deduct employee contributions, and transmit funds to the Board each
pay period.
      (2)   Maintain employee contributions accounts; determine interest to be
credited annually as per trustees’ instructions.
      (3)   Receive and retain one copy of each form of application for
participation, and beneficiary designation form.
      (4)   For terminating participants:
         (a)   Notify Board as to the amount of contribution refund due.
         (b)   Note the date of termination on the original application form
and retain this in a separate file.
      (5)   For pending retirements, complete basic data form, including
determination of average monthly earnings.
      (6)   Prepare annually employee data needed for actuarial valuation.
      (7)   Transmit city and state contributions to the Board.
(`69 Code, § 5-182) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00;
Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.60 ACTUARIAL DATA TO BE FURNISHED.
   The Board will furnish the actuary with all data required for necessary
actuarial computations under the plan.
(`69 Code, § 5-180) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00;
Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.61 ANNUAL REPORTS TO BE MADE TO STATE.
   Each year in accordance with Chapters 175 and 185, Florida Statutes, on or
before March 15, the trustees of the system shall submit a report to the
Department of Management Services, Division of Retirement for the State of
Florida.
(`69 Code, § 5-184) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00;
Am. Ord. 1443, passed 6-18-03; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.62 APPROVAL OF BOARD, CITY REQUIRED TO MAKE CHANGES IN SYSTEM.
   No change in any of the provisions of the system shall be made without the
approval of the Board at a regular meeting of the Board. The approval of the
City Commission is also required before any changes are made.
(`69 Code, § 5-168) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00;
Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.63 TERMINATION OF SYSTEM.
   (A)   Upon termination of the system by the city for any reason or because
of a transfer, merger, or consolidation of governmental units, services, or
functions as provided in Chapter 121, Florida Statutes, or upon written notice
by the city to the Board that contributions under the system are being
permanently discontinued, the rights of all members to benefits accrued to the
date of such termination and the amounts credited to the members' accounts are
nonforfeitable. The Fund shall be distributed in accordance with the following
procedures:
      (1)   The Board shall determine the date of distribution and the asset
value required to fund all the nonforfeitable benefits after taking into
account the expenses of such distribution. The Board shall inform the city if
additional assets are required. in which event the city shall continue to
financially support the system until all nonforfeitable benefits have been
funded.
      (2)   The Board shall determine the method of distribution of the asset
value, whether distribution shall be by payment in cash, by the maintenance of
another or substituted trust fund, by the purchase of insured annuities, or
otherwise, for each member entitled to benefits under the system as specified
in division (3) below.
      (3)   The Board shall distribute the asset value as of the date of
termination in the manner set forth in this division, on the basis that the
amount required to provide any given retirement income is the actuarially
computed single-sum value of such retirement income, except that if the method
of distribution determined under division (2) above involves the purchase of an
insured annuity, the amount required to provide the given retirement income is
the single premium payable for such annuity. The actuarial single-sum value may
not be less than the member's accumulated contributions to the system, with
interest if provided by the system, less the value of any system benefits
previously paid to the member.
      (4)   If there is asset value remaining after the full distribution
specified in division (3) above, and after the payment of any expenses incurred
with such distribution, such excess shall be returned to the city, less return
to the state of the state's contributions, provided that, if the excess is less
than the total contributions made by the city and the state to date of
termination of the system, such excess shall be divided proportionately to the
total contributions made by the city and the state.
      (5)   The Board shall distribute, in accordance with division (2) above,
the amounts determined under division (3) above.
   (B)   If, after 24 months after the date the system terminated or the date
the Board received written notice that the contributions thereunder were being
permanently discontinued, the city or the Board of the system's pension trust
fund affected has not complied with all the provisions in this section, the
Department of Management Services shall effect the termination of the fund in
accordance with this section.
(`69 Code, § 5-183) (Ord. 557, passed 2-19-81; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00;
Am. Ord. 1443, passed 6-18-03; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04; Am. Ord. 1767,
passed 1-15-14)
§ 34.64 TAX PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this plan, the retirement
benefit of a member shall be reduced to the extent that it exceeds amounts
specified in Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC).
   (B)   The city shall solely for the purpose of compliance with Sections 125,
457, and 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code, pick up the members’
contributions required to be made by employees on earnings paid with respect to
payroll periods upon this section becoming effective. The member contributions
so picked up shall be designated as employer contributions in determining tax
treatment under the Internal Revenue Code. Member contributions picked up by
the city pursuant to this subsection shall be treated for all other purposes of
this and other laws of the city in the same manner and to the same extent as
member contributions made prior to the effective date of this division (B). No
employee shall have the option of choosing to receive the contributed amounts
directly instead of having them paid by the city to the System.
   (C)   This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1,
1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would
otherwise limit a distributee’s election under this section, a distributee may
elect, at any time and in any manner prescribed by the plan administrator, to
have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. For
the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply:
      DIRECT ROLLOVER. A payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan
specified by the distributee. Effective as of January 1, 2008, a non-spouse
beneficiary may make a direct rollover only to an “inherited” individual
retirement account as described in IRC § 408(b). If a non-spouse beneficiary
receives a distribution from the plan, the distribution is not eligible for a
60-day (non-direct) rollover.
      DISTRIBUTEE. An employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's
or former employee's surviving spouse is a distributee with regard to the
interest of the spouse. Effective as of January 1, 2008, an employee's or
former employee's non-spouse beneficiary is a distributee with regard to the
interest of the employee or former employee.
      ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN. An individual retirement account described in §
408(a) of the IRC, an individual retirement annuity account described in § 403
(a) of the IRC, or a qualified trust described in § 401(a) of the IRC, that
accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution.
      Effective for distributions made after December 31, 2001, an eligible
retirement plan shall also mean an annuity contract described in IRC § 403(b)
and an eligible plan under IRC § 457(b) which is maintained by a state,
political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state
or political subdivision of a state, and which agrees to separately account for
amounts transferred into such plan from this Plan.
      ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBU- TION. Any distribution of all or any portion
of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible
rollover distribution does not include any distribution that is one of a series
of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) of
the distributee and the distributee’s designated beneficiary, for a specified
period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution
is required under § 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended
(IRC); and, the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross
income.
   (D)   In addition to other applicable limitations set forth in the plan, and
notwithstanding any other provisions of the plan to the contrary, for the plan
years beginning on or after October 1, 1996, the annual compensation of each
employee (who first became a plan participant in a plan year beginning after
September 30, 1996) taken into account under the plan shall not exceed the
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (OBRA ‘93) annual compensation limit.
The OBRA ‘93 annual compensation limit is $150,000, as adjusted by the
Commissioner for increases in the cost-of-living in accordance with § 401(a)
(17)(B) of the IRC. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year
applies for any period, not exceeding 12 months, over which compensation is
determined (determination period), beginning in such calendar year. If a
determination period consists of fewer than 12 months, the OBRA ‘93 annual
compensation limit will be prorated. For plan years beginning on or after
October 1, 1996, any reference in this plan to the limitation under § 401(a)
(17) of the IRC shall mean OBRA ‘93 annual compensation limit set forth in this
provision. The OBRA ‘93 annual compensation limit shall not apply to employees
who were participants in the plan before the first plan year beginning after
September 30, 1996.
   (E)   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, a member’s benefits
shall commence no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later
of (I) the calendar year in which he or she attains age 70 ½ or (ii) the
calendar year in which he or she retires (the “Required Beginning Date”). All
distributions from the plan (including the DROP) shall conform to the
regulations issued under Section 401(a)(9) of the IRC, including the incidental
death benefit provision of Section 401(A)(9)(G) of the IRC. Further, such
regulation shall override any plan or DROP provision that is inconsistent with
Section 401(a)(9) of the IRC.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan to the contrary, the form
of retirement income payable from this plan shall satisfy the following
conditions:
      (1)   If the retirement income is payable before the member's death:
         (a)   It shall either be distributed or commence to the member not
later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar
year in which the member attains age 70½, or the calendar year in which member
retires;
         (b)   The distribution shall commence not later than the calendar year
defined above; and
            1.   Shall be paid over the life of the member or over the
lifetimes of the member and spouse, descendant or dependent; or
            2.   Shall be paid over the period extending not beyond the life
expectancy of the member and spouse, descendant or dependent.
      Where the form of retirement income payment has commenced in accordance
with the preceding paragraphs and the member dies before his entire interest in
the plan has been distributed, the remaining portion of such interest in the
plan shall be distributed no less rapidly than under the form of distribution
in effect at the time of the member's death.
      (2)   If the member's death occurs before the distribution of his
interest in the plan has commenced, member's entire interest in the plan shall
be distributed within five years of member's death, unless it is to be
distributed in accordance with the following rules:
         (a)   The member's remaining interest in the plan is payable to his
spouse, descendant or dependent;
         (b)   The remaining interest is to be distributed over the life of the
spouse, descendant or dependent or over a period not extending beyond the life
expectancy of the spouse, descendant or dependent; and
         (c)   Such distribution begins within one year of the member's death
unless the member's spouse, is the sole designated beneficiary, in which case
the distribution need not begin before the date on which the member would have
attained age 70½ and if the member's spouse dies before the distribution to the
spouse begins, this section shall be applied as if the spouse were the member.
   (F)   Any provision of this plan that would cause it to fail to comply with
the applicable requirements for qualified plans under the IRC shall, to the
extent be necessary to maintain the qualified status of the Plan, be null and
void ab initio, and of no force and effect, and the plan shall be construed as
if such provision had never been inserted in the plan.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan to the contrary, the
form of retirement income payable from this plan shall satisfy the following
conditions:
      (1)   If the retirement income is payable before the member's death:
         (a)   It shall either be distributed or commence to the member not
later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar
year in which the member attains age 70-1/2, or the calendar year in which
member retires;
         (b)   The distribution shall commence not later than the calendar year
defined above; and (a) shall be paid over the life of the member or over the
lifetimes of the member and spouse, issue or dependent, or (b) shall be paid
over the period extending not beyond the life expectancy of the member and
spouse, issue or dependent.
      Where the form of retirement income payment has commenced in accordance
with the preceding paragraphs and the member dies before his entire interest in
the plan has been distributed, the remaining portion of such interest in the
plan shall be distributed no less rapidly than under the form of distribution
in effect at the time of the member's death.
      (2)   If the member's death occurs before the distribution of his
interest in the plan has commenced, member's entire interest in the plan shall
be distributed within five years of member's death, unless it is to be
distributed in accordance with the following rules:
         (a)   The member's remaining interest in the plan is payable to his
spouse, issue or dependent;
         (b)   The remaining interest is to be distributed over the life of the
spouse, issue or dependent or over a period not extending beyond the life
expectancy of the spouse, issue or dependent; and
         (c)   Such distribution begins within one year of the member's death
unless the member's spouse is the sole designated beneficiary, in which case
the distribution need not begin before the date on which the member would have
attained age 70-1/2 and if the member's spouse dies before the distribution to
the spouse begins, this section shall be applied as if the spouse were the
member.
(Ord. 967, passed 9-19-91; Am. Ord. 1067, passed 3-16-94; Am. Ord. 1091, passed
9-8-94; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 9-20-00; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04; Am. Ord.
1669, passed 8-4-10; Am. Ord. 1767, passed 1-15-14; Am. Ord. 1819, passed 5-6-
15)
RETIREE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM
§ 34.65 CREATION.
   There is hereby created a retiree health insurance program for all regular
full-time, permanent general and utility employees, certified firefighters and
police officers of the city.
(Ord. 990, passed 4-15-92; Am. Ord. 1015, passed 11-4-92; Am. Ord. 1024, passed
2-17-93)
§ 34.66 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DROP EMPLOYEE. An employee who has entered into any city offered
deferred retirement option plan but remains a full time employee of the city.
   CERTIFIED FIREFIGHTERS. All regular full- time, permanent employees of the
city Fire Department who are identified on the city’s employee classification
plan as a certified firefighter.
   CERTIFIED POLICE OFFICERS. All regular full-time, permanent employees of the
city’s Police Department who are identified on the city’s employee
classification plan as a certified police officer.
   CITY. The City of Pembroke Pines, Florida.
   COMMENCEMENT DATE. March 1, 1989, the date on which this program was
originally established.
   CONTINUOUS SERVICE. Uninterrupted service by an employee (expressed as years
and completed months) from the date he/she last entered employment as an
employee of the city until the date of his/her normal retirement date.
   DISABILITY. An employee who is receiving, or applied to receive and who has
not been denied disability pension benefits from the applicable city pension
fund.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. October 1, 1991, the date on which the program becomes
effective.
   EMPLOYEE. All regular, full-time, permanent general and utility employees,
certified firefighters and police officers of the city, as set forth in the
city’s Employee Classification Plan. For purposes of this program, the term
EMPLOYEE shall be those general and utility employees, certified firefighters
and police officers that work more than 30 hours per week, annually. Excluded
by the above definition are seasonal, temporary, part-time and contractual
employees of the city.
   GENERAL AND UTILITY EMPLOYEES. All regular full-time, permanent general and
utility employees of the city who are identified on the city’s employee
classification plan as general or utility employees of the city.
   MEMBER. An employee who fulfills the prescribed participation requirements
of the program.
   NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE. The first day of any month if coincident with,
following with, or following the attainment of normal retirement age and
completion of continuous service prescribed by the city pension plan which
covers employee. Provided, however, if employee does not participate in a city
pension plan, then and only then, the normal retirement date shall mean the
first day of any month if coincident with, following with, or following the
attainment of 55 years of age and ten years of continuous service to the city.
   PROGRAM. The retiree health insurance program set forth herein.
   SERVICE INCURRED DEATH OR TOTAL DISABILITY. Whenever any employee dies or is
injured in the performance of his or her duties for the city and dies or is
declared to be totally disabled by the Board of Trustees for the applicable
city pension plan or, if the employee does not belong to a city pension plan,
when a city appointed doctor declares the employee to be totally disabled. For
the purposes of this subchapter, TOTAL DISABILITY, at a minimum, shall mean
that the employee is prevented by reason of a medically determined physical or
mental impairment from rendering useful and efficient service to the city, or
any other employer, and is not capable of performing, with or without
accommodation, all essential job functions of any position available with the
city, or any other employer, and is likely to remain so disabled continuously
and permanently.
   SPOUSE. A lawfully wedded spouse of an employee, if any, on the employee’s
normal retirement date.
(Ord. 990, passed 4-15-92; Am. Ord. 1015, passed 11-4-92; Am. Ord. 1024, passed
2-17-93; Am. Ord. 1144, passed 12-6-95; Am. Ord. 1371, passed 4-4-01)
§ 34.67 PROGRAM AND SOURCE OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
34.68(C) and (D), an employee is eligible for this benefit, without regard to
the percentage of vesting, only when the employee qualifies for early
retirement or normal retirement while still in service under the applicable
retirement plan, or prior to the employee’s Normal Retirement Date if the
employee is not a member of a plan and has completed ten years of continuous
service to the city and attained age 55, the employee may elect to participate
in this program, even if he/she separates from continuous service to the city
prior to the normal retirement date, provided the employee:
      (1)   Notifies the city in writing prior to his/her separation from the
city or his/her desire and intent to participate in the program upon attainment
of the normal retirement date.
      (2)   Agrees to and actually pays to the city, on a monthly basis, the
premiums for the Group Health/Life Insurance Policy the employee was covered by
prior to his/her separation from the city from the date of separation to his/
her normal retirement date. If for any reasons the employee fails to make
timely payments at any time prior to the employee’s normal retirement date the
employee shall not be entitled to participate in this program hereafter.
   (B)   Following the employee’s attainment of the normal retirement date and
actual separation from continuous service to the city or the date an employee
is declared to have suffered a service incurred death or total disability, the
city shall provide, and pay for:
      (1)   For employees hired after the effective date the city shall provide
and pay for Group Health/Life Insurance, for employee (single) coverage only.
The above mentioned insurance, provided by the city, shall be substantially the
same as that which was enjoyed by the employee prior to his/her retirement.
      (2)   For employees hired prior to the effective date the city shall
provide, and pay for, Health/Life Insurance for the employee and dependents
(Dependent Coverage). If a member of this program expires, the spouse will be
given the option of continuing coverage provided by this program but would have
to assume responsibility for payment premium. The above mentioned insurance,
provided by the city, shall be substantially the same as that which was enjoyed
by the employee prior to his/her retirement.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall provide and pay for
group health/life insurance equitable to that provided to active employees for
employee and dependents (dependent coverage) for any employee who suffers a
service incurred death or total disability regardless of hire date, or, for an
active DROP employee who, based on available medical information received by
the city from an authorized treating physician, cannot perform his or her
essential job duties, with or without an accommodation, due to a service
connected injury. Ability to perform essential job duties shall be determined
by the employee’s department head in consultation with the Human Resource
Director. Provided, however, no employee shall be considered to have suffered a
service incurred total disability until examined by a duly qualified physician
or surgeon selected by the applicable pension board of trustees or the city if
the employee is not a member of a city pension plan with a duly constituted
board of trustees. Any employee determined to have suffered a service incurred
total disability shall be periodically examined, at the expense of the pension
fund or the city (if the employee is not a member of a city pension) by a duly
qualified physician or surgeon, selected by the applicable Board of Trustees or
the city, to determine if such disability has ceased to exist. The last payment
of group health insurance benefits under this subchapter shall be on the date
that: the employee recovers from the total disability; the employee is entitled
to medicare coverage (at which time the city health plan coverage will become
secondary); the employee’s spouse is entitled to similar or equal coverage from
his or her employer at no cost; or the employee is hired or self employed in a
similar or equal pay capacity as that enjoyed prior to the service incurred
total disability.
   (C)   If a member of this program is subsequently employed and is eligible
to receive health insurance from the new employer, at no cost to the member,
said insurance shall be primary and the insurance provided by this program
shall be secondary for so long as the employee remains covered by the insurance
provided by the new employer.
   (D)   The city agrees to provide the above mentioned insurance until the
member is entitled to receive Medicare benefits, at which point the insurance
provided by the city shall be in the form of Medicare Supplement so that the
total coverage available to employee under Medicare and the supplement is
substantially equal to the benefits provided to active employees at that time.
   (E)   Firefighter employees hired on or after October 1, 1991 but before
April 1, 2006 may elect to participate in this program as provided above, and
the city will pay for the coverage for the employee. However, the costs of any
dependant coverage must be paid for by the employee. Firefighter employees
hired after April 1, 2006, may elect to continue in the program as set forth
above, but the expense of both employee and dependant coverage shall be at the
employee's sole expense. A retiree premium shall be established by the city
equal to the fully insured rate or the equivalent self-funded rate paid by
active employees. Coverage shall be available only upon the employee complying
with all procedural and coverage requirements as otherwise provided in this
section, including but not limited to timely payment of premiums.
   (F)   Police officer employees hired on or after October 1, 1991 but before
October 1, 2006 may elect to participate in this program as provided above, and
the city will pay for the coverage for the employee. However, the costs of any
dependant coverage must be paid for by the employee. Police officer employees
hired after October 1, 2006, may elect to continue in the program as set forth
above, but the expense of both employee and dependant coverage shall be at the
employee's sole expense. A retiree premium shall be established by the city
equal to the fully insured rate or the equivalent self-funded rate paid by
active employees. Coverage shall be available only upon the employee complying
with all procedural and coverage requirements as otherwise provided in this
section, including but not limited to timely payment of premiums.
   (G)   Effective July 1, 2010 any general or utility employee who is eligible
for membership in the Federation of Public Employees Union (FPE) collective
bargaining unit, as defined by the Florida Public Employees Relations
Commission (PERC), on July 1, 2007, or as subsequently modified by PERC, may
elect to continue in the program upon their Normal Retirement Date, and such
coverage may include dependant coverage. Both employee and dependant coverage
shall be at the employee's sole expense. A retiree premium shall be established
by the city equal to the fully insured rate or the equivalent self-funded rate
paid by active employees. Coverage shall be available only upon the employee
complying with all procedural and coverage requirements as otherwise provided
in this section, including but not limited to timely payment of premiums.
   (H)   General and utility employees hired after February 1, 2010 and police
officer hired after May 1, 2010 shall no longer be eligible to participate in
the retiree life insurance program and their life insurance policy shall
terminate upon the date of their separation from active employment with the
city.
(Ord. 990, passed 4-15-92; Am. Ord. 1024, passed 2-17-93; Am. Ord. 1144, passed
12-6-95; Am. Ord. 1371, passed 4-4-01; Am. Ord. 1554, passed 8-16-06; Am. Ord.
1670, passed 8-4-10)
§ 34.68 ELIGIBILITY AND DISQUALIFICATION.
   (A)   Employees are eligible to participate and receive program benefits for
the employee only (single coverage); if the employee was hired on or before the
effective date; has executed the necessary employee contracts, described below;
has attained the normal retirement date; and actually separates from continuous
service to the city, except that employees and/or their dependents who have
suffered service incurred death or total disability shall be eligible to
participate in the program and receive dependent coverage paid by the city as
contemplated under this subchapter.
   (B)   Employees are eligible to participate and receive the program benefits
for the employee and the employee’s dependents, only if the employee was hired
by the city prior to the effective date; has executed the necessary employee
contracts described below; has attained the normal retirement date or suffered
a service incurred death or total disability; and actually separates from
continuous service to the city, except that employees and their dependents who
have suffered service incurred death or total disability shall be eligible to
participate in the program and receive dependent coverage paid by the city as
contemplated in this subchapter.
   (C)   Upon the effective date of this section, certified firefighter
employees who retire before attaining 50 years of age must purchase retiree
health insurance from the city at his or her own expense continuously each
month from the time of retirement until attaining age 50.
   (D)   On or after March 17, 2004, certified police officer employees who
retire before attaining 50 years of age must purchase retiree health insurance
from the city at his or her own expense continuously each month from the time
of retirement until attaining age 50.
   (E)   Employees are eligible to participate in the program only if the
employee has executed such employee contract’s as are required by this
subchapter. The employee contract shall be in substantially the following form:
   WITNESSETH:
   WHEREAS, CITY is authorized, and EMPLOYEE is required to enter into this
Contract in order to be eligible to participate in the City’s Retiree Health
Insurance Program, “Program”, established by Ordinance 990; and
   WHEREAS, it is beneficial to both parties to have employees protected by the
terms of the Program on the date hereof, and EMPLOYEE is desirous of
participating in the Program;
   IT IS UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED that this Contract shall remain in full force
and effect without change provided, however, Employee understands and hereby
agrees to waive, for now and in the future, the right to bargain a reduction in
the Program benefits on the date hereof in exchange for other employment
benefits.
   IT IS FURTHER UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED that it is the intent of the parties
hereto to create vested rights in the respective parties not to be hereinafter
impaired except as expressly provided for in this Contract,
   IT IS FURTHER UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED that the terms of the ordinance
establishing the Program as it exists on the date hereof, is declared to be a
part of this Contract and this Contract shall be construed with reference
thereto.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto caused these presents to be executed,
signed and dated.
   EMPLOYEE            DATE
   CITY               DATE
   (F)   The city recognizes that employees who separate from service to the
city may be subsequently employed by new employer(s) from time to time. If a
member of the program is subsequently employed and is eligible to receive
health insurance from the new employer at no cost to the member, said insurance
shall be primary and the insurance provided by this program shall be secondary
for as long as the employee remains covered by the insurance provided by the
new employer.
(Ord. 990, passed 4-15-92; Am. Ord. 1024, passed 2-17-93; Am. Ord. 1144, passed
12-6-95; Am. Ord. 1443, passed 6-18-03; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 3-17-04)
§ 34.69 EMPLOYEES OBLIGATIONS.
   It shall be the sole responsibility and obligation of the employee to
perform the following in order to avail himself/herself of the benefits of this
program:
   (A)   Notify the city, in writing, of the intent to retire and claim
eligibility in the program at least 30 days in advance of separation from the
city. This notice shall include the employee’s current and intended address
after retirement, if different, and the name of the dependents, if the employee
is entitled to dependent coverage.
   (B)   Execute program forms created by city, which may contain information
requested by the health insurance provider.
   (C)   Execute an affidavit agreeing that he/she will notify the city, in
writing, if in the future he/she is reemployed and is eligible to receive
substantially the same health insurance coverage from the new employer.
(Ord. 990, passed 4-15-92; Am. Ord. 1024, passed 2-17-93)
§ 34.70 TERMINATION OF PROGRAM.
   The city reserves the right to terminate this program whenever it deems it
to be in the best interest of the city, provided, however, anything to the
contrary, notwithstanding all employees of the city on the date the city
determines to end this program shall have the right to continue to participate
in and receive benefits from this program.
(Ord. 990, passed 4-15-92)
§ 34.71 EXCESS BENEFIT PLAN.
   An excess benefit plan is hereby established to allow eligible members of
the city's Police and Fire Pension Fund to continue to receive those retirement
benefits to which they are entitled pursuant to the city's Code of Ordinances,
as amended, which benefits would otherwise be limited by the provisions
contained in section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code and shall be implemented
as follows:
   (A)   Payment of the city contribution of excess retirement benefits for
eligible members of the city's Pension Fund for firefighters and police
officers above the limits permitted by the Internal Revenue Code shall be:
      (1)   Funded from the City General Fund;
      (2)   Paid annually concurrent with the city's annual contribution to
normal pension costs which shall cause the city to realize a reduction in
normal pension costs in the same amount; and
      (3)   Be deposited into an account established to receive the city's
excess retirement benefit contributions, which accounts shall be separate and
apart from the accounts established to receive the city's normal pension
contribution for that plan.
   (B)   The actuary for the city's Pension Fund for firefighters and police
officers' Board of Trustees shall calculate the amounts necessary to fund the
defined benefit plan giving the effect to the reductions caused by the
implementations of section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code.
   (C)   The excess benefits shall be paid to each eligible member of the
city's Pension Fund for firefighters and police officers on a monthly basis in
an amount equal to the differences between the allowable pension benefit to be
paid under the Internal Revenue Code and the amount of the defined benefit
granted to eligible members of the Police and Fire Pension Plan pursuant to the
provisions set forth in the Code.
(Ord. 1572, passed 2-21-07)
EXPENSES AND REIMBURSEMENT
§ 34.75 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter is entitled the “City Expense Reimbursement Regulations.”
(‘69 Code, § 5-185) (Ord. 572, passed 8-19-81)
§ 34.76 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions contained in F.S. § 112.061 are adopted in full without
modifications. To supplement these definitions, the following shall apply:
   AGENCY or PUBLIC AGENCY. The City of Pembroke Pines.
   AGENCY HEAD or HEAD OF AGENCY. The City Commission.
(‘69 Code, § 5-185) (Ord. 572, passed 8-19-81)
§ 34.77 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.
   As to all matters not specifically covered herein, F.S. § 112.061 and any
and all other state statutes pertaining to the subject matter of this
subchapter shall control. It is the specific intent of the city to adhere to
all state standards as promulgated in reference to public officials ad
standards for travel expenses, meal expense, and all other forms of
reimbursements for expenses incurred by public officials.
(‘69 Code, § 5-186) (Ord. 572, passed 8-19-81)
§ 34.78 TRAVEL EXPENSES.
   (A)   All travel except within Broward, Dade, and Palm Beach counties,
Florida, must be authorized by the City Commission in advance. No reimbursement
for travel is authorized outside of Broward, Dade, or Palm Beach Counties
unless approved in advance by the City Commission. This shall pertain to travel
by members of the city commission the City Manager, the Finance Director, and
the City Attorney. Department heads and city employees not enumerated herein
shall be authorized to travel by the City Manager only if the travel expenses
are budgeted in advance. (For travel within Broward, Dade, and Palm Beach
Counties, see §
34.81).
   (B)   Traveling expenses of travelers shall be limited to those expenses
absolutely necessarily incurred by them in the performance of a public purpose
authorized by law and to be performed by the agency. A traveler who combines
personal and official travel is permitted reimbursement only for the portion of
the travel which is official in nature.
   (C)   In order to comply with state statutes, the official headquarters of
the city is deemed to be the City Hall of the City of Pembroke Pines, Broward
County, Florida, 10211 Taft Street, or such other official city hall location
designation within the city.
   (D)   Broward County League of Cities dinners, seminars. For provision
concerning, see §
34.82.
   (E)   For purposes of reimbursement rates and methods of calculations, per
diem and subsistence allowances are subject to the following:
      (1)   All travelers may be allowed reimbursement for subsistence when
traveling to a convention or conference or when traveling outside the state in
order to conduct bona fide public business, when the convention, conference or
business serves a direct and lawful public purpose with relation to the city.
      (2)   Either of the following, but not both of the following, shall be
the method of reimbursement. A selection of the method to be used must be made
by the traveler prior to the travel incurred, in writing, by memorandum to the
Finance Director of the city:
         (a)   Up to the per diem dollar amount authorized by the United States
General Services Administration, as amended from time to time; or
         (b)   Up to the amounts permitted by the United States General
Services Administration, as amended from time to time for meals, plus actual
expense for lodging at a single-occupancy rate to be substantiated by bills
paid therefor.
(‘69 Code, § 5-188) (Ord. 572, passed 8-19-81; Am. Ord. 1282, passed 9-16-98)
§ 34.79 METHOD OF TRANSPORTATION.
   (A)   All travel must be by a usually-traveled route. In case a person
travels an indirect route for his own convenience, any extra cost shall be
borne by the traveler and reimbursement for expenses shall be based only on
such charges as would have been incurred by a usually-traveled route. The City
Commission shall designate the most economical method of travel for each trip
for members of the Commission, the Finance Director, City Manager, and City
Attorney, keeping in mind the following conditions:
      (1)   The nature of the business.
      (2)   The most efficient and economical means of travel (considering tie
of the traveler, cost of transportation, and per diem or subsistence required).
      (3)   The number of persons making the trip, and the amount of equipment
or material to be transported.
   (B)   Transportation by common carrier when traveling on official business
and paid for personally by the traveler shall be substantiated by a receipt
therefor. Federal tax shall not be reimbursable to the traveler unless the city
is also required by federal law to pay such tax. In the event the
transportation other than the most economical class as approved by the City
Commission is provided by a common carrier on a flight check or credit card,
the charges in excess of the most economical class shall be refunded by the
traveler to the city.
(‘69 Code, § 5-189) (Ord. 572, passed 8-19-81)
§ 34.80 TRAVEL BY PRIVATELY-OWNED VEHICLE.
   (A)   The use of privately-owned vehicles for official travel in lieu of
publicly-owned vehicles or common carriers is authorized by the City Commission
only if a publicly-owned vehicle is not available. Whenever travel is by
privately-owned vehicle, the traveler shall be entitled to a mileage allowance
at the fixed rate provided for by the United States General Services
Administration, as amended from time to time, as a mileage allowance.
Reimbursement for expenditures related to the operation, maintenance, and
ownership of a vehicle shall not be allowed when privately-owned vehicles are
used on public business and reimbursement is made pursuant to this section.
   (B)   All mileage shall be shown by stating in writing the odometer reading
of the privately-owned vehicle at the time of departure, the odometer reading
on the vehicle at the time of conclusion of the trip and the total number of
elapsed miles. City Commissioners conducting official business outside of
Broward, Dade, and Palm Beach Counties, Florida, must receive prior
authorization of the City Commission for the use of their vehicles in that
fashion prior to requesting reimbursement. No mileage reimbursement shall be
made to the City Commissioner, the City Manager, the City Attorney, or the
Finance Director for the use of their privately-owned vehicles for the
transportation in Dade, Palm Beach, or Broward County, Florida.
   (C)   Transportation by chartered or leased vehicles when traveling on
official business may be authorized by the City Commission when necessary or
where it is to the advantage of the city, provided the cost of the
transportation does not exceed the cost of transportation by a privately-owned
vehicle pursuant to this section.
   (D)   No traveler shall be allowed either mileage or transportation expense
when he is gratuitously transported by another person or when he is transported
by another traveler who is entitled to mileage or transportation expense.
(‘69 Code, § 5-190) (Ord. 572, passed 8-19-81; Am. Ord. 1282, passed 9-16-98)
§ 34.81 TRAVEL WITHIN DADE, BROWARD, OR PALM BEACH COUNTIES.
   (A)   Individuals covered by this subchapter may be reimbursed for actual
mileage expended and vouchered within Dade, Broward, and Palm Beach Counties.
   (B)   In order to be reimbursed for mileage, the starting odometer setting,
the ending odometer setting, and the elapsed miles, as well as the date and
purpose of travel, must be shown.
   (C)   Only official city activities are subject to reimbursement and are
considered to be a permitted purpose for reimbursable travel as set forth
herein.
(‘69 Code, § 5-194) (Ord. 618, passed 8-18-82)
§ 34.82 BROWARD COUNTY LEAGUE OF CITIES DINNERS, SEMINARS.
   (A)   The City Commissioners and city personnel attending Broward County
league of Cities dinners and seminars shall be permitted to obtain
reimbursement for the cost of their dinner and seminar activity at the exact
amount charged by the Broward County League of Cities. No reimbursement for
spouses shall be permitted.
   (B)   The city may pay directly the costs of these dinners and seminars.
(‘69 Code, § 5-195) (Ord. 618, passed 8-18-82)
§ 34.83 OTHER EXPENSES.
   (A)   The following incidental expenses may be reimbursed upon presentment
of receipts therefor:
      (1)   Taxi fare, bus.
      (2)   Ferry fare, and bridge, road, and tunnel tolls.
      (3)   Storage or parking fees.
      (4)   Communications expense.
      (5)   Photocopying costs.
      (6)   Convention registration fees or seminar fees while attending a
convention or conference which will serve a direct public purpose with relation
to the city. However, any meals or lodging included in the registration fee
will be deducted in accordance with the allowances therefore as provided for in
this subchapter.
   (B)   Except as enumerated in this subchapter, no reimbursement for expenses
of any kind is permitted.
   (C)   No reimbursement for expenses of spouses, children, or others is
permitted.
(‘69 Code, § 5-191) (Ord. 572, passed 8-19-81)
§ 34.84 REIMBURSEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Finance Director of the city shall devise a uniform voucher
reimbursement form. This form shall be prepared in accordance with the
requirements of state statutes and the rules promulgated by the State
Department of Banking and Finance. All reimbursements shall be made on these
forms with all receipts attached. No individual statement shall be accepted in
lieu of receipts. A copy of the program or agenda of any convention or
conference, itemizing registration fees and all other charges, shall be
attached to the voucher reimburse-ment form when reimbursement is being sought
for a convention or conference.
   (B)   The voucher reimbursement form shall be signed by the traveler and
shall specifically include a sworn affidavit that the expenses incurred are
true and correct and that all receipts have been obtained therefore.
   (C)   All requests for reimbursement shall be submitted within 90 days of
the date on which the expense was incurred. Failure to comply with this
requirement shall void any entitlement to reimburse- ment. The city shall not
be permitted to reimburse anyone for expenses who fails to comply with the
provisions hereof.
(‘69 Code, § 5-191) (Ord. 572, passed 8-19-81; Am. Ord. 689, passed 4-4-84)
§ 34.85 ADVANCEMENTS.
   Notwithstanding any of the foregoing restrictions and limitations, the City
Commission may make, or authorize the making of, advances to cover anticipated
costs of travel to travelers. Such advancements must be authorized prior to the
travel by the Commission and may not be retroactively authorized.
(‘69 Code, § 5-193) (Ord. 572, passed 8-19-81)
DRUG FREE WORKPLACE
§ 34.89 POLICY STATEMENT.
   (A)   The city is committed to provide a safe work environment for its
employees, community, and society. Substance abuse is a national problem which
impairs the health and safety of employees, promotes crime, and harms our
community. The city is addressing this problem by instituting a drug free
workplace program.
   (B)   Substance abuse is a complex yet treatable disease. The ultimate goal
of this policy is to balance our respect for individual privacy with our need
to keep a safe, productive, drug free environment. Our intention is to prevent
and treat substance abuse. We would like to encourage those who use drugs or
abuse alcohol to seek help in overcoming their problem. The city considers
substance abuse to be an unsafe and counter-productive work practice.
   (C)   The city’s policy is in accordance with the state drug free workplace
program, as provided in F.S. § 440.102 and Rule 38F-9.001 of the Florida
Administrative Code.
   (D)   To ensure a work place free from the influence of illegal drugs and
alcohol abuse, the following policy has been established.
   (E)   It is the policy of the city that an employee found with the presence
of alcohol or illegal drugs in his/her system, or in possession of, using,
selling, trading, or offering for sale illegal drugs or alcohol during working
hours, may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination.
(City-sponsored activities which may include the service of alcoholic beverages
are not included in this provision).
   (F)   An employee reporting for work visibly impaired is unable to properly
perform required duties and will not be allowed to work. If possible, the
supervisor should first seek another supervisor’s opinion of the employee’s
status. Then the supervisor should consult privately with the employee with the
observation, to rule out any problems that may have been caused by prescription
drugs.
   (G)   If, in the opinion of the supervisor, the employee is considered
impaired, the employee should be sent home, after drug testing by a medical
facility, by taxi or other safe transportation alternative, depending on the
determination of the observed im-pairment, accompanied by the supervisor or
another employee, if necessary. An impaired employee should not be allowed to
drive. The prescribed test direction form shall be completed by the supervisor.
   (H)   Prescription drugs prescribed by the employee’s physician may be taken
during working hours. The employee shall notify the supervisor if the use of
properly prescribed drugs will affect the employee’s work performance. Abuse of
prescription drugs will not be tolerated.
   (I)   It is the responsibility of the city’s super- visors to counsel with
an employee whenever they see changes in performance that suggest an employee
problem. The supervisor may suggest that the employee voluntarily seek help
from the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) or decide that the severity of the
observed problem is such that a formal referral to the EAP should be made.
(Ord. 1248, passed 1-7-98)
§ 34.90 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol (ethanol) and includes distilled spirits, wine, malt
beverages, and intoxicating liquors.
   ALCOHOL ABUSE. An employee shall be determined to be under the influence of
alcohol if the employee’s normal faculties are impaired due to the consumption
of alcohol or the employee blood alcohol level is 0.045 or higher.
   DRUG TESTING. Any chemical, biological, or physical instrumental analysis
for the purpose of determining the presence of an illegal drug or its
metabolites, including alcohol. DRUG TESTING may require the collection of
blood, urine, breath, saliva, or hair of an employee or job applicant.
      (1)   INITIAL DRUG TEST. A screening procedure of the blood and urine or
employees and job applicants for the presence of alcohol and illegal drugs in
accordance with the state drug free work-place program and appropriate state
administrative rules. All levels equal to or exceeding the following shall be
reported as positive:
   Alcohol   0.05 G%
   Amphetamines   1,000 NG/ML
   Cannabinoids   100 NG/ML
   Cocaine   300 NG/ML
   Phencyclidine   25 NG/ML
   Methaqualone   300 NG/ML
   Opiates   300 NG/ML
   Barbiturates   300 NG/ML
   Benzodiazepines   300 NG/ML
   Synthetic Narcotics:
    Methadone   300 NG/ML
    Propoxyphene   300 NG/ML
      (2)   CONFIRMATION TEST. A second test of all specimens identified as
positive on an initial test in accordance with the state drug free workplace
program and appropriate state administrative rules. All levels equal to or
exceeding the following shall be reported as positive:
   Alcohol   0.05 G%
   Cannabinoids   15 NG/ML
   Cocaine   150 NG/ML
   Phencyclidine   25 NG/ML
   Methaqualone   150 NG/ML
   Opiates   300 NG/ML
   Barbiturates   150 NG/ML
   Benzodiazepines   150 NG/ML
   Synthetic Narcotics:
    Methadone   150 NG/ML
    Propoxyphene   150 NG/ML
      (3)   METHODOLOGY. Specimens for drug testing will be collected, handled,
maintained, and tested in accordance with the state drug free workplace program
and the appropriate administrative rules. Urine will be used for the initial
and  confirmation tests for all drugs except alcohol. Blood will be used for
the initial and confirmation tests for alcohol.
   DRUGS. Alcohol, amphetamines, cannabinoids, cocaine, phencyclidine (PCP),
hallucinogens, synthetic narcotics, designer drugs, or a metabolite of any of
the substances listed above.
   EMPLOYEE. An individual who works for the city on a full-time basis and
receives compensation.
   ILLEGAL DRUGS. Any drug(s) which is not legally obtainable, which may be
legally obtainable but has not been legally obtained, or which is being used in
a manner or for a purpose other than as prescribed.
   JOB APPLICANT. A person who has applied for a position with the city and has
been offered employment conditioned upon successfully passing a drug test.
   LEGAL DRUG. Prescribed drugs and over-the-counter drugs which have been
legally obtained and are being used solely for the purpose for which they were
prescribed or manufactured.
   MEDICAL REVIEW OFFICER or MRO. A licensed physician with knowledge of
prescription drugs, pharmacology, and toxicology of drugs, who is responsible
for receiving and reviewing all positive confirmed test results and who is
responsible for contacting all individuals who test positive in a confirmation
test to inquire about possible medications which could have caused a positive
result.
   POSITIVE CONFIRMED TEST FOR CON- FIRMATION TEST. A second procedure which
confirms a positive result from an initial drug test.
   PRESCRIPTION or NON-PRESCRIPTION MEDICATION. A drug or medication obtained
pursuant to a prescription as defined by F.S. § 893.02, or a medication that is
authorized pursuant to a federal or state law for general distribution and use
without a prescription in the treatment of human diseases, ailments, or
injuries.
   REASONABLE SUSPICION DRUG TESTING. Drug testing based on a belief that an
employee is using or has used drugs in violation of this policy, drawn from
specific, objective, and documented facts and reasonable inferences drawn from
those facts in light of experience. Among other things, such facts and
inferences may be based upon:
      (1)   Observable phenomena while at work, such as direct observation of
drug use or of the physical symptoms or manifestations of being under the
influence of a drug.
      (2)   Abnormal conduct or erratic behavior while at work or a significant
deterioration of work performance, either or both of which are recognized
symptoms of alcohol or drug abuse and which are not adequately explained by the
employee or are not related to the employee’s working conditions.
      (3)   A report of drug use, provided by a reliable and credible source,
which has been independently corroborated. (Test direction form shall be used.)
      (4)   Evidence that an employee has tampered with a drug test during his
employment with the current employer.
      (5)   Information that an employee has caused or contributed to an
accident while at work.
      (6)   Evidence that an employee has illegally used, possessed, sold,
solicited, or transferred drugs while working or while on the city’s premises
or while operating a vehicle, machinery, or equipment of the city.
   SPECIMEN. A tissue or product of the human body, including blood, urine,
saliva, or hair, capable or revealing the presence of alcohol and/or illegal
drugs or their metabolites.
(Ord. 1248, passed 1-7-98)
§ 34.91 GENERAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Types of testing. In order to maintain a drug and alcohol free work
environment, the city will test for the presence of alcohol and drugs in the
following circumstances:
      (1)   Job applicants. All job applicants who have been offered a position
of employment are required to take a drug and alcohol test.
      (2)   Reasonable suspicion. All employees who are determined to be under
reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol use (as defined herein) are required to
take a drug and alcohol test.
      (3)   Fitness for duty. All employees who are subject to routine fitness
for duty medical examinations are required to take a drug and alcohol test as
part of their medical examination.
      (4)   Follow-up. All employees who have been referred to an employee
assistance program or rehabilitation program by the city for drug and/or
alcohol abuse are required to take drug and alcohol tests on a quarterly, semi-
annual, or annual basis for two years after returning to work.
      (5)   Post accident or injury. Employees who are involved in a job-
related accident or incident and who appear to be contributory, which results
or might have resulted in bodily injury or property loss or damage.
   (B)   Consequences of refusing a drug test.
      (1)   An employee who refuses to submit to a drug test will be subject to
discipline, up to and including termination. An employee who refuses to submit
to a drug test also will forfeit his eligibility for all worker’s compensation,
medical, and indemnity benefits.
      (2)   A job applicant who refuses to submit to a drug test will not be
hired.
   (C)   Actions following a positive confirmed test. The city may institute
disciplinary action, up to and including termination, for any employee who has
a positive, confirmed drug test.
   (D)   Confidentiality.
      (1)   Confidentiality of records concerning drug testing will be
maintained except to the extent necessary to comply with this policy. All
information, reports, memos, and drug test reports, written or otherwise,
received by the city through the drug testing program will be kept confidential
as provided by law.
      (2)   The city, its Employee Assistance Program, laboratories, and drug
and alcohol rehabilitation programs who receive or have access to information
concerning drug test results shall keep all information confidential. No such
information will be released unless there is a voluntary written consent,
signed by an employee or job applicant, except where such release is compelled
by a court pursuant to an appeal taken under this section, or where deemed
appropriate by a professional or occu-pational licensing board in a related
disciplinary proceeding.
      (3)   The city will maintain records con-cerning drug testing separate
and apart from an employee’s or job applicant’s personnel file. Information on
drug testing results shall not be released in an criminal hearing.
   (E)   Reporting of use of medication. Employees and job applicants may
confidentially report the use of prescription or non-prescription medication
both before and after having a drug test. A form for reporting medication use
shall be available from the city.
   (F)   Notice of common medications. A list of the most common medications,
by brand name or common name, as applicable, as well as by chemical name, which
may alter or affect a drug test is set forth in §
34.93. Employees and job applicants should review this list prior to submitting
to a drug test.
   (G)   Medication information. An employee or job applicant may consult with
the testing laboratory for technical information regarding prescription and
non-prescription medication.
   (H)   Employee Assistance Program. Reference should be made to the Employee
Assistance Program policy for the name, address, and telephone number of the
current provider. Other resources available are:
      1 (800) 356-9996   AL-Anon
      1 (800) 527-5344   American Council of Alcoholism Helpline
      1 (800) COCAINE   Cocaine Hotline
      1 (800) NCA-CALL   National Council on Alcoholism
      1 (800) 662-HELP   National Institute on Drug Abuse Hotline
      1 (800) 843-4971   National Institute on Drug Abuse Hotline
   (I)   Drugs to be tested. A list of drugs by brand names or common names is
set forth in §
34.93. The cut-off levels for reporting positive initial and con- firmation
drug tests are set forth in §
34.90. Drugs that will be tested are as follows:
      (1)   Alcohol, including distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, and
intoxicating liquors.
      (2)   Amphetamines.
      (3)   Cannabinoids.
      (4)   Cocaine.
      (5)   Phencyclidine (PCP).
      (6)   Hallucinogens.
      (7)   Methaqualone.
      (8)   Opiates.
      (9)   Barbiturates.
      (10)   Benzodiazepines.
      (11)   Synthetic narcotics.
      (12)   Designer drugs.
      (13)   A metabolite of any substance listed herein.
   (J)   Challenge of test results.
      (1)   An employee or job applicant who receives a positive confirmed test
result may contest or explain the result in writing within five days of receipt
of notification of a positive confirmed test result.
      (2)   If the explanation or challenge of the employee or job applicant is
unsatisfactory to the city, the city within 15 days of receipt will provide a
written explanation as to why the employee or job applicant’s explanation is
unsatisfactory and a copy of the report of positive confirmed test results.
      (3)   An employee may further challenge the results of the test in a
court of competent juris-diction or, if the drug test was administered due to a
workplace injury, by filing a claim for benefits with a judge of compensation
claims, pursuant to F.S. Chapter 440.
      (4)   If an employee or job applicant contests the drug test results, he
or she must notify the laboratory.
   (K)   Right under collective bargaining agree- ments. Employees who are
covered under a collective bargaining agreement between the city and any
collective bargaining unit may have a right to file a grievance regarding
discipline imposed by the city as a result of a violation of this policy.
(Ord. 1248, passed 1-7-98)
§ 34.92 POLICY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Conditions of pre-employment. The city will conduct pre-employment
screening examinations designed to prevent hiring individuals who use drugs.
      (1)   To determine the suitability of employees to work for the city, the
following pre-employment conditions are established:
         (a)   All job applicants will be tested prior to employment for drug
use and alcohol use. Any job offer which a job applicant may receive from the
city is contingent upon successfully completing a required physical
examination.
         (b)   Any job applicant who refuses to submit to drug and alcohol
testing as part of the pre-employment testing process will be refused
employment.
         (c)   Any job applicant who tests positive for drugs or alcohol use
will be refused employment at that time.
      (2)   Confidentiality will be maintained pursuant to this policy.
      (3)   The city will not discriminate against applications for employment
because of the past abuse of drugs or alcohol. It is the current abuse of drugs
or alcohol that the city will not tolerate.
   (B)   Current employee drug and alcohol abuse screening. The city will
maintain screening practices to identify employees who use illegal drug or
abuse alcohol. It shall be a condition of continued employment for all
employees to submit to drug screening under the following conditions:
      (1)   Reasonable suspicion. All employees who are determined to be under
reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol use (as defined herein) are required to
take a drug and alcohol test.
      (2)   Fitness for duty. All employees who are subject to routine fitness
for duty medical examinations are required to take a drug and alcohol test as
part of their medical examination.
      (3)   Follow-up. All employees who have been referred to an employee
assistance program or rehabilitation program by the city for drug and/or
alcohol abuse are required to take drug and alcohol tests on a quarterly, semi-
annual, or annual basis for two years after returning to work.
      (4)   Post accident or injury. Employees who are involved in a job-
related accident or incident and who appear to be contributory, which results
or might have resulted in bodily injury or property loss or damage.
   (C)   Employee Assistance Program.
      (1)   The city maintains an employee assistance program (EAP) which
provides help to employees and their families who suffer from alcohol or drug
abuse. (Refer to EAP Policy)
      (2)   It is the responsibility of each employee to seek assistance before
drugs and alcohol lead to disciplinary problems.
      (3)   Once a violation of this policy occurs, subsequent use of the
employee assistance program, on a voluntary basis, will not affect the
determination of appropriate disciplinary action.
      (4)   (a)   An employee’s decision to seek assistance from the Employee
Assistance Program on a voluntary basis prior to an incident warranting
disciplinary action will not be used as the basis for disciplinary action or in
any disciplinary proceeding.
         (b)   On the other hand, using the EAP will not be a defense to the
imposition of disciplinary action where facts, providing violation of this
policy, are obtained outside of the EAP. Accordingly, the purpose and practices
of this policy and the EAP are not in conflict but are distinctly separate in
their applications.
      (5)   Through the EAP, the city will provide appropriate assessment,
referral to treatment, and treatment of drug and alcohol abuse (subject to the
provisions of the city’s health insurance plan). Such employees may be granted
leave with a conditional return to work depending on successful completion of
the agreed-upon appropriate treatment regimen and in accordance with the career
services rules and regulations and any departmental rules and regulations.
      (6)   Upon successful completion of a drug and/or alcohol treatment
program, an employee may be released to resume work but will be subject to drug
testing on a random, periodic basis, at least quarterly, for at least two years
thereafter as a condition of continued employment.
      (7)   An individual’s participation in the program will not be made part
of any personnel records and will remain confidential, except to the extent
necessary to comply with this policy. Medical and insurance records, if any,
will be preserved in the same confidential manner as all other medical records
and be retained in a separate file as provided by law.
   (D)   Management’s responsibility.
      (1)   Supervisors are responsible for implementing the drug and alcohol
free work place policy. It is the responsibility of the supervisors to observe
the behavior of employees on the job as a precaution against unstable or
unreliable behavior which could threaten the safety and well-being of employees
and the community.
      (2)   Supervisors are responsible for maintaining a safe work environment
by determining the fitness for duty of employees.
      (3)   In the event a supervisor has a reasonable suspicion that an
employee may be affected by drugs or alcohol, the employee must be sent for
drug testing. A form for reporting the reason(s) for drug testing is available
from the city.
      (4)   In all cases when an employee is being removed from duty for drug
testing, the supervisor should notify his or her superior at the earliest
possible time.
   (E)   Employees responsibility.
      (1)   It is each employee’s responsibility to be fit for duty when
reporting for work and to inform his or her supervisor if the employee is under
prescription or non-prescription medication which may affect job performance.
      (2)   In the event an employee observes behavior which raises a doubt as
to the ability of a co-worker to work in a safe, reliable, and trustworthy
manner, the employee should report this behavior to his supervisor.
      (3)   Employees who voluntarily enter a drug or alcohol treatment and/or
rehabilitation program at the request or insistence of the city or, as a
condition of continued employment, enter a drug or alcohol treatment and/or
rehabilitation program are required to participate and complete recommended
treatment. Any employee who enters a drug or alcohol treatment and/or
rehabilitation program will be responsible for payment of the treatment and/or
program. If the employee fails to comply with the treatment and/or the program,
the employee will be subject to discipline, up to and including termination.
   (F)   Medical Review Officer’s (MRO) responsibilities.
      (1)   The MRO will review all information from the testing laboratory in
the event of a positive, confirmed test. The MRO will review any information
from the employee or job applicant regarding the use of medication or other
relevant medical information set forth in the form submitted prior to drug
testing.
      (2)   The MRO may request that the testing laboratory provide
quantification of test results.
      (3)   The MRO will provide his or her interpretation of positive,
confirmed test results to the personnel director.
      (4)   The MRO will assist employees in an employee assistance program,
monitor the employee’s progress, and confirm completion of the treatment
program.
(Ord. 1248, passed 1-7-98)
§ 34.93 LIST OF DRUGS BY TRADE OR COMMON NAMES.
   (A)   Narcotics.
Drug Trade or Common Name
Drug          Trade or Common Name
Codeine       Tylenol with codeine, Empirin compound with codeine, Robitussin
              A-C
Heroin        Diacetylmorphine, horse, smack
Hydromorphine Dilaudid
Meperidine    Demerol, Mepergan
(Pethidine)
Methadone     Dolophine, Methadone, Methadose
Morphine      Morphine, pectoral syrup
Opium         Dover’s powder, Paregoric, Parepectolin
Others        Laam, Leritine, Numorphan, Percodan, Tussionex, Fentanyl, Darvon,
              Talwin, Lomotil
 
   (B)   Depressants.
 
Drug            Trade or Common Name
Barbiturates    Phenobarbital, Tuinal, Amytal, Nembutal, Seconal, Lotusate
Benzodiazepines Atavan, Azene, Clonopin, Dalmane, Diazepam, Librium, Xanax,
                Serax, Tranxene, Valium, Verstran, Halcion, Paxipam, Restoril
Chloral hydrate Noctec, Somnos
Glutethimide    Doriden
Methaqualone    Quaalude
Others          Equanil, Miltown, Noludar, Placidyl, Valmid
 
   (C)   Stimulants.
 
Drug            Trade or Common Name
Amphetamines    Biphetamine, Delcobese, Desoxyn, Dexedrene, Metiatric
Cocaine         Coke, flake, snow, crack
Methylphenidate Ritalin
Phenmetrazine   Preludin
Others          Adipex, Bacarate, Cylert, Didrex, Ionamin, Plegine, Presate,
                Sanorex, Tenuate, Tepanil, Voranil
 
   (D)   Hallucinogens.
 
Drug                  Trade or Common Name
Amphetamine variants  2.5-DMA, PMA, STP, MDA, MDMA, TMA, DOM, DOB
LSD                   Acid, microdot
Mescaline and peyote  Mesc, buttons, cactus
Phencyclidine         PCP, angel dust, hog
Phencyclidine analogs PCE, PCPY, TCP
Others                Bufotenine, Ibogaine, DMT, DET, Psilocyn
 
   (E)   Cannabis.
 
Drug                  Trade or Common Name
Hashish               Hash
Hashish oil           Hash oil
Marijuana             Pot, Acapulco gold, grass, reefer, sinsemolla, Thai
                      sticks
Tetrahydro-cannabinol THC
 
(Ord. 1248, passed 1-7-98)
§ 34.94 OVER-THE-COUNTER AND PRESCRIPTION DRUGS WHICH COULD ALTER OR AFFECT THE
OUTCOME OF A DRUG TEST.
   The following over-the-counter and prescription drugs could alter or affect
the outcome of a drug test:
   ALCOHOL. All liquid medications containing ethyl alcohol (ethanol). Please
read the label for alcohol content. As an example, Vick’s Nyquil is 25% (50
PROOF) ethyl alcohol; Comtrex is 20% (40 PROOF); Contact Severe Cold Formula
Night Strength is 25 % (50 PROOF); and Listerine is 26.9% (55 PROOF).
   AMPHETAMINES. Obetrol, Bibhetamine, Desoxyn, Dexedrine, Didrex.
   BARBITURATES. Phenobarbital, Tuinal, Amytal, Nembutal, Seconal, Lotusate,
Fiorinal, Fioricet, Esgic, Butisol, Mebaril, Butabarbital, Butabital,
Phrenilin, Triad.
   BENZODIAZEPINES. Atavan, Azene, Clonopin, Dalmane, Diazepam, Librium, Xanax,
Serax, Tranxene, Valium, Verstran, Halcion, Paxipam, Restorial, Centrax.
   CANNABINOIDS. Marinol (dronabinol, THC)
   COCAINE. Cocaine HCI Topical Solution.
   METHADONE. Dolophine, Methadose.
   METHAQUALONE. Not legal by prescription.
   PHENCYCLIDINE. Not legal by prescription.
   PROPOXYPHENE. Darvocet, Darvon N, Dolene.
   OPIATES. Paregoric, Parepectolin, Donnagel, PG, Morphine, Tylenol with
codeine, Empirin with codeine, APAP with codeine, aspirin with codeine,
Robitussin A-C, Guiatuss AC, Novahistine DH, Novahistine Expectorant, Dilaudid
(hydromorphine), —S Contin and Roxanol (morphine sulfate), Percodan, Vicidin.
DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY FOR SAFETY SENSITIVE EMPLOYEES
§ 34.95 INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   On April 30, 2001, the Federal Transit Administration (FTA) introduced
a new regulation on drug and alcohol testing. This regulation effectively
superseded and combined into a single instruction its drug and alcohol testing
rules which were previously published in two separate directives. At the same
time, some of the included provisions were rewritten to be more consistent with
similar requirements imposed by other U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT)
agencies.
   (B)   The new regulation, published as 49 CFR Part 655, “Prevention of
Prohibited Drug Use and Alcohol Misuse in Transit Operations,” requires each
employer receiving FTA funding assistance or who performs certain functions for
or on behalf of such a recipient to establish and implement an anti-drug and
alcohol testing program that must include the following elements:
      (1)   A statement describing the employer’s policy on prohibited drug use
and alcohol misuse in the workplace, including consequences associated with
prohibited drug else and alcohol misuse.
      (2)   An educational and training program, which includes the display and
distribution of informational materials and a community service hotline
telephone number, if available.
      (3)   A testing program that meets the requirements outlined in 49 CFR
Part 655 and DOT regulation 49 CFR Part 40, “Procedures for Transportation
Workplace Drug and Alcohol Testing Procedures.”
      (4)   Procedures for referring a covered employee who has a verified
positive drug or alcohol test result to a substance abuse professional.
   (C)   This drug and alcohol testing policy and procedures subchapter is
provided to help employees n their representative better understand the
requirements. A copy of this policy shall be distributed to all current safety-
sensitive transit employees, posted on division bulletin boards, available on-
line via request, and issued to each new safety-sensitive employee as part of a
general orientation procedure.
   (D)   The policy and testing program described has been updated to include
all FTA and DOT rule changes, interpretations, and clarifications published
through September 30, 2001.
   (E)   The city is dedicated to assuring equitable application of this
policy. Therefore, supervisors and mangers are required to use and apply all
aspects of this policy in an unbiased and impartial manner. Any supervisor/
manager who knowingly disregards the requirements, or is found to deliberately
misuse the policy in regard to employees, will be subject to disciplinary
action, up to an including termination.
   (F)   The FTA regulation requires each employer to give each employee
subject to this policy at least 60 minutes of training on the effects and
consequences of prohibited drug use on his or her personal health, safety, and
the work environment, and the signs and symptoms that may indicate prohibited
drug use. Additionally, each employer must provide to ever supervisor who may
make reasonable suspicion determinations at least 60 minutes of training on the
physical, behavioral and performance indicators of probable drug use and at
least 60 minutes of training on the physical, behavioral, speech, and
performance indications of alcohol misuse.
(Ord. 1399, passed 3-20-02)
§ 34.96 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this policy is to assure worker fitness for duty and to
protect our employees and passengers from the risk posed by use of alcohol and
prohibited drugs.
   (B)   This policy complies with applicable law, including the Drug-Free
Workplace Act of 1988, Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act of 1991, and
associated U.S. Department of Transportation and Federal Transit Administration
regulations.
   (C)   Signs and symptoms. Except for odor, these are the general signs and
symptoms of any depressant substance:
      (1)   Dulled mental processes: lack of coordination;
      (2)   Odor of alcohol on breath;
      (3)   Slurred speech;
      (4)   Possible constricted pupils;
      (5)   Slowed reaction time; and/or
      (6)   Sleepy or stuporous condition.
   (D)   Health effects. The chronic consumption of alcohol (average of three
servings per day of beer [12 ounces], whiskey [1 ounce], or wine [6-ounce
glass]) over time may result in the following associated health hazards:
      (1)   Fatal liver disease;
      (2)   Kidney disease, pancreatitis, ulcers;
      (3)   Increased cancers of the mouth, tongue, pharynx, esophagus, rectum,
breast, and malignant melanoma;
      (4)   Spontaneous abortion and neonatal mortality;
      (5)   Birth defects (up to 54% of all birth defects are alcohol related);
      (6)   Decreased sexual functioning; and/or
      (7)   Dependency (up to 10% of people who drink alcohol become physically
and/or mentally dependent upon alcohol and can be termed “alcoholic”).
   (E)   Annual toll.
      (1)   24,000 people will die on the highway due to the legally impaired
driver;
      (2)   12,000 more will die on the highway due to an alcohol-affected
driver;
      (3)   15,800 will die in non-highway accidents;
      (4)   30,000 will die due to alcohol-caused liver damage;
      (5)   10,000 will die due to alcohol-induced brain disease or suicide;
and
      (6)   Up to another 125,000 die due to alcohol- related conditions or
accidents.
   (F)   Social issues.
      (1)   Two-thirds of all homicides are committed by people who drink prior
to the crime;
      (2)   Alcoholics are 15 times more likely to commit suicide than other
segments of the population;
      (3)   2 to 3% of the driving population is legally drunk at one time
(this rate is doubled at night and on weekends);
      (4)   Two-thirds of all Americans will be involved in an alcohol-related
vehicle accident during their lifetime.
      (5)   The rate of separation and divorce is seven times the average in
families with alcohol dependency problems;
      (6)   40% of family court cases are alcohol problem-related; and
      (7)   More than 60% of burns, 40% of falls, 69% of boating accidents, and
76% of private aircraft accidents are alcohol-related.
   (G)   Workplace issues.
      (1)   It takes one hour for the average person (150 pounds) to process
one serving of an alcoholic beverage from the body;
      (2)   Impairment in coordination and in judgment can be objectively
measured with as little as two drinks in the body; and
      (3)   A person who is legally intoxicated is six times more likely to
have an accident than a sober one.
   (H)   If you suspect a problem involving alcohol or drugs you may request
confidential, professional help by calling the Employee Assistance Program
Office at 954-435-6582 or by visiting the EAP at 501 NW 103 Avenue, Pembroke
Pines.
   (I)   You may also call a substance abuse “hotline” number, such as the
American Council on Alcoholism, 800-356-9996; National Institute on Drug Abuse,
800-662-HELP; National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence, 800-NCA-CALL;
Alcoholics Anonymous, 800-870-3795; United Way of Broward County, 954-467-6333;
or any state or local substance abuse clearinghouse.
(Ord. 1399, passed 3-20-02)
§ 34.97 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This policy applies to all safety-sensitive employees, volunteers and
contractors, and other employees when they are on transit property or
performing transit-related business. This policy applies to off-site lunch
periods or breaks when the employee is scheduled to return to duty. A safety-
sensitive function is any duty related to the safe operation of transportation
services including the operation, dispatch, and maintenance or repair of a
revenue service vehicle, whether or not the vehicle is in revenue service, and
other employees whose job functions require they hold a commercial driver’s
license or provide armed security.
   (B)   Listed below are the city positions determined to be safety-sensitive.
The city may modify the list as required under federal, state or local
regulation or as needed to ensure continued vitality of a comprehensive drug
and alcohol testing program.
      (1)   A/C mechanic I, II, III;
      (2)   Carpenter I, II, III;
      (3)   Electrician I, II, III;
      (4)   Plumber I, II, III;
      (5)   Irrigation workers;
      (6)   Maintenance workers;
      (7)   Maintenance crew laborer;
      (8)   Communications technician;
      (9)   Recreation laborer;
      (10)   Recreation supervisor;
      (11)   Special events coordinator;
      (12)   Recreation laborer/heavy equipment;
      (13)   Painter;
      (14)   Aquatic specialist;
      (15)   Utility service worker I, II; and
      (16)   Van driver.
   (C)   Employees included in the above-listed labor classifications must
participate in a drug and alcohol testing program as a condition of employment.
   (D)   This policy is effective upon receipt and continues in effect until
superseded or canceled by competent authority.
(Ord. 1399, passed 3-20-02)
§ 34.98 PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   Illegally used controlled substances and drugs. Controlled substances
are any illegal drug or substance identified in Schedules I through V of
Section 202 of the Controlled Substance Act (21 USC 8121), and as further
defined in 21 CFR 1300. These substances include, but are not limited to,
marijuana, amphetamines, opiates, phencyclidine, and cocaine, as well as any
drug not approved for medical use by the Drug Enforcement Administration or the
Food and Drug Administration. Illegal use includes use of illegally-obtained
prescription drugs.
   (B)   Legal drugs. The use of legally-prescribed drugs or nonprescription
medications is not prohibited. A legally-prescribed drug means that the
individual has a prescription or other written approval from a physician for
the use of the drug in the course of medical treatment. It must include the
patient’s name, the substance, quantity/amount to be taken, and the period of
authorized use. However, the use of any substance that carries a warning label
that mental functioning, motor skill or judgment may be affected adversely
should be reported to supervisory personnel, and medical advice should be
sought, as applicable, before performing work-related duties. The misuse or
abuse of legal drugs while performing transit business is prohibited.
   (C)   Alcohol. The use of products containing alcohol or substances
including any medication, mouthwash, food, candy, or any other substance such
that alcohol is present in the body while performing transit business is
prohibited.
(Ord. 1399, passed 3-20-02)
§ 34.99 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person covered by this policy shall engage in the manufacture,
distribution, dispensing, possession, or use of prohibited substances on
transit property, in transit vehicles, in uniform, or while on transit
business. Law enforcement officials shall be notified when criminal activity is
suspected.
   (B)   Employees found to be under the influence of a prohibited substance or
who test positive for a prohibited drug or alcohol concentration shall be
immediately removed from duty. Any safety-sensitive employee who is reasonably
suspected of being intoxicated, impaired, under the influence of a prohibited
substance, or not fit for duty shall be removed from duty pending verification
of condition.
   (C)   A drug or alcohol lost is considered positive if the individual is
found to have a quantifiable presence of a prohibited substance in the body
above minimum thresholds defined in 49 CFR Part 40.
   (D)   No safety-sensitive emp1oyee should report for duty or remain on duty
when his or her ability to function could be adversely affected by alcohol. No
employee shall be permitted to perform assigned safety- sensitive duties when
his or her breath alcohol concentration is 0.02 or greater. No safety-sensitive
employee shall use alcohol within four hours of reporting for duty, while on
call, or while on duty.
   (E)   All safety-sensitive employees will be subject to urine drug testing
and breath alcohol testing at any time while on duty. Any safety-sensitive
employee who refuses to comply with request for testing, who provides false
information in connection with a test, or who attempts to falsify results
through tampering, contamination, adulteration, or substitution shall be
immediately removed from duty. Refusal can include an inability to provide a
urine specimen or breath sample without valid medical explanation, as well as a
verbal declaration, obstructive behavior, or physical absence resulting in an
inability to conduct a test. Such refusal constitutes a positive result.
   (F)   Pursuant to the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988, employees must notify
the transit system within five days of a criminal drug statute conviction.
Failure to comply constitutes a violation of this policy.
(Ord. 1399, passed 3-20-02)
§ 34.100 TESTING FOR PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   The specific drugs that will be tested for are marijuana, cocaine,
opiates, amphetamines, and phencyclidine. An initial drug screen using
immunoassay techniques will be conducted in each specimen. For those specimens
which indicate one or more prohibited substances present, a confirmatory gas
chromatography/mass spectronomy (GC/MS) test will be performed. The test will
be considered positive if the amount present is equal or above the minimum
threshold established in 49 CFR Part40.
   (B)   Alcohol testing will be conducted using a National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration (NHTSA)-approved evidential breath testing (EBT) device
operated by a trained alcohol breath technician (BAT). Breath alcohol
concentration (BAC) is expressed in terms of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of
breath. If any initial test indicates a BAC of 0.02 or greater, a second test
will be performed to confirm the result. It is city policy that any employee
whose BAC is confirmed at 0.02 or greater, but less than 0.04, will be
suspended from duty for the remainder of his or her shift, which period shall
be not less than eight hours. A BAC of 0.04 or greater will be considered a
positive alcohol test result.
   (C)   The testing described in this policy will be independent and separate
from all other testing performed on behalf of the city and/or prevailing
federal, state and local requirements. All covered employees are subject to
testing for prohibited drug use and misuse of alcohol in the following
situations and/or circumstances:
      (1)   Pre-employment.
         (a)   All applicants for employment must first pass a pre-employment
drug test before being permitted to perform any safety-sensitive job function.
Also, an employee absent 90 consecutive days or longer, regardless of reason,
who has not been subject to random testing during that time will be required to
undergo pre-employment drug testing prior to resuming safety-sensitive duties.
         (b)   Employees or applicants must undergo pre-employment drug testing
before assignment to any position which requires the performance of safety-
sensitive duties. Only urine drug testing is required, and the result of pre-
employment drug testing must be a verified negative. Failure of a pre-
employment drug test will disqualify the applicant for employment or transfer.
Evidence of the absence of dependency from an accredited substance abuse
professional is required prior to further consideration for possible employment
in a safety-sensitive position.
         (c)   Applicants to safety-sensitive positions will be asked if they
have failed or refused to submit to pre-employment testing at any other DOT-
regulated employer in the past two years, regardless of hiring action, and will
be required to authorize the release of information regarding past drug and
alcohol testing during the past two years.
      (2)   Random.
         (a)   All safety-sensitive employees are subject to random drug and/or
alcohol testing at any time they are on duty and during all time periods that
safety-sensitive functions are being performed. Testing must be unannounced and
unpredictable. Once notified of a random testing requirement the employee must
proceed directly to the testing site.
         (b)   At least 50% of the total number of covered employees must be
tested each year for the use of prohibited drugs, and at least 10% tested for
alcohol. To satisfy this quota, all city safety-sensitive employees are
enrolled in a random testing pool, which may include a number of contractor
employees who perform safety-sensitive functions for or on behalf of the city.
         (c)   The frequency of testing is based upon the number of employees
in the pool and spread throughout the year, The odds of being selected in any
given selection cycle for a random drug and/or alcohol test are equal to the
number of employees enrolled in the pool at the time.
         (d)   An Occu-Med computer configured with a random number generator
selects employees for testing. It is possible that an employee could be
selected more than once during the year or even in consecutive selection
cycles.
      (3)   Reasonable suspicion. All safety-sensitive employees are subject to
drug and/or alcohol testing when there is reason to believe that drug or
alcohol use is adversely affecting job performance. Such determination will be
made on the basis of specific, contemporaneous, articulable observation
concerning the appearance, behavior, speech, or body odor of a covered
employee. The referral determination will be made by a supervisor trained to
detect the signs and symptoms of drug and alcohol use and who reasonably
concludes than the employee may be adversely affected or impaired in his or her
work performance due to prohibited drug use or alcohol misuse.
      (4)   Post-accident testing.
         (a)   The operator of a transit vehicle is required to undergo drug
and alcohol testing if involved in any “occurrence” associated with the
operation of the vehicle, whether or not the vehicle is in revenue service that
results in the loss of human life. Testing shall also be required for other
safety-sensitive employees on duty in the vehicle at the time as well as any
other employee whose performance of duty could have contributed to the
accident.
         (b)   Post-accident testing also must be conducted if any non-fatal
accident results in injuries requiring a person or persons being transported to
a medical treatment facility or if one or more vehicles incurs disabling damage
that requires towing from the site, unless the employee’s performance can be
completely discounted as a contributing factor to the accident. Employees
tested under this provision include not only the vehicle operator, but any
other covered employee whose performance could be a contributing factor, as
determined by the city and upon review and approval of the Director or his or
her designee.
         (c)   Post-accident testing must be conducted as soon as possible for
alcohol within (2 hours of the time of accident not to exceed 8 hours), and
within 32 hours for drugs.
         (d)   Any safety-sensitive employee involved in an accident must
refrain from alcohol use for eight hours following the accident or until
completion of a post-accident test or upon release by a supervisor. A safety
sensitive employee who leaves the scene of an accident without justifiable
explanation prior to submitting to drug and alcohol testing or who fails to
report to the collection facility within a reasonable time frame will be
considered to have refused to test.
(Ord. 1399, passed 3-20-02)
§ 34.101 SAFEGUARDS AND ASSURANCES.
   (A)   Testing shall be conducted in such a manner to assure the highest
degree of accuracy and reliability, and using techniques, equipment, and
laboratory facilities certified by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services(DHHS). All testing will be conducted consistent with the procedures
set forth in DOT regulation 49 CFR Part 40.
   (B)   All test results for prohibited drugs must be verified by a Medical
Review Officer (MRO). The MRO is a licensed physician functioning independent
of the city, whose qualifications include a demonstrated knowledge of substance
abuse disorders and who has appropriate medical training to interpret and
evaluate an individual’s confirmed positive drug result together with his or
her medical history and any other relevant biomedical information. All test
results must be verified by a qualified breath alcohol technician (BAT).
   (C)   Any employee may request that a representative be present in certain
activities related to the collection of specimens and during administrative
review and/or counseling, subject to the conditions imposed by 49 CFR Part 40.
The absence of such representations does not, by itself, negate or mitigate the
requirement to provide specimens and/or attend such review and counsel in
response to required drug and alcohol testing.
   (D)   Federal regulations impose strict procedural controls and accounting
mechanisms upon the collection site processing laboratory, the MRO, and the
transit system with respect to testing for prohibited drugs and alcohol. These
procedures require the use of tamper-proof specimen containers for urine
samples, employee certification of “ownership,” use of chain-of-custody
documentation, regimented quality control standards, including blank-air
testing for EBT devices and blind samples for urine testing, equipment
calibration testing, and specific certification and training standards.
   (E)   Only confirmatory tests will be used as evidence of prohibited drug
use or alcohol misuse. Testing which does not follow criteria outlined in 49
CFR Part 40 must be invalidated, or canceled, and reported as a negative
result. As a matter of policy, any urine specimen reported to the MRO as a
negative dilute will necessitate a retest. As a further safeguard, an employee
who questions a positive result of a required drug test tray request the MRO to
perform a second. separate test of the original specimen. The test must be
conducted at a different DHHS-certified laboratory and must utilize a split
sample that was provided at the same time as the original specimen. All costs
for such testing are paid by the employee unless the second test produces a
negative result. Inability to pay the cost of split specimen testing will not,
however, deny anyone the right to request such testing.
   (F)   The employee’s request for split specimen testing must be made in
writing within 72 hours of notice of the initial test result. Requests after 72
hours will be accepted if the delay was beyond the control of the employee and
reason for such delay is acceptable to the MRO.
   (G)   All test results are treated as confidential medical information. and
are handled only by designated personnel within the city who have a specific
need to know. Test results are not releaseable except as authorized by the
employee concerned, as required by the National Transportation Safety Board
during an accident investigation, as directed by the U.S. Department of
Transportation or a DOT agency with regulatory authority over the city, or to
the decision maker in a lawsuit, grievance, or other proceeding initiated by pr
on behalf of the employee.
   (H)   The employee has the right to review his or her alcohol testing
records, provide information to dispute the results, and shall have access to
any pertinent record such as equipment calibration records and records of
laboratory certifications. Copies of these records shall be made available to
the employee upon his or her written request.
   (I)   The application of this policy with respect to drug and alcohol
testing does not abridge anything included in a labor agreement, nor does it
infringe upon the employee’s right to redress under grievance, administrative,
or judicial proceedings.
(Ord. 1399, passed 3-20-02)
§ 34.102   EMPLOYEE ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Any safety-sensitive employee who tests positive for the presence of a
prohibited drug or alcohol must be evaluated by a substance abuse professional
(SAP) before returning to duty. A SAP is a licensed or certified physician,
psychologist, social worker, employee assistance professional, or addiction
counselor with knowledge of and clinical experience in the diagnosis and
treatment of drug and/or alcohol related disorders. The SAP will evaluate each
employee to determine what assistance, if any, the employee needs in resolving
associated problems. Assessment by a SAP does not shield an employee from
disciplinary action or guarantee employment or reinstatement with the city.
   (B)   If after a positive test result a safety-sensitive employee is allowed
to return to duty, the employee must properly follow the rehabilitation program
prescribed by the SAP, pass a return-to-duty drug and alcohol test, and agree
to be subject to a minimum of 6 unannounced follow-up tests for a period of at
least 12 months, and up to 5 years, from date of return to duty.
   (C)   If unavailable for follow-up testing due to approved leave of absence,
seasonal layoff, out or reassigned for worker’s compensation, temporary
assignment to non safety-sensitive duties or combination thereof for 30
consecutive days or longer, the employee shall be reevaluated by the SAP to
determine if the requirement/term of treatment and return to work agreement
shall be extended accordingly. The cost of treatment or rehabilitation services
is the responsibility of the employee or insurance provider.
   (D)   No employee who has tested positive may reenter the workforce without
agreeing to a last chance/rehabilitation regiment. However, such an agreement
is not an entitlement. This agreement may include, but is not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   A release to work statement from the substance abuse professional,
together with satisfactory evidence, of a verified negative test for drugs and/
or alcohol;
      (2)   A statement of agreement to comply with federal and city
requirements for treatment, aftercare and specified follow-up testing;
      (3)   A statement of expected work-related behaviors; and/or
      (4)   The agreement that any violation of the last chance/rehabilitation
agreement will result in a separation from employment.
(Ord. 1399, passed 3-20-02)
§ 34.103 CONSEQUENCES, PENALTIES AND SANCTIONS.
   (A)   Irrespective of possible criminal and/or civil proceedings which may
arise as a result of prohibited drug use or alcohol misuse, the city reserves
the right to apply administrative penalties and sanctions against an employee
who violates any rule encompassed by this policy.
   (B)   Minimum associated consequences of prohibited drug use and/or alcohol
misuse are as follows:
      (1)   Removal from duty. (remainder of the day or work shift for a
minimum of eight consecutive hours):
         (a)   Reporting for or remaining on duty with a BAC(breath alcohol
concentration) of 0.02 or greater; or
         (b)   Consumption of alcohol within four hours of reporting or
returning to duty.
      (2)   Referral to a SAP. A positive test result for a prohibited drug or
a BAC of 0.04 or greater; or
      (3)   Dismissal. Violation under one or more of the following
circumstances or conditions constitutes a severe affront to the safety and
well-being of other employees and the general public, and is punishable as a
major infraction of policy under “due cause proceedings.”
         (a)   Engaging in the manufacture, distribution, dispensing,
possession, and/or use of a prohibited substance on transit division property,
in transit vehicles, in uniform, or while on transit division business;
         (b)   Refusal to submit to drug alcohol testing, including the
inability to provide an adequate specimen or breath sample without valid
medical explanation;
         (c)   Leaving the scene of an accident without proper authority,
resulting in the inability to conduct drug and/or alcohol testing;
         (d)   Obstructive behavior, providing false information in connection
with a test, or attempting, to falsify test results through tampering,
contamination, adulteration, or substitution of specimen samples;
         (e)   Failure to comply with transit system requirement for treatment
or with a prescribed aftercare program; and/or
         (f)   Failure to notify the city within five days of any criminal drug
statute conviction.
(Ord. 1399, passed 3-20-02)
§ 34.104 SYSTEM CONTACT.
   (A)   Employees who have any questions regarding this policy or any other
aspect of the city prohibited drug and alcohol testing program should contact
the city’s staff representative.
   (B)   If there are questions concerning specimen collections, laboratory
analysis, or any other procedural aspect of drug and/or alcohol testing, the
MRO should be contacted.
   (C)   The city employees and employees of contractors participating in the
city testing program may contact a SAP by calling or visiting the city’s
designated SAP.
   (D)   The city’s Human Resources Department should be contacted to obtain
the current representatives and providers referenced herein.
(Ord. 1399, passed 3-20-02)
§ 34.105 EMPLOYEE RECEIPT.
   Each city employee subject to this policy shall receive a copy of this
policy and sign and return a receipt to the city acknowledging the employees’s
receipt thereof.
(Ord. 1399, passed 3-20-02)
DONATION OF ACCRUED SICK/VACATION LEAVE
§ 34.115 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose and scope of this subchapter is to establish a donation of
accrued sick/vacation leave program to provide a uniform policy for the
donation of accrued sick/vacation leave by employees to another employee who is
absent from work due to critical illness or injury, and who has exhausted his/
her own personally accrued sick, annual, holiday and other compensatory leave.
(Ord. 1012, passed 10-21-92)
§ 34.116 POLICY.
   (A)   It shall be the policy of the city to permit other employees the
opportunity of donating accrued leave time to a designated employee whenever
extraordinary circumstances require the designated employee to be absent from
work for a lengthy period of time, and when the designated employee has
exhausted all of his/her personal accrued sick/vacation leave.
   (B)   Extraordinary circumstances shall be defined as, but not limited to,
lengthy hospitalization, critical illness or injury.
(Ord. 1012, passed 10-21-92)
§ 34.117 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Permission to solicit donations of accrued leave from departmental
personnel and/or city-wide personnel shall be submitted in writing to the
department director of the absent employee. The department director shall
consult with the Personnel Director, or designee, in reviewing such requests.
Consideration shall be given to the designated employee’s previous leave
history, as well as the nature of the illness or injury.
   (B)   Such written requests shall include employee’s name, reasons for
requesting such donations of accrued leave and approximate duration of absence,
if known.
   (C)   Upon approval of such request, the requesting department’s director
shall obtain a supply of the donation form, prepared by the Personnel
Department for application for donation of accrued sick/vacation leave, and
shall distribute these forms to employees willing to donate accrued leave time.
   (D)   As forms are completed by the donors, the department director shall
forward same to the Personnel Department who shall time date and stamp each
form in the order it is received and deduct donated time from the appropriate
balance. Donated time will be credited to the absent employee in the order in
which the forms are received.
   (E)   Donated time will be converted to a dollar value based on the current
rate of pay of each donor for hours donated and on the rate of pay of each
donee for hours utilized. The rate of pay used for each donor will be that in
effect at the time the application is signed.
   (F)   Time donated for this purpose will not be considered during the
donor’s performance rating period, nor will it affect a donor’s right to
convert accrued sick leave to cash payment, as established by the city’s Career
System Personnel Rules and Regulations.
   (G)   The Personnel Director, or designee, shall notify the appropriate
department director when donated time is nearly exhausted and that department
shall have the responsibility of requesting additional donated time, if
desired.
   (H)   The department director shall immediately notify the Personnel
Director, or designee, by phone of the absent employee’s return to work or of
any major change in the employee’s physical condition or employment status. In
the event of excess donations received, but not used, the Personnel Department
shall notify the department director of the donation forms voided and the time
returned to the donating employees. Donated time returned to a donor shall be
reflected in leave balances on the donor’s pay stub.
(Ord. 1012, passed 10-21-92; Am. Ord. 1100, passed 11-2-94)
457 DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN
§ 34.130 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   A 457 Deferred Compensation Plan for the employees of the Charter
Schools and Early Learning Centers is hereby established.
   (B)   A specific plan shall be established by resolution, which may be
amended from time to time by resolution of the City Commission.
(Ord. 1359, passed 12-20-00)
401(A) RETIREMENT PLAN
§ 34.140 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   A 401(A) Retirement Plan for the employees of the Charter Schools and
Early Learning Centers is hereby established.
   (B)   A specific plan shall be established by resolution, which may be
amended from time to time by resolution of the City Commission.
(Ord. 1345, passed 8-2-00; Am. Ord. 1401, passed 4-3-02)
MONEY PURCHASE RETIREMENT PLAN
§ 34.150 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A Money Purchase Retirement Plan in the form of the International Management
Association Retirement Prototype Money Purchase Plan and Trust for employees
electing the DROP program is hereby established.
(Res. 2647, passed 3-17-99)
DONATION OF ACCRUED SICK/ VACATION LEAVE FOR CHARTER SCHOOL AND EARLY LEARNING
CENTER EMPLOYEES
§ 34.160 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose and scope of this subchapter is to establish a donation of
accrued sick leave program to provide a uniform policy for the donation of
accrued sick leave by a Charter School or Early Learning Center employee to
another Charter School or Early Learning Center employee who is absent from
work due to critical illness or injury, and who has exhausted his or her own
personally accrued sick, annual, holiday and other compensatory leave.
(Ord. 1436, passed 3-5-03)
§ 34.161 POLICY.
   (A)   It shall be the policy of the city to permit other Charter School or
Early Learning Center employees the opportunity of donating accrued leave time
to a designated Charter School or Early Learning Center employee whenever
extraordinary circumstances require the designated Charter School or Early
Learning Center employee to be absent from work for a lengthy period of time,
and when the designated Charter School or Early Learning Center employee has
exhausted all of his or her personal accrued sick, annual, holiday and other
compensatory leave.
   (B)   Extraordinary circumstances shall be defined as, but not limited to,
lengthy hospitalization, critical illness or injury.
(Ord. 1436, passed 3-5-03)
§ 34.162 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Permission to solicit donations of accrued leave from any other
Charter School or Early Learning Center employees within the city shall be
submitted in writing to the principal of the charter school at which the
Charter School or Early Learning Center employee is employed by the absent
Charter School or Early Learning Center employee. The principal shall consult
with the Director of Human Resources, or his or her designee in reviewing such
requests. Consideration shall be given to the designated Charter School or
Early Learning Center employee’s previous leave history, as well as the nature
of the illness or injury.
   (B)   Such written requests shall include the Charter School or Early
Learning Center employee’s name, reasons for requesting such donations of
accrued sick leave and approximate duration of absence, if known.
   (C)   Upon arrival of such request, the requesting Charter School Early
Learning Center employee’s principal shall obtain a supply of the donation form
prepared by the Human Resources Department for application for donation of
accrued sick leave and shall distribute such forms to the Charter School Early
Learning Center employees willing to donate accrued sick leave time.
   (D)   As forms are completed by the donors, the principal shall forward same
to the Human Resources Department who shall time, date and stamp each form in
the order in which it is received and deduct donated time from the appropriate
balance. Donated time will be credited to the absent Charter School Early
Learning Center employee in the order in which the forms are received.
   (E)   Donated time will be converted to a dollar value based on the current
rate of pay of each donor for hours donated and on the rate of pay of each
donee for hours utilized. The rate of pay used for each donor will be that in
effect at the time the application is signed.
   (F)   Time donated for this purpose will not be considered during the
donor’s performance rating period, nor will it affect a donor’s right to
convert accrued sick leave to cash payment, as established by the Charter
School Employee Policies.
   (G)   The Director of Human Resources, or his or her designee, shall notify
the appropriate principal when donated time is nearly exhausted and that
principal shall have the responsibility of requesting additional donated time,
if desired.
   (H)   The principal shall immediately notify the Human Resources Director,
or his or her designee, of the absent Charter School Early Learning Center
employee’s return to work or of any major change in the Charter School Early
Learning Center employee’s physical condition or employment status. In the
event that excess donations are received, but not utilized, the Human Resources
Director, or designee, shall notify the principal of the donation forms voided
and the time returned to the donating Charter School Early Learning Center
employees. Donated time returned to a donor shall be reflected in leave
balances on the donor’s pay stub.
(Ord. 1436, passed 3-5-03)
OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFIT TRUST FUND
§ 34.170 CREATION, PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created a special fund to be known as the Post-
Employment Benefit Trust Fund ("Trust"). This fund is to be used exclusively
for the purpose provided for in this subchapter and shall be collected,
administered, and disbursed according to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The participation in and any coverage under the Trust shall not
constitute nor be construed to constitute a specific, accrued or vested benefit
for any specific employee or retiree unless otherwise specifically provided
within this subchapter.
   (C)   It is intended that the income of the Trust shall not be taxable
income of the Trust, as such Trust income shall accrue to the city, and such
income shall be derived from the exercise of an essential governmental function
as provided for under § 115(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, Revenue Rulings
77-261 and 9074, and other relevant guidance.
(Ord. 1598, passed 12-3-07)
§ 34.171 DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CUSTODIAN. A bank, mutual fund, savings and loan association, insurance
company or other qualified entity selected by the Trustees to hold and
administer the assets of the Trust Fund.
      DEPENDENT. A dependent, as defined in § 105(b) of the Internal Revenue
Code, of a retiree.
      HEALTH AND WELFARE BENEFIT. Any benefit considered a post-retirement
benefit other than pension under Governmental Accounting Standards Board
Statement No. 45 ("GASB 45"), including, but not limited to, health and life
insurance benefits.
      INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
      INVESTMENT COMMITTEE. That Investment Committee created pursuant to Ord.
1384 of the City Commission of the city.
      INVESTMENT CONSULTANT. An investment advisor selected in accordance with
the city's procurement policy.
      INVESTMENT FUND. An Investment Fund that forms part of the Trust Fund as
established by the Trustees.
      INVESTMENT MANAGER. An Investment Manager selected by the Investment
Consultant and approved by the Investment Committee.
      OPEB OBLIGATION. The city’s net OPEB Obligation pursuant to GASB 45, such
as the cumulative different between the annual OPEB cost (normal cost plus
unfunded actuarial accrued liabilities) and contributions to date for health
and welfare benefits.
      RETIREE. A person employed by the city who is eligible on the benefit
commencement date to receive retiree health insurance or life insurance
contributions from the city as a member or retiree of any retirement plan
offered by the city, and as defined in §§
34.65 through
34.70 of this code.
      PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR.  The City Manager or his or her designee.
      PROPERTY. Any property, real or personal, or partial interests therein,
wherever situated, including, but without being limited to, mutual funds,
preferred and common stocks, shares of investment companies, bonds, notes,
debentures and mortgages, certificates of deposit, equipment trust
certificates, investment trust certificates, interests in limited liability
companies, in partnerships whether limited or general or in any insurance
contract, policy, annuity, or other investment vehicles offered by an insurance
company, in which trust assets may be invested pursuant to Florida law and the
investment policy established for this Trust.
      REGULATION. A policy, procedure, rule or regulation adopted by the
Trustees, establishing administrative procedures or interpretations affecting
the Trust.
      TRUST. The Trust created and established by this subchapter.
      TRUST FUND. Such money, property, and all investments made therewith and
proceeds thereof and all earnings and profits thereon, less payments made by
the Trustees as authorized within this subchapter.
      TRUST YEAR. The 12-month period beginning each October 1 and ending the
following September 30 on which the books and records of the Trust are
maintained.
      TRUSTEES. The Trustees of the Trust serving from time to time in
accordance with the terms of this subchapter. References to a Trustee in this
subchapter shall refer to such person or persons in its or their capacity as
Trustee(s) pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   Rules of construction. Accounting terms and principles used herein or
applicable hereto shall be as defined and described from time to time by
pronouncements and other guidance of the Governmental Accounting Standards
Board, or any successor organization.
(Ord. 1598, passed 12-3-07)
§ 34.172 TRUST AND TRUST ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Appointment of Trustees. The Trustees of the Trust shall be the
designated by the City Manager from among the city's administrative staff in
accordance with staff qualifications as may be deemed appropriate. The Trustees
shall serve without compensation from the Trust Fund, but they may be
reimbursed from the Trust Fund for all necessary, reasonable and proper
expenses, such as travel, which they may actually expend in the performance of
their duties as a Trustee. Expenditures are not to exceed the limits imposed by
law, including, but not limited to F.S. § 112.061, as may be amended from time
to time.
   (B)   Trust Fund.
      (1)   The Trustees shall receive and accept for the purposes hereof all
contributions described herein and shall hold, invest, reinvest, manage,
administer, and distribute the property and the increments, proceeds, earnings
and income solely to provide health and welfare benefits as described herein.
      (2)   Upon reliance on advice provided by third-party professional money
managers or investment advisors, the Trustees have the authority to invest and
manage the assets of the Trust Fund.
      (3)   The Trustees shall have the exclusive right to manage the business
affairs of the Trust, and shall have all powers and rights necessary,
appropriate or advisable to effectuate and carry out the purposes and business
of the Trust and, in general, all powers permitted to be exercised by a trustee
pursuant to Florida law. The Trustees may appoint, employ or otherwise contract
with any persons (who may be designated as officers of the Trust) or entities
for the transaction of the business of the Trust or the performance of services
for or on behalf of the Trust, and the Trustees may delegate to any such person
or entity such authority to act on behalf of the Trust as the Trustees may from
time to time deem appropriate.
      (4)   No Trustee shall be required to post any bond, secured or
unsecured, in connection with or as a consequence of serving as a Trustee of
the Trust. Upon any Trustee ceasing to be such, such Trustee's interests in the
Trust and any and all Trust property shall automatically vest, without
requirement of further action, in the remaining (and any successor) Trustees.
      (5)   No beneficiary of the Trust, by reason of its status as such, shall
have any right to take part in or direct the management or control of the
business of the Trust or to act for or bind the Trust or any Trustee or
otherwise to transact any business on behalf of the Trust.
      (6)   This Trust is created for the sole purpose of providing health and
welfare benefits as described herein. No portion of the principal or income of
this Trust shall revert to thecity or shall be used for or diverted to any
purpose other than to provide health and welfare benefits and to pay the
reasonable expenses of the Trust.
      (7)   The contributions made by the city and all investments, receipts,
disbursements, and other transactions thereunder may be maintained in a
custodial account, which contributions shall be used solely for the payment of
benefits, expenses and other charges properly allocable to the Trust.
      (8)   The Trust Fund shall continue to be held by the Trustees in trust
and dealt with in accordance with the provision of this subchapter. At no time
shall any part of the Trust Fund be used for, or diverted to, purposes other
than providing benefits to participants.
(Ord. 1598, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 1702, passed 9-20-11)
§ 34.173 DEPOSITS AND DISBURSEMENTS FROM THE TRUST FUND.
   (A)   Trust deposits.
      (1)   The Trustees hereby delegate to the Program Administrator or his or
her designee, the responsibility for accepting contributions to the Trust and
remitting said contributions to the Custodian. In all cases, deposits of
contributions shall be treated as actually made only as of the date the funds
are accepted as in good order by the Program Administrator.
      (2)   The Trustees shall invest and reinvest the Trust Fund and pay
benefits as described herein from the Trust Fund on the order of the Program
Administrator or his or her duly authorized representative. The Trustees shall
account for contributions, income and payments made to or from the Trust. The
Trustees, Custodian and Program Administrator shall not be responsible for the
adequacy of the Trust Fund to meet and discharge any liabilities of the city.
      (3)   Contributions to the Trust shall solely consist of:
         (a)   Appropriations;
         (b)   Other employer contributions; and
         (c)   Any other required retiree, dependent or spouse contributions.
   (B)   Trust payments.
      (1)   The Trustees shall disburse amounts from the Trust Fund for the
sole purpose of assisting in the payment of the city’s premiums for post-
retirement health insurance and life insurance for retirees and their eligible
spouses and dependents and for reasonable expenses, fees and allocated
administrative fees and expenses.
      (2)   Any amounts remaining in the Trust Fund after all premiums, fees
and expenses have been paid shall be retained for payment of future premium
payments until all city liabilities for post-retirement health benefits have
been satisfied.
   (C)   Trust expenses. The Trustees may pay fees and expenses from the assets
of the Trust Fund, as well as a reasonable allocation of all administrative
fees and expenses.
(Ord. 1598, passed 12-3-07)
§ 34.174 ACCOUNTS AND INVESTMENTS.
   (A)   Accounts. All amounts held by the Trust shall be held in a custodial
account. The Trustees and Custodian shall be under no duty to determine whether
the amount of any contribution is adequate to meet the city's OPEB obligation,
or to collect or enforce payment of any contribution.
   (B)   Investment of Trust Fund.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided by regulation or as delegated to the
Custodian or an Investment Manager, the Trustees shall have complete control of
the management and investment of the Trust Fund and shall have all powers
necessary or convenient to enable it to exercise such control.
      (2)   The Trustees may invest and reinvest funds held by the Trust Fund
in any investments which are legal investments under Florida law and shall have
the discretion to decide the allocation of funds among such investments. The
Trustees are further authorized to develop and adopt an investment policy for
the investment of the Trust Funds. In accordance with such policy, the Trustees
may purchase, acquire, hold, lease, sell and convey real and personal property,
and place the Trust Fund with banks or trust companies which have corporate
trust powers, with insurance companies authorized to do business within the
city and do all such other acts permitted by law.
(Ord. 1598, passed 12-3-07)
§ 34.175 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRUSTEES.
   (A)   Powers and duties. The Trustees, in administering the Trust, shall
have such power and authority, including discretion with respect to the
exercise of that power and authority, as may be necessary, advisable,
desirable, or convenient to the Trustees, in their sole discretion as Trustees
and investment fiduciaries subject to the provisions of this subchapter:
      (1)   To make regulations with respect to the Trust not inconsistent with
the Trust, GASB 45, the Internal Revenue Code or applicable law, and to amend
or rescind such regulations;
      (2)   To determine, consistent with the applicable laws rules or
regulations, all questions of law or fact that may arise as to any person or
entity claiming rights under the Trust;
      (3)   Subject to and consistent with GASB 43 and 45 and applicable law,
to construe and interpret the Trust and to correct any defect, supply any
omission or reconcile any inconsistency in the Trust;
      (4)   To adopt and amend rules governing its operations and procedures;
      (5)   To make and enter into contracts with any agency of the city or any
outside agency or company for the purpose of assisting in the general
administration of the Trust or the investing or advising as to the investment
of the Trust Fund;
      (6)   To provide for changes in trustees and transfer of assets to
successor custodians as permitted by law;
      (7)   To provide investment management and administration of the Trust
Fund, which has been established to provide funding for health and welfare
benefits;
      (8)   To employ legal counsel;
      (9)   To employ and contract with actuaries, auditors, accountants,
consultants, medical personnel and other agents and employees;
      (10)   To collect and disburse all funds due to and payable from the
Trust;
      (11)   To maintain proper records and accountings consistent with GASB
Statement 43 and 45 and IRS standards;
      (12)   To bring and defend actions, sue and be sued and plead and be
impleaded;
      (13)   To expend funds for the reasonable expenses of the Trustees while
engaged in the performance of their duties;
      (14)   To employ insurance companies, banks, trust companies, and
investment brokers as agents for the keeping of records and the receipt and
disbursement of funds held by or due the Trustees;
      (15)   To exercise generally any of the powers of an owner with respect
to all or any part of the Trust Fund; and
      (16)   To take all actions consistent with this subchapter necessary or
appropriate to administer or carry out the purposes of the Trust; provided,
however, the Trustees need not take any action unless in their opinion there
are sufficient Trust assets available for the expense thereof.
   (B)   Delegation by Trustees. In addition to the powers stated in this
section, the Trustees may from time to time delegate to an individual,
committee or organization certain of its fiduciary responsibilities under the
Trust. Any such individual, committee or organization shall remain a fiduciary
until such delegation is revoked by the Trustees, which revocation may be
without cause and without advance notice. Such individual, committee or
organization shall have such power and authority with respect to such delegated
fiduciary responsibilities as the Trustees have under the Trust.
(Ord. 1598, passed 12-3-07)
§ 34.176 LIMITATIONS OF RESPONSIBILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   Limitations of responsibility. The Trustees' responsibilities and
liabilities shall be subject to the following limitations:
      (1)   The Trustees shall have no duties other than those expressly set
forth in this subchapter and those imposed on the Trustees by applicable laws;
      (2)   The Trustees and the Program Administrator shall not be responsible
for any particular federal, state or local income, payroll or other tax
consequence to the city or a retiree, spouse or dependent;
      (3)   The Trustees shall be responsible only for money and property
actually received by the Trust, and then only to the extent described in this
subchapter;
      (4)   The Trustees shall not be responsible for the correctness of any
determination of payments or disbursements from the Trust Fund;
      (5)   No Trustee shall have any liability for the acts or omissions of
any predecessor or successor in office; and
      (6)   The Trustees shall have no liability for the acts or omissions of
any Investment Manager or Managers, the acts or omissions of any Investment
Consultant, the acts or omissions of any insurance company, the acts or
omissions of any Investment Fund, the acts or omissions of any Custodian, the
acts or omissions of the Program Administrator, or the acts or omissions of any
contractor.
   (B)   Indemnification. The Trust shall, and hereby does, to the extent
permitted by law, indemnify the Trustees, including persons who have served as
such in the past or who are heirs, executors, or administrators thereof,
against expenses (including attorney's fees), judgments, fines, settlements and
other amounts actually and reasonably incurred in connection with any actual or
threatened proceeding of any kind, arising by reason of the fact that any such
person is or was a Trustee, and shall advance to such person expenses
reasonably incurred in defending any such proceedings as permitted by law. Such
indemnity shall apply, however, only if, in connection with the matter at
issue, the person claiming indemnity hereunder acted in good faith and in a
manner he or she reasonably believed was in the best interests of the Trust.
This indemnity does not extend to any acts of the person seeking indemnity
which involve gross negligence or willful misconduct, or are materially in
breach of this subchapter, or any rule, procedure or regulation of the Trust.
The Trustees may obtain and may rely upon a written opinion of independent
legal counsel on any issues of good faith, reasonable belief, or breach, or on
any and all issues that may bear on the application of this indemnity.
(Ord. 1598, passed 12-3-07)
§ 34.177 ACCOUNTS AND RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   Maintenance of records.
      (1)   The Trustees shall maintain or cause to be maintained suitable
records, data and information relating to its responsibilities hereunder. The
Trust's books and records relating thereto shall be open to inspection and
audit at reasonable times, subject to applicable law.
      (2)   The City Clerk or his or her designee shall serve as the secretary
to the Trust.
   (B)   Independent audit. An independent audit of the Trust Fund shall be
performed annually as part of the city's audit. The results shall be reported
to the Trustees, the Program Administrator and the City Commission.
   (C)   Annual report. Each year, the financial statements of the Trust shall
be included in the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) of the city.
(Ord. 1598, passed 12-3-07)
§ 34.178 RELIANCE ON COMMUNICATIONS.
   Certification of providers. The Trustees shall be protected in relying upon
a written certification that purports to be from any Custodian, Investment
Manager, insurance company, or mutual fund as to the person or persons
authorized to give instructions or directions on behalf of such Custodian,
Investment Manager or insurance company and continue to rely upon such
certification until a subsequent certification is filed with the Trustees.
(Ord. 1598, passed 12-3-07)
§ 34.179 AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION.
   (A)   Amendment. This Trust may be amended by the City Commission of the
city at any time and in any manner permitted by applicable law and not
inconsistent with GASB 43 and 45 or Internal Revenue Code § 115. Notice of such
amendment shall be promptly provided to the Investment Advisor, Custodian or
other contractor as may be appropriate.
   (B)   Irrevocability. This Trust is hereby irrevocable.
   (C)   Dissolution/termination. The Trust shall have perpetual existence,
except if dissolved by the city. Following any such dissolution, the Trustees
shall proceed to wind up the affairs of the Trust in an orderly manner and
within a reasonable period of time, considering relevant circumstances. All of
the powers of the Trustees under this subchapter shall continue until the
affairs of the Trust have been completely wound up, including the power to
fulfill or discharge the contracts of the Trust, collect its assets, sell,
convey, exchange or otherwise dispose of all or any part of the remaining
property of the Trust to one or more persons at public or private sale (for
consideration which may consist in whole or part of cash, securities or other
property of any kind), discharge or pay its liabilities, defend or prosecute
suits or administrative proceedings and do all other acts appropriate to the
winding up and liquidation of the property and affairs of the Trust. After
paying or making reasonable provision for the payment of all liabilities of the
Trust, and upon receipt of such releases, indemnities or like documentation as
the Trustees may reasonably deem necessary for the protection of the Trustees
and the Trust, the Trustees shall distribute the remaining property of the
Trust, in cash or in kind or partly each, to the city.
(Ord. 1598, passed 12-3-07)
§ 34.180 MISCELLANEOUS.
   (A)   This Trust shall be construed, enforced and administered and the
validity thereof determined in accordance with the Charter and Code of
Ordinances of the city. If any provision is held to violate the city's Code of
Ordinances, Florida or federal law, or otherwise to be illegal or invalid for
any other reason, that provision shall be deemed to be null and void, but the
invalidation of that provision shall not otherwise affect the Trust.
   (B)   In resolving any conflict among provisions of this Trust and in
resolving any other uncertainty as to the meaning or intention of any provision
hereof, the interpretation that causes the Trust to be exempt from tax as a
governmental instrumentality under Internal Revenue Code § 115, and causes the
Trust to comply with all applicable requirements of this code, shall prevail
over any different interpretation.
   (C)   If the Trustees or the Program Administrator makes any payments that,
according to the terms of this Trust and the benefits provided hereunder,
should not have been made, the Trustees or Program Administrator may recover
that incorrect payment by whatever means necessary, whether or not it was made
due to the error of the Trustees or Program Administrator, from the person to
whom it was made or from any other appropriate party. This authority shall
include the authorization of the Trustees or Program Administrator to deduct
the amount of the incorrect payment when making any future payments to the
recipient of the incorrect payment.
   (D)   Any payment to any insurance company, or its designee, shall to the
extent thereof, be in full satisfaction of the claim of such entity being paid
thereby and the Trustees or Program Administrator may condition payment thereof
on the delivery by the insurance company, or its designee, of the duly executed
receipt and release in such forms as may be determined by the Trustees or
Program Administrator.
(Ord. 1598, passed 12-3-07)
CITY HOLIDAYS
§ 34.185 CITY HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   The following holidays shall be paid employee holidays observed by the
city:
      (1)   Juneteenth Independence Day, June 19.
   (B)   If any of these holidays fall on Saturday, the preceding Friday shall
be observed as a holiday. If any of these holidays fall on Sunday, the
following Monday shall be observed as a holiday.
   (C)   The City Manager shall have the discretion to implement by
administrative policy the application of the observance of the paid holidays
for bargaining, non-bargaining, exempt, non-exempt, part-time, and full time
employees to maintain the operational integrity of city functions and the
contractual obligations of the city. (Ord. 1956, passed 1-13-21)
CHAPTER 35: PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES; PUBLIC FUNDS
Section
Public Funds
   
35.01   Investment or reinvestment of surplus public funds
Procurement Procedures
   
35.15   Definitions
   
35.16   Procurement Department
   
35.17   Compliance required
   
35.18   Competitive bidding or competitive proposals required; exceptions
   
35.19   Sealed competitive bidding procedure
   
35.20   Competitive negotiations
   
35.21   Award of contract
   
35.22   City Attorney to review and approve form of purchasing contracts
   
35.23   Debarment and suspensions
   
35.24   Availability of funds
   
35.25   Open market procedure
   
35.26   Inspection and testing of purchased items or services
   
35.27   Surplus property
   
35.28   Change orders
   
35.29   Term, termination, extension and renewal of contracts
   
35.30   Preference to businesses with drug-free workplace programs
   
35.31   Non-discrimination
   
35.32   Non-collusion
   
35.33   Design-build projects
   
35.34   Promoting business with the city; no expenditures of public funds
   
35.35   Procurement of goods and services funded with financial assistance from
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
   
35.36   Local vendor preference
   
35.37   Military veteran's preference
   
35.38   Bid protest procedures
   
35.39   City contractors providing equal benefits for domestic partners and all
married couples
   
35.40   Cone of silence
   
35.41   Electronic signatures and submissions
PUBLIC FUNDS
§ 35.01 INVESTMENT OR REINVESTMENT OF SURPLUS PUBLIC FUNDS.
   (A)   The City Commission shall be authorized to invest or reinvest surplus
public funds without the necessity of having to adopt such investment or
reinvestment of funds.
   (B)   This grant of authority shall, pursuant to F.S. § 166.261, be limited
to investment or reinvest-ment of surplus public funds in the following:
      (1)   The Local Government Surplus Funds Trust Fund;
      (2)   Negotiable direct obligations of, or obligations the principal and
interest of which are unconditionally guaranteed by, the United States
Government at the then prevailing market price for such securities;
      (3)   Interest-bearing time deposits or savings accounts in banks
organized under the laws of this state, in national banks organized under the
laws of United States and doing business and situated in this state, in savings
and loan associations which are under state supervision, or in federal savings
and loan associations located in this state and organized under federal law and
federal supervision, provided that any such deposits are secured by collateral
as may be prescribed by law;
      (4)   Obligations of the Federal Farm Credit Banks; the Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation, including Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation
participation certificates; or the Federal Home Loan Bank or its district
banks, or obligations guaranteed by the Government National Mortgage
Association; or
      (5)   Obligations of the Federal National Mortgage Association, including
Federal National Mortgage Association participation certificates and mortgage
pass-through certificates guaranteed by the Federal National Mortgage
Association.
(Ord. 705, passed 8-1-84; Am. Ord. 1924, passed 5-15-19)
PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES
§ 35.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADDENDA or ADDENDUM. Written or graphic instruments issued prior to the
opening of bids which clarify, correct or change the bidding documents or the
contract documents.
   BUSINESS LOCATION. A permanent office or other site where the vendor
operates, conducts, engages in, or carries on all, or a portion of, its
business. A post office box shall not be sufficient to constitute a BUSINESS
LOCATION.
   CHANGE ORDER. Changes, due to unanticipated conditions or developments, made
to an executory contract, which do not substantially alter the character of the
work contracted for, and which do not vary so substantially from the original
specifications as to constitute a new undertaking. The changes must reasonably
and conscientiously be viewed as being in fulfillment of the original scope of
the contract rather than as departing therefrom. Further, the changes, when
viewed against the background of the work described in the contract and the
language used in the specifications, must clearly be directed either to the
achievement of a more satisfactory result or the elimination of work not
necessary to the satisfactory completion of the contract.
   CHIEF PROCUREMENT OFFICER. The City Manager, or his or her designee, who is
responsible for the procurement of commodities and services as well as the
management and disposal of commodities.
   CITY STANDARD  COMMODITIES. Those situations where the city has determined
that a particular style, brand, make, or model is the only type that meets the
city’s requirements for performance, compatibility or other salient
characteristics.
   COMMODITIES. Personal property, including, but not limited to, goods,
supplies, apparatus, equipment, material and other forms of tangible personal
property.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person or business entity having a contract with the city.
   COOPERATIVE PURCHASING. Situations where the city participates in joint
procurement of commodities or services with other public entities, in order to
obtain lower prices through greater purchasing volume.
   INVITATION FOR BID. A written solicitation for competitive sealed bids with
the title date and hour of the public bid opening designated therein and
specifically defining the commodities or services for which bids are sought.
The invitation for bid shall be used when the city is capable of specifically
defining the scope of work for which a service is required or when the city is
capable of establishing 15 precise specifications defining the actual
commodities required. The invitation for bid shall include instruction to
bidders, plans, drawings and specifications, if any, bid form and other
required forms and documents to be submitted with the bid.
   QUOTATIONS. Unsealed telephonic, facsimile or written bids for commodities
or services.
   REQUEST FOR LETTERS OF INTEREST. A written solicitation for offers with the
title, date and hour of the submission deadline designated. A request for
letters of interests shall include, but is not limited to, general information
and submission deadline. The city shall engage in competitive negotiations with
responsible offerors determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected
for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of and
conformance to the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair
and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion.
   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS. A written solicitation for competitive sealed
proposals with the title, date and hour of the public opening designated. A
request for proposals shall include, but is not  limited to, general
information, functional or general specifications, a statement of work,
proposal instruction and evaluation criteria. All requests for proposals shall
state the relative importance of price and any other evaluation criteria. The
city may engage in competitive negotiations with responsible proposers
determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the
purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of and conformance to the
solicitation requirements. Proposers shall be accorded fair and equal treatment
with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and
such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the
purpose of obtaining the best and final offer.
   REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS. A written solicitation for competitive sealed
offers with the title, date and hour of the public opening designated. A
request for qualifications shall include, but is not limited to, general
information, functional or general specifications, statement of work,
instructions for offer and evaluation criteria. All requests for qualifications
shall state the relative importance of the evaluation criteria. The city may
engage in competitive negotiations with responsible offerors determined to be
reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of
clarification to assure full understanding of and conformance to the
solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment
with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of offers, and such
revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose
of obtaining the best and final offer.
   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER, RESPONSIBLE OFFEROR, or RESPONSIBLE PROPOSER. A person
or business entity having the capability in all respects to perform fully the
contract requirements and sufficient experience, ability, reliability,
capacity, facilities, equipment, financial resources and credit to give the
city a reasonable expectation of good faith performance, determined solely
within the city’s discretion.
   RESPONSIVE BIDDER, RESPONSIVE OFFEROR, or RESPONSIVE PROPOSER.  A person who
has submitted a bid, offer, or proposal that conforms in all material respects
to the invitation for bid, request for letters of interests, request for
qualifications, or request for proposals, determined solely within the city’s
discretion.
   SERVICES. The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor, not
involving the delivery of a specific end-product other than reports that are
merely incidental to the required performance. This term shall not include
employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements.
   SOLE SOURCE. The commodities or services are available from only one
responsible vendor.
   SURPLUS PROPERTY. Any personal property belonging to the city that is
capable of being used but is in excess of the normal operating requirements of
the city or which is no longer used or which has become obsolete, worn out or
scrapped.
   USING AGENCY. Any department, agency, commission, bureau or other unit in
the city government using commodities or procuring services as provided in this
subchapter.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924,
passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.16 PROCUREMENT DEPARTMENT.
   The Procurement Department shall be under the supervision of the City
Manager’s Office.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924,
passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.17 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any city officer or employee to purchase any
commodities or services or make any contract within the purview of this
subchapter unless there has been compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter. Any purchase made or contract executed contrary to the provisions
hereof shall be null and void, and the city shall not be bound thereby.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924,
passed 5-15-19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 35.18 COMPETITIVE BIDDING OR COMPETITIVE PROPOSALS REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   A purchase of or contract for commodities or services that is
estimated by the Chief Procurement Officer to cost more than $25,000 shall be
based on sealed competitive solicitations as determined by the Chief
Procurement Officer, except as specifically provided herein.
   (B)   For all capital improvement projects where the services of a
professional architectural, engineering, landscape architectural, or survey and
mapping services are required, the Chief Procurement Officer, with the approval
of the City Manager, will adhere to the following guidelines:
      (1)   For all capital improvement projects , the Chief Procurement
Officer, with the approval of the City Manager, shall determine the project
delivery method to be utilized to complete the project and shall present the
recommendation as part of the request for approval of bid advertisement as
required in §
35.19(A).
   (C)   Only the following situations are exempt from the competitive bid and
competitive proposal requirements of this section:
      (1)   Emergency purchases.  In urgent cases of compelling emergency that
require the immediate purchase of commodities or services, the City Manager is
empowered to waive competitive bidding or competitive proposals and authorize
the Chief Procurement Officer to secure by open market procedure any
commodities or services, notwithstanding the estimated cost of the commodities
or services.
      (2)   Professional services. Contracts for professional services
involving peculiar skill, ability, experience or expertise, which are in their
nature unique and not subject to competitive bidding, or competitive proposals,
are exempt from this section; however, state laws, such as the Consultants’
Competitive Negotiation Act of the state statutes, as may be amended from time
to time to the extent applicable, shall be followed.
      (3)   City standard, single-source and sole- source commodities or
services. City standard, single- source and sole-source commodities or services
are exempt from this section.
      (4)    Disaster preparedness. Contracts for and purchases of commodities
or services that are made in contemplation and preparation for and in response
to the occurrence of a natural or man-made disaster or civil unrest, where time
or availability rather than price is the controlling factor, are exempt from
this section.
      (5)   Utilization of other governmental agencies’ contracts. Commodities
or services that are the subject of contracts with the state its political
subdivisions or other governmental entities including the United States
government, are exempt from this section, provided, however, that this division
shall apply only if the contract expressly permits or if the awarding
jurisdiction and/or the vendor agree to allow the city to purchase therefrom
and if either: (i) the commodities or services are the subject of a price
schedule negotiated by the state or federal government or by competitive bid by
another governmental agency and not on any preference; (ii) or the price
offered for the commodity or service exactly equals or is lower than the
governmental contract from vendors awarded the governmental contract. Where an
award is made pursuant to this paragraph, the terms and conditions agreeable to
the city may be used in lieu of those terms and conditions of the contract with
the other governmental agency.
      (6)   Cooperative purchasing. Cooperative purchasing plans are exempt
from this section.
      (7)   The following contractual services are not subject to the
competitive procurement requirement:
         (a)   Academic program reviews, lectures or seminars by individuals,
professional development programs, training, and continuing education seminars;
         (b)   Health services involving examination,   diagnosis, treatment,
prevention, medical consultation or administration;
         (c)   Artistic services which are original and creative in character
and skill in a recognized field of artistic endeavor such as music, dance,
drama, painting and sculpture, photography, culinary arts, fashion design and
the like;
         (d)   Maintenance service and repair of equipment. When considered to
be in the best interest of the city and recommended by the using department and
the services to be performed are by the equipment manufacturer, manufacturer’s
service representative or a distributor of the manufacturer’s equipment, the
services may be procured without following the competitive sealed bid process;
         (e)   Advertising in newspapers, periodicals, television, radio,
billboards or other formal advertising media;
         (f)   Utilities including but not limited to electric, water and
communications;
         (g)   The foregoing enumeration of services deemed to be exempt from
the competitive procurement requirements is not intended to be an exhaustive or
exclusive list. The City Manager or his or her designee may determine if a
contractual service must be procured through the competitive procurement
process if not expressly indicated herein;
         (h) Copyrighted materials, including computer software;
         (i)   Software licensing and maintenance with the company from which
the software was purchased, or its authorized representative;
         (j)   Educational books, technical publications or other type trade
journals;
         (k)   Governmental, professional or organizational membership dues or
fees;
         (l)   Shipping, freight and postage charges;
         (m)   Entertainment services (performing artists, entertainment and
amusements at festivals or special events);
         (n)   Field trip expenditures, including but not limited to tickets to
events such as museums;
         (o)   Donated funds, pass through funds and deposit accounts,
including but not limited to funds collected from students to pay for prom,
class rings, etc., funds raised by the parent teacher associations for a
specific purpose and sanitation funds collected from Home Owner Associations;
and/or
         (p)   Food, clothing and other promotional items purchased for resale
or distribution to the public.
      (8)   Best interest of the city. Purchases of and contracts for
commodities or services are exempt from this section when the City Commission
declares by a simple majority affirmative vote that the process of competitive
bidding and competitive proposals is not in the best interest of the city. The
City Commission shall make specific factual findings that support its
determination, and such contracts may be placed on the City Commission consent
agenda.
      (9)   Insurance. Purchases of insurance through the city’s agent of
record are exempt from the sealed competitive solicitation requirements of this
chapter. For purposes of this division, “insurance” shall include third party
administrative services in situations in which the city is self-insured. In
addition, any liability claims up to $50,000 can be approved with the combined
approval of the city’s Risk Manager, City Attorney and the City Manager without
the City Commission’s approval. All liability claims in excess of $50,000 shall
require the City Commission’s approval.
   (D)   Any other provision of this section to the contrary notwithstanding,
city purchasing shall be conducted in accordance with applicable state law,
including F.S. §§ 180.24 and 255.20, as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924,
passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.19 SEALED COMPETITIVE BIDDING PROCEDURE.
   The sealed competitive bidding procedures below shall be followed:
   (A)   Presentation to City Commission. All sealed competitive solicitations
as defined in §
35.18 shall be presented to the City Commission for their consideration prior
to advertisement.
   (B)   Advertisement for bids required. Notice of the sealed competitive
solicitation shall be advertised in accordance with the requirements of the
Florida Statutes, as may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   (1)   Bid deposits. When deemed necessary by the Chief Procurement
Officer, bid deposits or sureties shall be prescribed in the public notice
inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of the deposit
or surety where the Chief Procurement Officer has required same. A successful
bidder shall forfeit any deposit or surety required by the Chief Procurement
Officer upon failure on its part to enter a contract within 15 days after the
award.
      (2)   Sureties on performance. Pursuant to F.S. § 255.05, for all
competitive solicitations for the construction of a public building or public
work in excess of $200,000 the Chief Procurement Officer or appropriate staff
person shall include as a requirement of such advertised bids a payment and
performance bond in the total contract amount. The Chief Procurement Officer,
in his or her discretion, may require such payment and performance bonds for
bids seeking commodities or services in an amount of $200,000 or less. The City
Manager shall have the discretion to waive the performance bond requirement in
the event of an undue hardship or emergency. Pursuant to F.S. § 255.05, the
city shall not require a contractor to secure a surety bond from a specific
agent or bonding company. The requirements of the bonding company such as
ratings, shall be determined by the city’s Risk Manager or designee.
   (D)   Addenda. Written addenda will be issued when changes, clarification or
amendments to the sealed competitive solicitations are deemed necessary.
   (E)   Bid opening procedure.
      (1)   Bids shall be submitted online via the city’s electronic
procurement system, or at such location as otherwise designated in the bid.
      (2)   Bids shall be opened in public at City Hall by the City Clerk or
designee at the time and place stated in the public notice. The names of all
bidders shall be publicly announced at the time of opening.
      (3)   A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public
inspection upon completion of the specified time frame in applicable state law,
and in accordance with F.S. Ch. 119 and Ch. 286, as said statutes may be
amended from time to time.
      (4)   No late bids shall be accepted or opened.
      (5)   The city reserves the right to waive any irregularities in the
bids, as determined by the Chief Procurement Officer and approved by the City
Manager.
   (F)   Rejection of bids. The City Manager and City Commission may reject any
bids, parts of all bids or all bids for any one or more commodities or services
included in the proposed contract when the public interest will be served
thereby. The Chief Procurement Officer shall not accept a bid from a contractor
who is in default on the payment of taxes licenses or other moneys due the
city.
   (G)   Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsive, responsible
bidder, which provides the best value to the city. In determining the “lowest
responsive, responsible bidder,” the Chief Procurement Officer shall consider:
      (1)   The prices contained in the bid;
      (2)   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required;
      (3)    Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
      (4)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
      (5)   The quality of performance of previous contracts of services,
including, but not limited to, city contracts;
      (6)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service;
      (7)   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;
      (8)   The quality, availability and adaptability of the commodities or
services to the particular use required;
      (9)   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service
for the use of the subject of the contract;
      (10)   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid;
      (11)   The overall cost to the city;
      (12)   Whether the bidder is involved in any pending litigation with the
city; and/or
      (13)   The best interests of the city.
   (H)   Determination and findings statement. When the award is not given to
the most responsive, responsible bidder, a determination and findings statement
shall be prepared by the Chief Procurement Officer and filed with the other
papers relating to the transaction.
   (I)   Tie bids.
      (1)   If the determination of lowest responsive, responsible bidder
results in a tie, the contract may be split when it is to the city’s advantage
as determined by the Chief Procurement Officer.
      (2)   If the Chief Procurement Officer determines not to split the bid,
the contract shall be awarded by first preference to businesses with drug-free
workplace programs as described in §
35.30 and then by publicly drawing lots.
   (J)   Prohibition against subdivision. No contract of purchase shall be
subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section.
   (K)   Inspection of bids. Inspection of the city’s formal bids and proposals
shall be conducted in accordance with applicable state law, including F.S. Ch.
119, as said statutes may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924,
passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.20 COMPETITIVE NEGOTIATIONS.
   When the use of competitive bidding is not in the best interest of the city
for a purchase of, or contract for, commodities and/or services estimated to
cost in excess of $25,000, the commodities and/or services may be purchased by
competitive negotiations. A request for proposals or a request for
qualifications, or a request for letters of interest shall be issued. Adequate
public notice of the solicitation shall be given in the same manner as provided
in §
35.19. Other procedural provisions applicable to the sealed bid process shall
also apply. To assure full understanding of and responsiveness to the
solicitation requirements and full understanding of qualified proposals or
offers, discussions may be conducted with qualified proposers or offerors who
submit responses determined to be reasonably acceptable of being selected for
award for the purpose of clarification and to assure full understanding of, and
responsiveness to, the solicitation requirements. The respondents shall be
accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for
discussion and revision of responses, and such revisions may be permitted
through negotiations prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final
proposals or offers. The award shall be made to the responsible proposer or
offeror whose proposal or offer is determined to be the most advantageous to
the city taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth
in the solicitation. No other criteria shall be used in the evaluation. A
summary of the basis on which the award is made shall be included in the
contract file.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11)
§ 35.21 AWARD OF CONTRACT.
   (A)   City Commission approval.
      (1)   An initial purchase of, or contract for, commodities or services,
in excess of $25,000, shall require the approval of the City Commission,
regardless of whether the competitive bidding or competitive proposal
procedures were followed. However, emergency purchases as described in §
35.18, shall not require advance City Commission approval. In such emergency
situations, the City Manager may approve the purchase or contract, subject to
later ratification by the City Commission. Emergency purchases are to be made
only when the normal function and operation of the city would be hampered to
such an extent by submittal of a requisition in the usual manner that it may
effect the life, health or convenience of citizens.
      (2)   Purchases exceeding the sum of $225,000 in the aggregate shall not
be purchased from the same person or entity during the course of any fiscal
year, unless the purchases are first authorized by the City Commission. The
above provision shall not apply to purchases of utilities or to ongoing
contracts. The fiscal year of the city and charter schools shall be respective
of one another. The fiscal year of the city shall begin on October 1, of each
year and shall end on September 30, of the following year. The fiscal year of
the charter schools shall begin on July 1 of each year and shall end on June
30, of the following year.
   (B)   City Manager approval. A purchase of, or contract for, commodities or
services in an amount of between $25,000 and $5,000.01 shall require the
approval of the City Manager or designee.
   (C)   Department Head approval. A purchase of, or contract for, commodities
or services in an amount of $5,000 or less shall require the approval of the
respective Department Head or designee.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924,
passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.22 CITY ATTORNEY TO REVIEW AND APPROVE FORM OF PURCHASING CONTRACTS.
   The City Attorney shall review all contracts awarded under this subchapter
and shall approve the contracts as to form prior to their execution by the
appropriate city officials. Notwithstanding the above, the City Attorney, in
his or her discretion, may approve form contracts bearing a pre-printed City
Attorney approval, provided that the provisions of the form contracts are not
modified.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924,
passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.23 DEBARMENT AND SUSPENSIONS.
   (A)   Authority and requirement to debar and suspend. After reasonable
notice to an actual or prospective contractual party, and after reasonable
opportunity to such party to be heard, the City Manager, after consultation
with the City Attorney, shall have the authority to debar a person or entity
for the causes listed below from consideration for award of city contracts. The
debarment shall be for a period of not fewer than three years. The City Manager
shall also have the authority to suspend a contractor from consideration for
award of city contracts, if there is probable cause for debarment pending the
debarment determination. The authority to debar and suspend contractors shall
be exercised in accordance with regulations that shall be issued by the City
Manager.
   (B)   Causes for debarment or suspension. Causes for debarment or suspension
include the following:
      (1)   Conviction of a criminal offense incident to obtaining or
attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or incident
to the performance of such contract or subcontract;
      (2)   Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft,
forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen
property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or
business honesty;
      (3)   Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of
the submission of bids or proposals;
      (4)   Violation of city’s contract provisions, which is regarded by the
Chief Procurement Officer to be indicative of non-responsibility. Such
violation may include failure without good cause to perform in accordance with
the terms and conditions of a city contract or to perform within the time
limits provided in the city contract, provided that failure to perform caused
by acts beyond the control of a party shall not be considered a basis for
debarment or suspension;
      (5)   Debarment or suspension of the person or entity by any federal,
state, or other governmental entity;
      (6)   False certification pursuant to division (C) below; and/or
      (7)   Any other cause judged by the City Manager to be so serious and
compelling as to affect the responsibility of the person or entity performing
city contracts.
   (C)   Debarment and suspension decisions.  Subject to the provisions of
division (A) above, the City Manager shall render a written decision stating
the reasons for the debarment or suspension. A copy of the decision shall be
provided promptly to the contractual party.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11)
§ 35.24 AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS.
   Except in cases of emergency, the City Manager or designee shall not issue
any order for delivery on a contract or any open-market order unless and until
the Director of the Finance Department certifies that there are unencumbered
funds available in the using agency’s budget, in excess of all unpaid
obligations, to defray the cost of the commodities or services.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11)
§ 35.25 OPEN MARKET PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Generally. A purchase of, or contract for, commodities or services
that is estimated by the Chief Procurement Officer to cost $5,000 or less,
maybe purchased either in the open market without newspaper advertisement and
without observing the procedures prescribed by §
35.19, or in accordance with the competitive bidding procedure prescribed by §
35.19, as deemed appropriate by the Chief Procurement Officer. However, all
such purchases of greater than the estimated cost of $5,000 but less than or
equal to $7,500 shall require at least three oral quotations. Purchases of an
estimated cost greater than $7,500 but less than or equal to $25,000 shall
require at least three quotations in written form.
   (B)   Notice inviting quotations. When using the open market procedure, the
Chief Procurement Officer may solicit or oversee the solicitation of quotations
by:
      (1)   Direct mail requests to prospective vendors;
      (2)   Telephone;
      (3)   Public notice;
      (4)   Facsimile; and/or
      (5)   Internet
   (C)   Recording. The Chief Procurement Officer shall keep a record of all
open market orders and the bids submitted in competition thereon, and such
records shall also be open to public inspection.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924,
passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.26 INSPECTION AND TESTING OF PURCHASED ITEMS OR SERVICES.
   (A)   Generally. The Department Head of the using department shall inspect
or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of commodities or services to
determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or
contract.
   (B) Delegation of authority. The Department Head of the  using department
shall have the authority to authorize staff to inspect all deliveries made to
the using department under rules and regulations prescribed by the Department
Head.
   (C)   Testing. The Chief Procurement Officer shall have the authority to
require chemical and physical test of samples submitted with bids and samples
of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance
with the specifications. In the performance of such tests the Chief Procurement
Officer shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any
agency of the city government or of any outside laboratory.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924,
passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.27 SURPLUS PROPERTY.
   (A)   Disposal of surplus property. The Chief Procurement Officer may sell,
trade or otherwise dispose of surplus and obsolete personal property belonging
to the city either by sale, barter or exchange, by competitive sealed bid,
public auction, cannibalization, trade in or any other means of disposal as may
be appropriate and in the best interests of the city. Disposal of surplus or
obsolete personal property in excess of $20,000 per item shall be made only
after approval by the City Commission. No employee of the Procurement
Department having direct control of the surplus property or handling the
disposition of the property shall be entitled to purchase any such property.
   (B)   Donation of surplus property. Surplus property valued at $1,000 or
greater may be donated by City Commission approval, in any manner as the
Commission deems fit. Any surplus property valued at less than $1,000 may be
donated by the City Manager in his or her discretion.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924,
passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.28 CHANGE ORDERS.
   (A)   City Manager’s authority. Subject to the restrictions contained in
division (B) below, the City Manager or designee is authorized to approve and
initial work on the following types of change orders determined in his or her
judgment, to be in the public interest, as follows:
      (1)   All change orders decreasing the cost of the contract to the city
that do not materially alter the character of the work contemplated by the
contract;
      (2)   A change order where the total cost of the purchase does not exceed
$25,000;
      (3)   A change order to purchase initially approved by the City
Commission where the net change increases the cost of the contract to the city
by an amount less than or equal to 5%; and/or
      (4)   A change order to a purchase initially approved by the City
Commission, on a unit price contract consisting of unit quantity increases at
the unit price bid, which do not exceed 10% of the original unit quantity for
each line item.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, the City Manager
is not authorized to approve a change order without authorization of the City
Commission where the initial purchase required the City Commission’s approval
and where the sum of all change orders issued under the contract exceeds 5% of
the original contract amount or $25,000.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924,
passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.29 TERM, TERMINATION, EXTENSION AND RENEWAL OF CONTRACTS.
   (A)   Term.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for supplies or
services may be entered into for any time period deemed to be in the best
interests of the city provided the funds are available for the first fiscal
period at the time of contracting. Payment and performance obligations for
future fiscal periods shall be subject to the availability of funds.
      (2)   Contracts may be awarded with provisions of upward or downward
price adjustments provided this allowance is part of the original bid
solicitation and the adjustments are based on a nationally recognized or
published index or other criteria acceptable to the Chief Procurement Officer.
   (B)   Termination. The City Manager or his or her designee is authorized to
terminate any contract entered into by the city when he or she determines that
a party to the contract has breached or failed to perform one or more of its
obligations under the contract. Except in the case of an emergency, where such
advance notice is not possible, or where the contract was entered into without
City Commission approval, the City Manager or his or her designee must provide
sufficient prior written notice to the Mayor and each Commissioner so that they
can make any necessary inquiries at the next Commission meeting. When a
contract is entered into by the city pursuant to City Commission approval and
is terminable by the city without cause, only the City Commission is authorized
to terminate the contract without cause. If the Mayor or any Commissioner
desires that a contract be terminated without cause, he or she shall notify the
City Manager in writing and request that the item be placed on the next
Commission agenda.
   (C)   Extensions. The City Manager or his or her designee is authorized to
extend, for operational purposes only, and for a maximum of 180 days, any
contract previously approved by the City Commission and entered into by the
city. Any further extensions of the contract require the approval of the City
Commission.
   (D)   Renewals.
      (1)   General. When a contract is entered into by the city pursuant to
City Commission approval and provides for one or more renewals by affirmative
action of the city, the City Manager may approve such renewals without approval
of the City Commission.
   (E)   Employment contracts. The provisions of this section shall not apply
to the employment contract of the City Manager, the City Attorney, the Finance
Director and the Commission Auditor.
   (F)   City Commission notification. The City Manager, or his or her
designee, shall notify the Commission, in writing, at least three months in
advance of the expiration, renewal, automatic renewal or extension date, and
shall provide a copy of the contract or agreement and a vendor performance
report card contracts or agreements that initially required the City
Commission’s approval as defined in §
35.21.
   (G)   Application to existing and future contracts. The provisions of this
section shall apply to every contract in existence on the effective date of
this section and every contract entered into thereafter.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924,
passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.30 PREFERENCE TO BUSINESSES WITH DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE PROGRAMS.
   (A)   The city hereby adopts by reference F.S. § 287.087, as amended,
regarding bidding preferences for businesses with drug-free workplace programs.
   (B)   Whenever two or more bids which are equal with respect to price,
quality and service are received by the city for the procurement of commodities
or services, a bid received from a business that certifies that it has
implemented a drug-free workplace program shall be given a preference, provided
that the drug-free workplace program complies with F.S. § 287.087, and any
other applicable state law. An announcement of this preference may be included
in the bid documents.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924,
passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.31 NON-DISCRIMINATION.
   The vendor shall not discriminate against any person in its operations,
activities or delivery of services. The vendor shall affirmatively comply with
all applicable provisions of federal, state and local equal employment laws and
shall not engage in or commit any discriminatory practice against any person
based on race, age, religion, color, gender, pregnancy, sexual orientation,
gender identity and expression, national origin, marital status, physical or
mental disability, political affiliation or any other factor which cannot be
lawfully used as a basis for service delivery.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1796,
passed 11-5-14; Am. Ord. 1924, passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.32 NON-COLLUSION.
   A bidder shall not collude, conspire, connive or agree, directly or
indirectly, with any other bidder, firm or person to submit a collusive or sham
bid in connection with the work for which the bid has been submitted; or to
refrain from bidding in connection with such work or have in any manner,
directly or indirectly, sought by person to fix the price or prices in the bid
or of any other bidder, or to fix any overhead profit, or cost elements of the
bid price or the bid price of any other bidder, or to secure through any
collusion, conspiracy, connivance, or unlawful agreement any advantage against
any other bidder, or any person interested in the proposed work.
(Ord. 1409, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924,
passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.33 DESIGN-BUILD PROJECTS.
   For design-build projects, the city shall follow the procedures set forth in
F.S. § 287.055. The city may use either a qualifications based selection
process or a competitive proposal selection process as detailed in F.S. §
287.055.
(Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924, passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.34 PROMOTING BUSINESS WITH THE CITY; NO EXPENDITURE OF PUBLIC FUNDS.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, the city may, by a majority
vote of the City Commission, enter into a mutually beneficial arrangement with
a private business entity for the specific benefit of the citizens and
residents of the city provided that no public funds are expended in furtherance
of such arrangement. If the City Commission votes to enter into such an
arrangement with a particular private business entity, all such other private
businesses within the city that provide the same or similar goods or services
shall be fully afforded the same or similar business opportunity.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, the City Manager, at his
or her discretion, may adopt an administrative policy permitting the city to
enter into sponsorships or other similar relationships with private businesses
in the city.
(Ord. 1650, passed 8-4-09; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924, passed
5-15-19)
§ 35.35 PROCUREMENT OF GOODS AND SERVICES FUNDED WITH FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM
THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT.
   For all goods and services which are partially or fully funded with funding
provided by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, the
procurement process shall comply with the city’s Local Jobs Initiative Section
3 compliance plan, as adopted in conformance with Section 3 of the Housing and
Urban Development Act of 1968, 12 U.S.C. § 1701(u).
(Ord. 1684, passed 3-16-11; Am. Ord. 1924, passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.36 LOCAL VENDOR PREFERENCE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LOCAL BROWARD COUNTY VENDOR. A business entity which has maintained a
permanent place of business with full-time employees within the Broward County
limits for a minimum of one year prior to the date of issuance of a bid or
proposal solicitation. The permanent place of business may not be a post office
box. The business location must actually distribute goods or services from that
location. In  addition, the business must have a current business tax receipt
from the Broward County or the city within Broward County where the business
resides.
      LOCAL PEMBROKE PINES VENDOR. A business entity which has maintained a
permanent place of business with full-time employees within the city limits for
a minimum of one year prior to the date of issuance of a bid or proposal
solicitation. The permanent place of business may not be a post office box. The
business location must actually distribute goods or services from that
location. In addition, the business must have a current business tax receipt
from the City of Pembroke Pines.
   (B)   Process.
      (1)   Competitive bid. For bid evaluation purposes, vendors that meet the
definition of local Pembroke Pines vendor, as defined herein, shall be given a
5% evaluation credit. This shall mean that if a local Pembroke Pines vendor
submits a bid/quote that is within 5% of the lowest price submitted by any
vendor, the local Pembroke Pines vendor shall have an option to submit another
bid which is at least 1% lower than the lowest responsive bid/quote. If the
local Pembroke Pines vendor submits a bid which is at least 1% lower than that
lowest responsive bid/quote, then the award will go to the local Pembroke Pines
vendor. If not, the award will be made to the vendor that submits the lowest
responsive bid/quote. If the lowest responsive and responsible bidder IS a
local Pembroke Pines vendor, the award will be made to that vendor and no other
bidders will be given an opportunity to submit additional bids as described
herein.
      (2)   For bid evaluation purposes, vendors that meet the definition of
local Broward County vendor, as detailed herein, shall be given a 2.5%
evaluation credit. This shall mean that if a local Broward County vendor
submits a bid/quote that is within 2.5% of the lowest price submitted by any
vendor, the local Broward County vendor shall have an option to submit another
bid which is at least 1% lower than the lowest responsive bid/quote. If the
local Broward County vendor submits a bid which is at least 1% lower than that
lowest responsive bid/quote, then the award will go to the local Broward County
vendor. If not, the award will be made to the vendor that submits the lowest
responsive bid/quote. If the lowest responsive and responsible bidder is a
local Pembroke Pines vendor, the award will be made to that vendor and no other
bidders will be given an opportunity to submit additional bids as described
herein.
      (3)   If there is a local Pembroke Pines vendor and a local Broward
County vendor participating in the same bid solicitation and both vendors
qualify to submit a second bid as detailed above, the local Pembroke Pines
vendor will be given first option. If the local Pembroke Pines vendor cannot
beat the lowest bid received by at least 1%, an opportunity will be given to
the local Broward County vendor. If the local Broward County vendor cannot beat
the lowest bid by at least 1%, then the bid will be awarded to the lowest
bidder regardless of geographic location of the business.
      (4)   If multiple local Pembroke Pines vendors submit bids/quotes which
are within 5% of the lowest bid/quote, then all vendors will be asked to submit
a best and final offer (BAFO). The award will be made to the local Pembroke
Pines vendor submitting the lowest BAFO providing that that BAFO is at least 1%
lower than the lowest bid/quote received in the original solicitation. If no
local Pembroke Pines vendor can beat the lowest bid/quote by at least 1 %, then
the process will be repeated with all local Broward County vendors who have
submitted a bid/quote which is within 2.5% of the lowest bid/quote. If no local
Pembroke Pines vendor and no local Broward County vendor can submit a BAFO that
is at least 1% lower than the lowest bid/quote submitted in the original
solicitation, the award will be made to the lowest responsive bidder regardless
of geographic location of the business.
   (C)   Competitive proposal. For evaluation purposes, local Pembroke Pines
vendor and local Broward County vendor shall be a criterion for award in any
Request For Proposal unless specifically exempted by the City Manager or the
City Commission.
   (D)   Exceptions.
      (1)   No local vendor preference will be included in any competitive
solicitation where the city is the lead agency for the Southeast Florida
Cooperative Purchasing Group;
      (2)   Utilization of a state or other agency contract;
      (3)   State or federal law prohibits the use of local preference;
      (4)   The work is funded in whole or in part by a governmental entity
where the laws, rules, regulations or policies prohibit the use of local
preferences;
      (5)   Sole source or single source purchases;
      (6)   The local vendor is either non-responsive or non-responsible;
      (7)   All bids submitted exceed the budget amount for the project;
      (8)   Emergency purchases;
      (9)   The City Manager and/or the City Commission may exempt any
competitive solicitation from the local vendor preference.
(Ord. 1707, passed 10-19-11; Am. Ord. 1924, passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.37 MILITARY VETERAN'S PREFERENCE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
      VETERAN OWNED SMALL BUSINESS. A business entity which has received a
Determination Letter from the United States Department of Veteran Affairs
Center for Verification and Evaluation notifying the business that they have
been approved as a veteran owned small business (VOSB).
   (B)   Process.
      (1)   Competitive bid. For bid evaluation purposes, vendors that meet the
definition of veteran owned small business, as defined herein, shall be given a
2.5% evaluation credit. This shall mean that if a veteran owned small business
submits a bid/quote that is within 2.5% of the lowest price submitted by any
vendor, the veteran owned small business shall have an option to submit another
bid which is at least 1% lower than the lowest responsive bid/quote. If the
veteran owned small business submits a bid which is at least 1% lower than that
lowest responsive bid/quote, then the award will go to the veteran owned small
business. If not, the award will be made to the vendor that submits the lowest
responsive bid/quote. If the lowest responsive and responsible bidder IS a
local Pembroke Pines vendor or a local Broward County vendor as established in
§
35.36 of this Code, entitled "Local Vendor Preference", then the award will be
made to that vendor and no other bidders will be given an opportunity to submit
additional bids as described herein.
      (2)   If there is a local Pembroke Pines vendor, a local Broward County
vendor, and a veteran owned small business participating in the same bid
solicitation and all three vendors qualify to submit a second bid as detailed
above, the local Pembroke Pines vendor will be given first option. If the local
Pembroke Pines vendor cannot beat the lowest bid received by at least 1%, an
opportunity will be given to the local Broward County vendor. If the local
Broward County vendor cannot beat the lowest bid by at least 1%, an opportunity
will be given to the veteran owned small business. If the veteran owned small
business cannot beat the lowest bid by at least 1%. then the bid will be
awarded to the lowest bidder.
      (3)   If multiple veteran owned small businesses submit bids/quotes which
are within 2.5% of the lowest bid/quote and there are no local Pembroke Pines
vendors or local Broward County vendors as described in §
35.36 of this Code, entitled "Local Vendor Preference", then all vendors will
be asked to submit a best and final offer (BAFO). The award will be made to the
veteran owned small business submitting the lowest BAFO providing that that
BAFO is at least 1% lower than the lowest bid/quote received in the original
solicitation. If no veteran owned small business can beat the lowest bid/quote
by at least 1%, then the award will be made to the lowest responsive bidder.
   (C)   Competitive proposal. For evaluation purposes, veteran owned small
business shall be a criterion for award in any Request For Proposal unless
specifically exempted by the City Manager or the City Commission. The criterion
amount shall be 2.5%.
   (D)   Any business claiming veteran owned small business cannot also claim
local vendor preference as described in § 35.36 of the this Code entitled
"Local Vendor Preference".
   (E)   Exceptions.
      (1)   No veteran owned small business preference will be included in any
competitive solicitation where the city is the lead agency for the Southeast
Florida Cooperative Purchasing Group;
      (2)   Utilization of a state or other agency contract;
      (3)   State or federal law prohibits the use of veteran owned small
business preference;
      (4)   The work is funded in whole or in part by a governmental entity
where the laws, rules, regulations or policies prohibit the use of veteran
owned small business preferences;
      (5)   Sole source or single source purchases;
      (6)   The veteran owned small business is either non-responsive or non-
responsible;
      (7)   All bids submitted exceed the budget amount for the project;
      (8)   Emergency purchases;
      (9)   The City Manager and/or the City Commission may exempt any
competitive solicitation from the veteran owned small business preference.
(Ord. 1769, passed 2-19-14; Am. Ord. 1924, passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.38 BID PROTEST PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Upon completion of the evaluation of all bids for a particular
procurement, the Purchasing Manager shall issue a notice of bid/proposal
action. This notice, containing the date and time of issuance, shall be posted
on the city website and on the Internet bid service websites named in the bid
documents.
   (B)   A bidder with a “substantial interest” who has been adversely affected
by the city’s selection of a bidder may protest the selection by complying with
the requirements set forth herein. A bidder shall be deemed to have a
“substantial interest” if the bidder would have been selected as the lowest
responsive and responsible bidder but for the alleged mistake or irregularly
described in the protest. If the Purchasing Manager determines that a bidder
does not have a “substantial interest,” that bidder is precluded from bringing
a protest pursuant to this section.
   (C)   A bidder wishing to object to terms, conditions, specifications,
procedures, selection criteria, weight of evaluation criteria or other matter
set forth in the bid or proposed documents must make such objections in writing
during the period of time set forth for questions and answers in the invitation
to bid, request for proposal, request for qualifications or request for letters
of interest. A bidder who has not raised such objections in writing during the
question and answer time may not use the bid protect process to object to these
matters once a notice of bid/proposal action has been posted.
   (D)   A bidder may file a “Notice of Intent to Protest” by emailing said
notice to the Purchasing Manager within two business days of the issuance of
the notice of bid/proposal action pursuant to division (A) or the publication
of a City Commission agenda recommending the award of the bid, whichever is
sooner. Such notice of protest shall include the bid or proposal number and
title, the name and address of the protester, and a brief statement as to the
basis of the protest.
   (E)   The complete written protest must be filed with the Purchasing Manager
within ten calendar days of the issuance of the notice of bid action. To be
considered, the written protest must include:
      (1)   Bid or proposal number and title;
      (2)   Company name, protester’s name and title, physical address of
protester, and email address of protester;
      (3)   The facts and law upon which the protest is based; and grounds not
stated shall be deemed waived;
      (4)   Rules, regulations or statutes pertinent to the protest;
      (5)   Relief which the protester seeks;
      (6)   Any other information that the protester deems to be material to
the protest; and
      (7)   A bid protest bond in the form of a certified check, cashier’s
check, or money order made payable to the City of Pembroke Pines in an amount
equal to 5% of the protester’s bid or $5,000, whichever is less. If the protest
is upheld by the city, the bond will be refunded to the protester. If the
protest is denied, the entire bond amount shall be forfeited to the city.
   (F)   Upon receipt of a timely filled and complete formal written protest,
the Purchasing Manager shall stay the award of the purchase order or contract
until the protest is resolved, unless the Purchasing Manager determines in
writing that compelling circumstances exist which require that the award be
processed without further delay, in order to protect the city’s interest or for
the purpose of avoiding an immediate and serious danger to the public health,
safety or welfare.
   (G)   After receipt of the timely filed and complete written protest, and
upon the protester’s request, the Purchasing Manager shall meet with the
protester to discuss the allegations and to attempt to resolve the matter. The
Purchasing Manager shall issue his or her decision on the protest within 14
calendar days of the meeting, or if no meeting is requested, within 14 days of
receipt of the timely filed and complete written protest. Such decision shall
be e-mailed to the protester on the date of issuance unless otherwise directed
by the protester.
   (H)   The protester may appeal the decision of the Purchasing Manager to the
City Manager by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk’s office within
three business days of issuance of the Purchasing Manager’s decision. The
appeal must be in writing and must include a full explanation of the basis of
disagreement with the decision rendered by the Purchasing Manager, as well as
the relief sought. The City Manager shall overturn the selection if the
protester proves that the selection did not comply in material respects with
the requirements contained in the invitation to bid, request for proposal,
request for qualifications or request for letters of interest; with this
procurement code, or with Florida law. The decision of the City Manager shall
be final. The City Manager’s decision shall be e-mailed to the protester on the
date of issuance unless otherwise directed by the protester.
   (I)   Failure by a bidder to comply with the timelines and requirements set
forth herein shall result in an immediate invalidation and termination of the
protest and a waiver of the right to seek further redress or to appeal the
alleged adverse action in a court of law.
   (J)   Any and all costs incurred by a protesting party in connection with a
protest pursuant to this section shall be the sole responsibility of the
protesting party.
(Ord. 1772, passed 4-9-14; Am. Ord. 1924, passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.39 CITY CONTRACTORS PROVIDING EQUAL BENEFITS FOR DOMESTIC PARTNERS AND ALL
MARRIED COUPLES.
   (A)   Contractor offering benefits. Except where federal or state law
mandates to the contrary, a contractor awarded a contract pursuant to a
competitive solicitation shall provide benefits to domestic partners and
spouses of its employees, irrespective of gender, on the same basis as it
provides benefits to employees' spouses in traditional marriages.
   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section only, the following
definitions shall apply:
      (1)   BENEFITS. The following plan, program or policy provided or offered
by a contractor to its employees as part of the employer's total compensation
package which may include but is not limited to sick leave, bereavement leave,
family medical leave, and health benefits.
      (2)   CASH EQUIVALENT. The amount of money paid to an employee with a
domestic partner or spouse in lieu of providing benefits to the employee's
domestic partner or spouse. The cash equivalent is equal to the employer's
direct expense of providing benefits to an employee for his or her spouse from
a traditional marriage.
      (3)   COVERED CONTRACT. A contract between the city and a contractor
awarded subsequent to the date when this section becomes effective valued at
over $25,000 or the threshold amount required for competitive bids as required
in § 35.18(A).
      (4)   DOMESTIC PARTNER. Any two adults of the same or different sex who
have registered as domestic partners with a governmental body pursuant to state
or local law authorizing such registration, or with an internal registry
maintained by the employer of at least one of the domestic partners. A
contractor may institute an internal registry to allow for the provision of
equal benefits to employees with domestic partners who do not register their
partnerships pursuant to a governmental body authorizing such registration, or
who are located in a jurisdiction where no such governmental domestic
partnership registry exists. A contractor that institutes such registry shall
not impose criteria for registration that are more stringent than those
required for domestic partnership registration by the city.
      (5)   EQUAL BENEFITS. The equality of benefits between employees with
spouses and/or dependents of spouses and employees with domestic partners and/
or dependents of domestic partners, and/or between spouses of employees and/or
dependents of spouses and domestic partners of employees and/or dependents of
domestic partners.
      (6)   SPOUSE. One member of a married pair legally married under the laws
of any state within the United States of America or any other jurisdiction
under which such marriage is legally recognized, irrespective of gender.
      (7)   TRADITIONAL MARRIAGE. A marriage between one man and one woman.
   (C)   Equal benefits requirements.
      (1)   All solicitations for covered contracts which are issued on or
after the effective date of this section shall include the requirement to
provide equal benefits in the procurement specifications.
      (2)   Certification of contractor. As part of the competitive
solicitation and procurement process a contractor seeking a contract covered by
division (A) of this section shall certify one of the following:
         (a)   Contractor currently complies with the requirements of this
section;
         (b)   Contractor will comply with the conditions of this section at
the time of contract award;
         (c)   Contractor will not comply with the conditions of this section
at the time of contract award; or
         (d)   Contractor does not need to comply with the conditions of this
section because of an allowable exemption and indicates the exemption as part
of the certification.
The certification shall be in writing and signed by an authorized officer of
the contractor. Failure to provide such certification shall result in a
contractor being deemed non-responsive.
      (3)   The City Manager or his/her designee shall reject a contractor's
certification of compliance if he/she determines that such contractor
discriminates in the provision of benefits or if the City Manager or designee
determines that the certification was created, or is being used for the
purposes of evading the requirements of this section.
      (4)   The contractor shall provide the city and/or the City Manager or
his/her designee, access to its records for the purpose of audits and/or
investigations to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this section, and
upon request shall provide evidence that the contractor is in compliance with
the provisions of this section upon each new bid, contract renewal, or when the
City Manager has received a complaint or has reason to believe the contractor
may not be in compliance with the provisions of this section. Records shall
include but not be limited to providing the city and/or the City Manager or
his/her designee with certified copies of the contractor's records pertaining
to its benefits policies and its employment policies and practices.
      (5)   The contractor must conspicuously make available to all employees
and applicants for employment the following statement:
   "During the performance of a contract with the City of Pembroke Pines,
Florida, the Contractor will provide Equal Benefits to its employees with
spouses, as defined by Section 35.39 of the City's Code of Ordinances, and its
employees with Domestic Partners".
The posted statement must also include a city contact telephone number and
email address which will be provided to each contractor when a covered contract
is executed.
   (D)   Exceptions and waivers. The provisions of this section shall not apply
where:
      (1)   The contractor does not provide benefits to employees' spouses in
traditional marriages;
      (2)   The contractor provides an employee the cash equivalent of benefits
because the contractor is unable to provide benefits to employees' domestic
partners or spouses despite making reasonable efforts to provide them. To meet
this exception, the contractor shall provide a notarized affidavit that it has
made reasonable efforts to provide such benefits. The affidavit shall state the
efforts taken to provide such benefits and the amount of the cash equivalent.
Cash equivalent means the amount of money paid to an employee with a domestic
partner or spouse rather than providing
benefits to the employee's domestic partner or spouse. The cash equivalent is
equal to the employer's direct expense of providing benefits to an employee's
spouse;
      (3)   The contractor is a religious organization, association, society,
or any non-profit charitable or educational institution or organization
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association, or society;
      (4)   The contractor is a governmental agency;
      (5)   The contract is for the sale or lease of property;
      (6)   The covered contract is necessary to respond to an emergency;
      (7)   The provisions of this section would violate the laws, rules, or
regulations of federal or state law (for example, F.S. § 287.055, Consultants'
Competitive Negotiation Act);
      (8)   The provisions of this section would violate or be inconsistent
with the terms or conditions of a grant or contract with the United States or
the State of Florida; or
      (9)   Upon a majority vote, the City Commission may waive compliance of
this section under the following circumstances:
         (a)   Where only one solicitation response is received and the sole
bidder does not comply with the requirements of this section.
         (b)   Where more than one solicitation response is received, but the
responses demonstrate that none of the proposers can comply with the
requirements of this section and one or more of the solicitation responses
received would otherwise have been responsive if compliance with this section
would not have been listed as a requirement in the solicitation specifications.
         (c)   Where the bid price or proposal price as submitted by the lowest
responsive bidder which complies with the requirements of this section is at
least 5% greater than the lowest bid or proposal submitted by the bidder which
does not comply with the requirements of this section but would otherwise have
been responsive if compliance with this section would not have been listed as a
requirement in the bid specifications.
         (d)   Best interest of the city as determined by the City Commission.
   (E)   Contracts. Every covered contract, unless otherwise exempt from this
section, shall contain language that obligates the contractor to comply with
the applicable provisions of this section. The contract shall include
provisions for the following:
      (1)   The contractor certifies and represents that it will comply with
this section during the entire term of the contract.
      (2)   The failure of the contractor to comply with this section shall be
deemed to be a material breach of the contract, entitling the city to pursue
any remedy stated below or any remedy provided under applicable law.
      (3)   The city may terminate the contract if the contractor fails to
comply with this section.
      (4)   The city may retain all monies due or to become due until the
contractor complies with this section.
      (5)   The contractor may be subject to debarment or suspension
proceedings. Such proceedings will be consistent with the procedures in this
chapter.
   (F)   Applicable dates. This section shall be applicable to contracts
awarded pursuant to competitive solicitations issued after the effective date
of this section.
(Ord. 1797, passed 11-5-14; Am. Ord. 1924, passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.40 CONE OF SILENCE.
   (A)   Prohibited communication. Except as set forth in division (C) during
the course of a sealed competitive solicitation, a cone of silence shall be in
effect between:
      (1)   Any person or entity that seeks a contract, contract amendment,
award, recommendation, or approval related to a sealed competitive solicitation
or that is subject to being evaluated or having its response evaluated in
connection with a sealed competitive solicitation, including a person or
entity's representative; and
      (2)   The City Manager or any person or group of persons appointed or
designated by the City Commission or the City Manager to evaluate, select, or
make a recommendation to the City Commission or the City Manager regarding a
sealed competitive solicitation, including any member of the selection/
evaluation committee.
   (B)   Effective dates. A cone of silence shall begin and shall end for
sealed competitive solicitations as follows:
      (1)   A cone of silence shall be in effect during a sealed competitive
solicitation process beginning upon the advertisement for the sealed
competitive solicitation or during such other procurement activities as
declared by the City Commission.
      (2)   The cone of silence shall terminate at the time the City Commission
takes final action or gives final approval of a contract, rejects all bids or
responses to the sealed competitive solicitation, or takes other action which
ends the sealed competitive solicitation process.
   (C)   Permitted communication.
      (1)   The cone of silence shall not apply to written or oral
communications with legal counsel for the city or the Procurement Department
staff for the city.
      (2)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit any person or
entity subject to this section from:
         (a)   Making public presentations, asking questions, or providing
feedback at pre-bid meetings, site visits or conferences or at a selection,
evaluation or negotiation meeting related to the sealed competitive
solicitation.
         (b)   Engaging in contract negotiations with the entity selected to
negotiate the terms of the agreement or with the City Commission during a
public meeting.
         (c)   Making a public presentation to the City Commission during any
public meeting related to the sealed competitive solicitation.
         (d)   Communicating with the person or persons designated in the
sealed competitive solicitation as the contact person for clarification or
information related to the sealed competitive solicitation. The contact person
shall not be a member of the selection/evaluation committee or the person
designated to negotiate the agreement, except as otherwise provided for in
division (D)(1) above.
      (3)   The purchasing agent and the City Attorney shall accept written
communications from persons or entities subject to this section during the time
a cone of silence is applicable to a sealed competitive solicitation.
   (D)   Violations. Any action in violation of this section shall be cause for
disqualification of the bid or the proposal. The determination of a violation
and the penalty shall be made by the City Commission.
   (E)   The cone of silence shall not apply to a competitive process which
seeks to enter into a contract or award of money to perform governmental quasi-
governmental, social or human services primarily for charitable, benevolent,
humanitarian or other philanthropic purposes, such as the award of grants or
support assistance to organized nonprofit entities that promote or assist with
the care, education, health, standard of living or general welfare of people in
the City of Pembroke Pines, or that promote or assist community or neighborhood
enhancements.
(Ord. 1924, passed 5-15-19)
§ 35.41 ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES AND SUBMISSIONS.
   (A)   Force and effect of electronic signature. Unless otherwise prohibited,
regulated or preempted by Florida law, an electronic signature may be used to
sign a writing and shall have the same force and effect as a written signature.
   (B)   SIGNATURE means a manual or electronic identifier, or the electronic
result of an authentication technique attached to or logically associated with
a record that is intended by the person using it to have the same force and
effect as a manual signature.
   (C)   WRITTEN or IN WRITING means the product of any method of forming
characters on paper, other materials, or viewable screens, which can be read,
retrieved, and reproduced, including information that is electronically
transmitted and stored.
   (D)   Authorization for the use of electronic transmissions. The use of
electronic media, including acceptance of electronic signatures, is authorized
consistent with State of Florida applicable statutory, regulatory or other
guidance for use of such media, so long as such guidance provides for:
      (1)   Appropriate security to prevent unauthorized access to the bidding,
approval, and/or award processes; and
      (2)   Accurate retrieval or conversion of electronic forms of such
information into a medium which permits inspection and copying.
(Ord. 1924, passed 5-15-19)
CHAPTER 36: PLACEMENT, ENFORCEMENT OF LIENS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   Scope
   
36.02   Definitions
   
36.03   Placement of lien for charges, special assessments
   
36.04   Foreclosure
   
36.05   Lien charges
   
36.06   Debt collection
Special Assessments
   
36.10   Scope
   
36.11   Definitions
   
36.12   Declaration of intent; notice
   
36.13   Setting assessments for special assessment improvements
   
36.14   Levying of special assessments
    
36.15   Collection of payments; installment payments; certificate of
indebtedness
   
36.16   Issuance of bonds
   
36.17   Concurrency of improvements
   
36.18   Street improvements
   
36.19   Sidewalk improvements
   
36.20   Storm system improvements
   
36.21   Sanitary sewer extensions
   
36.22   Water line extensions
   
36.23   Developer agreements
   
36.24   Special assessments pursuant to interlocal agreement
   
36.25   Specific provisions not a limitation
   
36.26   Irregularities
General Provisions
§ 36.01 SCOPE. 
   This chapter is not to be read in conflict with pertinent state law or city
or county ordinances pertaining to the placing of liens or levying of
assessments by municipalities for any reason, or the enforcement of same
through foreclosure proceedings.
(Ord. 699, passed 7-18-84)
§ 36.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSESSMENT or SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.  Any assessment or special assessment, or
revolving fund or funds levied against benefitted property out of which may be
paid the cost, or a portion thereof, of any improvement to the property.
   LIEN. A charge, security, or encumbrance attaching to real property,
satisfaction of which is a pre-requisite to the vestiture of title in a third
party.
   SERVICES. Shall include, but not be limited to water and sewer services as
well as lot clearing and garbage collection services provided by the city.
(Ord. 699, passed 7-18-84)
§ 36.03 PLACEMENT OF LIEN FOR CHARGES, SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The city shall have a lien on all lands or premises situated within the city
limits for all charges or special assessments levied against that property for
improvements made thereto or services rendered thereon, until paid. These liens
shall be superior and prior to all other liens with the exception of state,
county, and municipal tax liens when notice of the lien has been filed in the
Public Records of Broward County.
(Ord. 699, passed 7-18-84)
§ 36.04 FORECLOSURE.
   Any liens placed against real property pursuant to this chapter may be
foreclosed upon by the city in a manner provided by state law for the
foreclosure of mortgages on property, if the lien remains unpaid for 30 days
after it has been recorded in the Public Records of Broward County.
(Ord. 699, passed 7-18-84)
§ 36.05 LIEN CHARGES.
   (A)   Individuals requesting information regarding city liens on residential
properties may utilize one of the following three options:
      (1)   Automated lien search. Individuals may establish a pre-funded
online account at the city’s website (www.ppines.com/liensearch). After
entering a folio number, a completed lien search will be transmitted to the
individual pursuant to the instructions provided by the individual on the
website. A history of the account will be available online at any time. A
charge of $50 shall be deducted from the individual’s account at the time of
the lien search. If an account does not have sufficient funds to cover the
cost, it will be treated as a semi-automated lien search.
      (2)   Semi-automated lien search. Individuals may establish an unfunded
account at the city’s website. After entering a folio number, individuals shall
mail the printed order form, along with a check for $75 to the City of Pembroke
Pines, Attn: Finance Department, 10100 Pines Boulevard, Pembroke Pines, FL
33026. The completed lien search shall be transmitted to the individual in
accordance with the instructions provided once the payment is received by the
city. A history of the account will be available online at any time.
      (3)   Manual lien search. A lien search request form shall be available
on the city’s website (www.ppines.com) or at the City of Pembroke Pines Finance
Department. Individuals may hand deliver or mail the request form to the
address set forth in subsection (2), together with a check for $100. The
completed lien search shall be transmitted to the individual in accordance with
the instructions provided.
   (B)   Individuals requesting information regarding city liens on non-
residential properties may utilize one of the options set forth in section (A).
The cost for non-residential lien searches on properties with one tenant shall
be as stated above. Non-residential properties with more than one tenant shall
be charged an additional 10% for each additional tenant.
   (C)   The following charges are imposed in connection with liens and lien
satisfactions:
      Lien preparation and recording   $55
      Lien satisfaction preparation and recording   $45
      Lien satisfaction preparation without recording   $35
(Ord. 917, passed 1-17-90; Am. Ord. 1456, passed 9-17-03; Am. Ord. 1620, passed
9-17-08)
§ 36.06 DEBT COLLECTION.
   (A)   The city may engage a third-party collection agency to pursue any debt
owed to the city as a result of delinquent water or utility accounts, false
alarm fees, fire inspection fees, emergency medical service fees, or any other
unpaid funds owed to the city.
   (B)   A pass-through collection fee shall be added to all delinquent
accounts or other unpaid funds owed to the city that are pursued through any
debt collection process.
(Ord. 1679, passed 9-21-10)
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
§ 36.10 SCOPE.
   (A)   The provisions of this division shall apply to special assessment
improvements, and §§
36.10 through
36.26 may be referred to as the “Home Rule Special Assessment Ordinance”.
Improvements may be made or undertaken in accordance with the Home Rule Special
Assessment Ordinance whenever the city determines that such improvement should
be undertaken and completed and the costs collected, in whole or in part, as a
special assessment. The authority granted to the city pursuant to the Home Rule
Special Assessment Ordinance shall be supplemental to other provisions of law,
including Florida Statutes, Chapter 170, and shall not be construed as
limiting, or being limited by, such other provisions of law.
   (B)   Special assessments made pursuant to this division shall be levied
only for the purposes enumerated in this division and at a rate of assessment
based upon the special benefit accruing to the property assessed from such
improvements.  SPECIAL BENEFIT means generally a benefit which is different in
type or degree from benefits provided to the community as a whole. The
reasonably estimated value of such special benefit must equal or exceed the
amount of the assessment for each parcel assessed. Adoption of the Assessment
Resolution, as hereinafter defined and provided, shall constitute a legislative
finding that these standards have been met.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94)
§ 36.11 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this division the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSESSABLE AREA. The area of property that will receive a special benefit
from a special assessment improvement.
   ASSESSABLE FRONT FOOTAGE. The length of property abutting a special
assessment improvement that will receive a special benefit from that
improvement.
   ASSESSABLE VALUE. The value of real property that will receive a special
benefit from a special assessment improvement. For the purposes of this
division, the value shall be determined by reference to the assessed value
according to the latest final assessment roll prepared by the property
appraiser for Broward County, including improvements but without regard to
exemptions.
   BASIS FOR ASSESSMENT. The assessable area, assessable front footage, or
assessable value of real property deriving a special benefit from a special
assessment improvement, as determined by the city in accordance with the
provisions of this division. When appropriate, the city may use a basis other
than area, front footage, or value in allocating improvement costs among
properties specially benefitted by a special assessment improvement, including,
but not limited to, the amount of any impact fees or concurrency fees for which
the assessed property would be liable and for which the special assessment is
levied in lieu thereof.
   COST PER ASSESSABLE UNIT. The total improvement cost divided by the total
basis for assessment of all specially benefitted properties.
   IMPROVEMENT. A valuable addition made to real property or an amelioration in
its condition. For the purposes of this division, the term shall include but
not be limited to repairs and replacement.
   SPECIAL ASSESSMENT IMPROVEMENT. A public works project which adds to or
extends the capability of a municipal service (including another governmental
unit’s service pursuant to an interlocal agreement between the city and such
other governmental unit or units) and which specially benefits properties
adjoining or adjacent to the improvement, or properties located within an area
in which the special benefits may be determined, by increasing the safety,
utility, accessibility or value of the properties involved or by levying a
special assessment in lieu of an impact fee, concurrency fee or other similar
governmental charge levied in connection with the development of the
properties. The term includes, but is not necessarily limited to:
      (1)   Construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance, paving,
repaving, widening, guttering or draining of streets, alleys and sidewalks,
      (2)   Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of permanent
pedestrian canopies over public sidewalks and ways;
      (3)   Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of lighting,
landscaping, street furniture, signage, bike paths, trails and other amenities
associated with streets, sidewalks or public ways;
      (4)   Construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance, renovation,
excavation, grading, stabilization, relocation and upgrading of greenbelts,
swales, culverts, sanitary sewers, water lines, storm sewers, outfalls, canals,
primary, secondary, and tertiary drains, water bodies, marshlands, and natural
areas, separately or as part of a comprehensive stormwater management system,
including the necessary appurtenances and structures thereto and including, but
not limited to, dams, weirs, pumps and underdrains, retention and detention
ponds;
      (5)   Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of sanitary
sewers, gravity lines, force mains, lift stations, telemetry systems, water
mains, water laterals and other potable and reuse water distribution and
storage facilities, including the necessary appurtenances thereto;
      (6) Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of bridges and
culverts;
      (7)   Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of parks and
other public recreational facilities and improvements, including appurtenances
thereto;
      (8)   Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of public
schools and other public educational facilities and improvements, including
appurtenances thereto;
      (9)   Creation, restoration, drainage or reclamation of wet, low, or
overflowed lands;
      (10)   Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of off street
parking facilities, parking garages, or similar facilities.
      (11)   Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of mass
transportation facilities;
      (12)   Provision for commercial projects in an enterprise zone as defined
in Florida Statutes, § 159.27(19);
      (13)   Construction, rehabilitation, revitalization and beautification of
city neighborhoods and low, moderate and affordable housing;
      (14)   Burial of overhead utility lines, including without limitation
acquisition of necessary or convenient easements or rights of way;
      (15)   Provision for landscaping and green spaces;
      (16)   Provision of all other public improvements and services as
designated by the City Commission;
      (17)   Stabilization and improvement of:
         (a)   Retail business districts,
         (b)   Wholesale business districts,
         (c)   Nationally recognized historical districts,
         (d)   Industrial districts,
         (e)   Educational districts,
         (f)   Commercial districts, or
         (g)   Office and newly developing districts.
and such other areas as the City Commission may desire from time to time, or
any combination of such districts, through promotion, management, marketing,
security, maintenance and other similar services in the municipality.
      (18)   Provision of engineering, surveys, designs, documents, plans and
specifications, legal services and all services related to the feasibility or
practicability of such improvements.
The term includes any improvement of general benefit to the public which the
City Commission determines to serve a proper public purpose, and may include
improvements conducted jointly with any other public agency or publicly
regulated utility.
   SPECIAL BENEFIT. See §
36.10(B).
   STREET. Includes but is not limited to a road, highway, boulevard, alley,
street or other public thoroughfare
   TOTAL IMPROVEMENT COST. The sum of all expenses chargeable to an
improvement, including all costs incurred from inception to final acceptance,
including by way of example and not limitation, engineering, field, design, and
overhead costs, acquisition and construction costs; direct city labor and
material costs; general city administrative and overhead costs as a fixed
percentage of the other total costs; attorneys fees; and other necessary or
incidental expenses. Such costs may include the cost of construction or
reconstruction, repair, or maintenance, the cost of all labor and materials,
the cost of all land, property, rights, easements, and franchises acquired,
financing charges, interest, discount on the sale of special assessment bonds
or an anticipation certificates, cost of plans and specifications, surveys,
environmental assessments, remediation or mitigation, surveys of estimates of
costs and of revenues, cost of engineering and legal services, and all other
expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability
of such construction or reconstruction, repair or maintenance, administrative
expense, and such other expense as may be necessary or incident to the
improvements and financing authorized.
   UNIFORM ASSESSMENT COLLECTION ACT. Refers to Florida Statutes §§ 197.3632
and 17.3635, or any successor statutes authorizing the collection of non- ad
valorem assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, and any applicable
regulations promulgated thereunder.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94; Am. Ord. 1110, passed 1-18-95)
§ 36.12 DECLARATION OF INTENT; NOTICE
   (A)   Whenever the city shall decide that a special assessment improvement
needs to be accomplished, the City Commission shall by resolution (the “Intent
Resolution”) declare the city’s intention to have such work performed,
designating the nature of the work; the location of the work; the part or
portion of the cost to be paid by special assessment; the manner in which
special assessments shall be made; when such assessments are to be paid, and
what part, if any, shall be apportioned to be paid from other funds of the city
or another participating governmental unit. Such Intent Resolution shall also
describe the lands on which the special assessment is to be levied and it shall
be sufficient to describe such land as all lots and lands adjoining and
contiguous or bounding and abutting upon such improvements or specially
benefitted thereby. Such Intent Resolution shall also state the estimated total
amount of the improvement costs.
   (B)   At the time of the adoption of the Intent Resolution there shall be on
file with the City Clerk an Assessment Plat showing the area to be assessed,
together with preliminary plans and specifications and an estimate of the total
improvement cost, which assessment plat, preliminary plans and specifications,
and estimate shall be open to the inspection of the public.
   (C)   Upon adoption of the Intent Resolution, the city shall advertise for
bids for construction of the improvement in a newspaper of general circulation
in the municipality and include in such advertisement the Intent Resolution
number and title, except in cases where the work will be performed pursuant to
an agreement with another public agency or a publicly regulated utility agency.
All such bids shall conform to the city bid procedures then in effect.
   (D)   Promptly after adoption of the Intent Resolution, the City Clerk shall
cause the Intent Resolution to be published once a week for a period of two
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and in Broward County,
Florida.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94)
§ 36.13 SETTING ASSESSMENTS FOR SPECIAL ASSESSMENT IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Determining basis for assessment. The city shall determine the total
assessable front footage area, value, or other assessable unit for each special
assessment improvement and shall prepare an assessment roll (the “Preliminary
Assessment Roll”) in accordance with the method of assessment set out in the
Intent Resolution. Such Preliminary Assessment Roll shall show the lots and
land to be assessed and, after taking into consideration the limitations
contained in subsection (B) of this section, the amount of assessment against
each lot or parcel.
   (B)   Determining assessable cost per lot or parcel. The estimated total
cost of the improvement shall be used to develop a cost per assessable unit as
defined for the total improvement. The assessable unit of each lot or parcel
shall be multiplied by the cost per assessable unit to arrive at the total
assessment for that lot or parcel.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94)
§ 36.14 LEVYING OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Upon completion of the Preliminary Assessment Roll, the city shall by
resolution or motion fix a time and place at which the owners of property to be
assessed, or any other persons interested therein, may appear before the city
and be heard with respect to the propriety and advisability of making the
improvements and funding them with special assessments, the cost of the
improvement, and the amount to be assessed against each property so improved.
The City Clerk shall provide written notice of such hearing to each of the
property owners whose property is subject to being assessed. Such notice shall
be provided by first class U.S. mail, postage prepaid, certified with return
receipt requested, not less than two days in advance of the hearing. In
addition, notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given by two
publications approximately one week apart in a newspaper of general circulation
in the municipality; the last publication shall appear not less than one week
prior to the hearing date; provided however that any mistake in such advertised
notice or in any mailed notice shall not void any assessment levied in
accordance with the provisions of this division. The resolution or motion shall
contain the date, time and place of the hearing, describe the area to be
improved, and advise persons interested that the description of individual
properties to be assessed and the amount of the assessment can be ascertained
at the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   At such meeting, the city shall consider all objections relating to
the assessments and shall make a final decision on whether to levy the special
assessments. Thereafter, if the decision is to levy the special assessments,
the city shall equalize or adjust such assessments where justice and right so
dictate, and shall approve and confirm the assessment roll by resolution (the
“Assessment Resolution”). When so equalized and approved, a final assessment
roll shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk, and such assessments shall
stand confirmed and remain legal, valid and binding first liens upon the
property against which such assessments are made until paid.
   (C)   A statement of the confirmed assessment shall be provided to each
property owner listed on the roll. The property owner shall have such time as
may be provided in the Assessment Resolution within which to pay the total
assessment.
   (D)   The city shall determine in the Assessment Resolution when the payment
of any special assessment levied pursuant to this division shall commence, and
the frequency and amount of any scheduled collections of such assessments upon
determination of the confirmed assessment roll.
   (E)   Upon completion of the improvement, any excess in the special
assessment as originally made, approved and confirmed over the actual cost of
the improvement to be paid by such special assessment, shall be credited
proportionately against each special assessment against each parcel in the
manner set forth in the Assessment Resolution, or used for any lawful purpose.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94)
§ 36.15. COLLECTION OF PAYMENTS; INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS; CERTIFICATE OF
INDEBTEDNESS.
   (A)   Notice of assessment; collection. Promptly after adoption of the
Assessment Resolution, a statement of the confirmed assessment shall be
provided to each property owner listed on the confirmed roll. The special
assessments shall bear interest and be payable at the time and in the manner
stipulated in the Assessment Resolution, and shall remain liens, co-equal with
the lien of all state, county, district, and municipal taxes, other non-ad
valorem assessments which are duly levied and collected pursuant to the Uniform
Method, superior in dignity to all other liens, titles, and claims, until paid.
The city may elect to either collect its own assessment or to utilize the
Uniform Method.
   (B)   Installment payments. The assessment, subject to the interest provided
in this section, may be satisfied through weekly, monthly or annual
installments as provided for in the Assessment Resolution with such installment
payment period to run not more than ten years from the completion date of the
improvement or such other period as determined in the Assessment Resolution.
Such assessment, together with interest accrued thereon, may be paid in full at
any time and the property owner shall not incur any penalty for prepayment.
   (C)   Certificate issued for failure to pay assessment. In the event the
city elects to collect its own assessments rather than utilize the Uniform
Method whenever assessments are not paid within the time provided in the
Assessment Resolution, a certificate of indebtedness shall be issued for each
assessed lot or parcel. The certificate shall contain a description of the lot
or parcel, the amount of the assessment, a description of the improvement, and
shall identify the Assessment Resolution under which the assessment was made.
Such certificate shall be recorded in the public records of Broward County and
shall constitute a lien co-equal with the lien of all state, county, district
and other municipal taxes, superior in dignity to all other liens, titles and
claims, until paid, and shall bear interest at a rate to be set forth in the
Assessment Resolution.
   (D)   Enforcement of certificate. Upon failure of the property owner to pay
any assessment installment due, any part thereof, or any interest, the
procedures and remedies of the Uniform Method shall apply; or if the city has
opted not to utilize the Uniform Method, then the city may cause the necessary
proceedings to be brought to enforce payment of either the assessment or the
certificate issued under §
36.15(C), together with all accrued interest. As a part of such proceeding, the
city shall be entitled to recover all cost and a reasonable attorney’s fee.
Default in the payment of any installment of the assessment or accrued interest
shall result in the entire assessment plus interest becoming immediately due.
Such foreclosure proceeding shall be instituted and prosecuted under Florida
Statues, Chapters 43 and 173.
   (E)   Validity. In no event shall the amount or validity of the lien or
certificate of indebtedness as provided for by this division be questioned in
any direct or collateral proceeding instituted more than 30 days after the
issuance of such certificate of indebtedness by the city, or such shorter time
as may result from the filing of bond validation proceedings.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94; Am. Ord. 1110, passed 1-18-95)
§ 36.16 ISSUANCE OF BONDS.
   The city may at any time without an election being held therefor borrow
money and issue bonds therefor in anticipation of the collection of unpaid
special assessments levied or to be levied for the purpose of paying the cost
of special assessment improvements.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94)
§ 36.17 CONCURRENCY OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Before paving or otherwise surfacing or resurfacing any street of the city,
the city may, but need not, determine a time certain within which sewer, water,
gas or other underground utility connection must be constructed or not at all,
and shall give notice thereof to the person required to make the connection. If
any person fails to make connection when so required, no permission to make
such connection shall thereafter be granted after the completion of any street
improvement for a period of five years, unless for special reasons approved by
the city. During that period of time, no permits to open or cut the street or
alley shall be issued without such special approval. Required connections
during this period shall be accomplished so as to leave the street improvement
unaffected, using such construction methods as jack and bore. Connections made
shall be subject to the general provisions of this division if they otherwise
meet the definitions and intent of the policy on special assessment
improvements.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94)
§ 36.18 STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Power to improve streets. The city shall have the power to construct,
reconstruct, pave, repair, resurface, widen, provide drainage and gutters and
otherwise upgrade all paved and unpaved streets and alleys within its corporate
boundaries. Properties benefitting from any such improvement shall be assessed
by the city for the total cost of such improvement of such city streets and
alleys to standard or for any portion of the cost of such improvement, as
determined by the city.
   (B)   Conditions for improving streets; street paving. All unpaved or
substandard streets that are paved or rebuilt or otherwise improved must be
constructed to city standards and specifications to include curbs and drainage.
The cost of paving unpaved streets will be assessed to and shared between
abutting property owners. If an existing paved street does not have curbs and
drainage, the cost of bringing that street up to standard will be equitably
shared between the city and abutting property owners on either side of the
street, as determined by the city. If an existing paved street requires
widening, whether it has curbs and drainage or not, the cost of standardizing
the street will be shared equitably between the abutting property owners, as
determined by the city.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94)
§ 36.19 SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Power to install and improve sidewalks. The city shall have the power
to install, repair, modify and otherwise upgrade sidewalks within rights-of-way
owned by the city within its corporate boundaries. Properties benefitting from
the sidewalk improvements shall be assessed by the city for the total cost of
the improvement.
   (B)   Conditions for installing or improving sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be
constructed or improved whenever:
      (1)   The city shall decide that it is necessary in the best interests of
the city that sidewalks be constructed or repaired upon any of the streets,
avenues or alleys of the city; or
      (2)   Requested by at least 50% of the property owners in a geographic
area.
   (C)   Exception to improvement procedure. Where an existing sidewalk is
broken, raised or otherwise damaged by means other than as a result of a
construction project, then the abutting property shall be assessed only the
cost of materials to repair the sidewalk. The city shall supply the labor to
effect such repair. The cost of repairs for damage caused by construction
projects shall be charged to the person causing such damage.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94)
§ 36.20 STORM SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Power to install and improve storm drainage. The city shall have the
power to install, repair, modify or otherwise upgrade all storm drainage
systems within its corporate boundaries. Properties benefitting primarily from
such storm system improvements shall be assessed by the city for the total cost
of the improvements.
   (B)   Conditions for installing or improving storm drainage. Storm drainage
systems may be installed or improved whenever:
      (1)   The city shall decide for reasons of public health, safety and
welfare that it is in the best interests of the city that storm drainage
systems be installed or improved at any location within the city;
      (2)   The city receives a petition signed by the property owners to be
affected by such storm drainage improvements.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94)
§ 36.21. SANITARY SEWER EXTENSION.
   (A)   Power to extend service. The city shall have the power to install,
improve and maintain sanitary sewer lines and facilities, storm sewers and
drains within the corporate limits of the city, and without the corporate
limits where provided by general law or special act. Benefitting properties
shall be assessed by the city for the cost of the improvement to extend the
service to their property from the nearest main or sanitary sewer connection.
   (B)   Conditions for extending service. Sanitary sewer service shall be
extended when:
      (1)   Property owners in contiguous unincorporated areas agree, in
writing, to annex their property into the city; or
      (2)   The Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services shall
officially notify the city that a health hazard exists within a given
unincorporated or incorporated area; such health hazard shall be determined by
a field survey with appropriate tests or inspections by the Department of
Health and Rehabilitative Services; or
      (3)   A property owner requests such extension of available sanitary
sewer service to property within the city or in a contiguous unincorporated
area agreeing to annex into the city, and such extension is determined to be in
the best interest of the city by the city administration; or
      (4)   The city decides unilaterally for reasons of public health, safety
and welfare that certain properties within the city must be put on sewer
service.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94)
§ 36.22 WATER LINE EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   Power to extend water service. The city shall have the power to
install, improve and maintain water lines and facilities within the corporate
limit of the city, and without the corporate limits where provided by general
law or special act. Benefitting properties shall be assessed by the city for
the cost of the improvement to extend the service to their property from the
nearest water main.
   (B)   Conditions for extending service.  Water service shall be extended
when:
      (1)   Property owners in contiguous unincorporated areas agree, in
writing, to annex their property into the city; or
      (2)   The Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services shall
officially notify the city that a health hazard exists within a given
unincorporated area; such health hazard shall be determined by a field survey
with appropriate tests or inspections by the Department of Health and
Rehabilitative Services; or
      (3)   A property owner requests such extension of available water service
to property within the city or in a contiguous unincorporated area agreeing to
annex into the city and such extension is determined to be in the best interest
of the city by the city administration; or
      (4)   The city decides unilaterally for reasons of public health, safety
and welfare that certain properties within the city must be put on water
service.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94)
§ 36.23 DEVELOPER AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   The city is expressly authorized to enter into agreements (herein
“Developer Agreements”), on its own behalf and on behalf of other governmental
units pursuant to an interlocal agreement authorized under §
36.24, with the property owners to be affected by any proposed special
assessment, pursuant to which such property owners voluntarily agree to
participate in the city’s special assessment program. Any Developer Agreement
shall set forth:
      (1)   The improvement to be constructed, repaired, maintained or improved
pursuant to the special assessment program,
      (2)   The location(s) of the improvement(s),
      (3)   An acknowledgement of the special benefit to be realized by each
property owner as a result of the improvement,
      (4)   The basis for assessment,
      (5)   The estimated Total Improvement Cost to be paid pursuant to the
special assessment program, and
      (6)   The sources of funds to pay the Total Improvement Cost.
   (B)   A Developer Agreement may also contain such other provisions as are
acceptable to the city and each property owner, and may be executed in
connection with a special assessment pursuant to an interlocal agreement as
authorized by §
36.24. Any Developer Agreement entered into pursuant to this section (§ 32.23)
shall be enforceable by the city on its own, or in conjunction with the
enforcement of any assessment or certificate of indebtedness.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94)
§ 36.24 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS PURSUANT TO INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS.
   The city is authorized to enter into interlocal agreements pursuant to
Florida Statutes, Chapter 163 with other local agencies and governmental units
in order to implement a special assessment program where:
   (1)   The improvement will be located within the municipal corporate limits
of the city, but will benefit areas beyond the municipal corporate limits of
the city,
   (2)   Other local agencies or governmental units are to provide funds to pay
a portion of the Total Improvement Costs, or
   (3)   Another local agency or governmental unit is willing to waive an
impact fee, concurrency fee or similar governmental charge and allow the city
to levy a special assessment in lieu thereof to pay all or a portion of the
Total Improvement Costs of the proposed improvement to be constructed as part
of the special assessment program.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94)
§ 36.25 SPECIFIC PROVISIONS NOT A LIMITATION.
   Nothing in this division making specific provision and conditions for
certain types of improvements to be made by special assessment shall be deemed
or construed to limit or affect the power and authority of the city under
Article VIII, Section 2(b) of the Florida Constitution, Florida Statutes
Chapter 166, and applicable law to make:
   (1)   The same or any other improvement apart from a special assessment, or
   (2)   Any other type of improvement by special assessment.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94)
§ 36.26 IRREGULARITIES.
   Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the
levy of any special assessment under the provisions of this division shall not
affect the validity of the special assessment where the assessment roll has
been confirmed by the city by adoption of the Assessment Resolution. The
assessment roll as finally approved and confirmed shall be competent and
sufficient evidence that the assessment was duly levied, that the assessment
was duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings adequate to the
adoption of the assessment roll were duly had, taken and performed as required
by this division, and no variance from the directions hereunder shall be held
material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially
injured thereby.
(Ord. 1094, passed 9-8-94)
CHAPTER 37: (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 38: RETIREMENT INCOME PLAN FOR GENERAL CITY EMPLOYEES
Section
Introduction; Definitions
   
38.001   Introduction
   
38.002   Definitions
Participation
   
38.005   Active participant
   
38.006   Inactive participant
   
38.007   Cessation of participation
Contributions
   
38.015   Employer contributions
   
38.016   Required contributions by participants
   
38.017   Salary reduction contributions
   
38.018   Investment of contributions
Retirement Benefits
   
38.025   Accrued benefit
   
38.026   Required contribution accrued benefit
   
38.027   Benefit limitation
   
38.028   Excess Benefit Plan
   
38.029   Amount of benefit at retirement
   
38.030   Benefits upon employment after retirement date
   
38.031   Deferred retirement option plan
   
38.032   Cost of living adjustment
Other Benefits
   
38.040   Death benefits
   
38.041   Vested benefits
   
38.042   Disability benefits
When Benefits Start and Distribution of Benefits
   
38.050   When benefits start
   
38.051   Automatic forms of distribution
   
38.052   Optional forms of distribution
   
38.053   Election procedures
Required Minimum Distributions
   
38.060   Application
   
38.061   Definitions
   
38.062   Required minimum distributions
   
38.063   TEFRA Section 242(b)(2) Elections
Termination of Plan
   
38.070   Termination and limitation
Administration of Plan
   
38.080   Administration
   
38.081   Expenses
   
38.082   Records
   
38.083   Delegation of authority
   
38.084   Exercise of discretionary authority
Additional Provisions
   
38.090   Amendments
   
38.091   Direct rollovers
   
38.092   Provisions relating to the insurer
   
38.093   Employment status
   
38.094   Rights to Plan assets
   
38.095   Beneficiary
   
38.096   Construction
   
38.097   Legal actions
   
38.098   Small amounts
   
38.099   Word usage
   
38.100   Military service
Cross-reference:
   401(A) Retirement Plan, see §
34.140
   Money Purchase Retirement Plan, see §
34.150
INTRODUCTION; DEFINITIONS
§ 38.001 INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   The employer previously established a defined benefit plan on October
1, 1973.
   (B)   Entry into the Plan was frozen effective January 31, 2010 for
employees who are covered under a collective bargaining agreement with the
employer. After that date, no such employee shall become an active participant,
and no such inactive participant or such former participant shall again become
an active participant, except as stated in this chapter. All employees who are
active participants in the Plan as of such date shall continue to participate
in the Plan including any employee who is hired or rehired as a non-
collectively bargained employee after such date as stated in this chapter. In
addition, any employee promoted to a non-collectively bargained position may
again enter the Plan as an active participant after such date as described
herein.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, entry into the Plan is frozen effective
October 1, 2014 for non-collectively bargained employees. After that date, no
such employee shall become an active participant, and no such inactive
participant or such former participant shall again become an active
participant. In addition, no employee who is promoted to a non-collectively
bargained position may again enter the Plan as an active participant after such
date.
   (D)   The accrued benefit for a participant who is covered under a
collective bargaining agreement with the employer was frozen effective June 30,
2010 and no additional benefits shall accrue after such date.
   (E)   The plan is being restated, effective October 1, 2014, and is set
forth in this chapter which is substituted in lieu of the prior chapter with
the exception of any interim amendment and any model amendment that have not
been incorporated into this restatement. Such amendment(s) apply to this
restated Plan until such provisions are integrated into the Plan or such
amendment(s) are superseded by another amendment.
   (F)   It is intended that the restated Plan qualify as a governmental
defined benefit plan under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, including any
later amendments to the Code. The employer agrees to operate the Plan according
to the terms, provisions, and conditions set forth in this chapter.
   (G)   The restated Plan continues to be for the exclusive benefit of
employees of the employer. All persons covered under the Plan before the
effective date of this restatement shall continue to be covered under the
restated Plan with no loss of benefits. However, the employer may sponsor other
plans such as a 457 plan or a 401 plan for inactive participants.
   (H)   The Plan includes the statutory, regulatory, and guidance changes
specified in the 2012 Cumulative List of Changes in Plan Qualification
Requirements (2012 Cumulative List) contained in Internal Revenue Service
Notice 2012-76 and the qualification requirements and guidance published before
the issuance of such list. The provisions of this Plan apply as of the
effective date of the restatement unless otherwise specified.
   (I)   According to the provisions of §§
38.070 and
38.090 may amend, change, or terminate the Plan at its option at any time. The
Plan is not a contract and/or a guarantee of employment. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-
7-15)
§ 38.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise
   ACCRUAL SERVICE. The total of an employee's continuous service. This total
is expressed in whole years and fractional parts of a year (counting a complete
month as a fractional part of a year). However, accrual service is modified as
follows:
      (1)   Service after a date excluded: For an employee who is covered under
a collective bargaining agreement with the employer, continuous service accrued
after the date the accrued benefit is frozen (as stated in § 38.001), is
excluded.
      (2)   Service while not an eligible employee excluded: Service while an
employee was not an eligible employee is excluded.
      (3)   Voluntary discontinuance service excluded: Prior to October 1,
1998, service while an employee failed or refused to make a contribution
required under the prior plan is excluded. This provision also applies to an
employee's service while contributions were not made because he failed or
refused to complete a written agreement to make such contributions.
      (4)   Other service excluded:
         (a)   Service for an employee who has a severance from employment and
who is 0% vested in his accrued benefit resulting from employer contributions
other than salary reduction contributions on such date shall be excluded if he
receives a distribution of his required contribution account. Such service
shall not be reinstated in the event he is later reemployed by the employer.
         (b)   Also, service for any participant who was covered under a
collective bargaining agreement with the employer on June 30, 2010, who was
zero percent vested in his accrued benefit resulting from employer
contributions other than salary reduction contributions on such date, and who
is later promoted to a non-collectively bargained position shall be excluded if
he received a distribution of his required contribution account. Such service
shall not be reinstated in the event he again becomes an active participant as
described in §§
38.001 and
38.005.
      (5)   Period of military duty included: A period of military duty shall
be included as service with the employer to the extent it has not already been
credited. Such service shall be deemed to be service as an eligible employee
only if an employee was an eligible employee on the day immediately preceding
the period of military duty.
   ACCRUED BENEFIT. On any date, the amount of monthly retirement benefit under
the normal form accrued by an active participant as of any date and payable at
normal retirement date, or such date, if later. See §
38.025.
   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT FORM. A form executed by an employee, in which he
acknowledges that he has been informed by the employer that, as a condition of
his employment, the employer will deduct from the employee's compensation, by
regular payroll deductions, an amount equal to 7.25% of his compensation and
pay that amount to the Plan as a contribution by the employee. These
contributions shall be classified as "picked up" by the employer pursuant to
Code Section 414(h) and treated as an employer contribution. Any employee who
participates in this Plan shall be deemed to have entered into this
acknowledgement form. Notwithstanding, after June 30, 2010, for an employee who
is covered under a collective bargaining agreement with the employer, the
percentage of compensation shall be 0%.
   ACTIVE PARTICIPANT. An eligible employee who is actively participating in
the Pan according to the provisions in §
38.005.
   ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT. Equality in the value of the aggregate amount expected
to be received for benefits payable at different times or under different forms
of distributions.
      (1)   For purposes of determining the amount of a distribution other than
an annual benefit that is nondecreasing for the life of the participant or, in
the case of a preretirement survivor annuity, the life of the participant's
spouse; or that decreases during the life of the participant merely because of
the death of the surviving annuitant (but only if the reduction is to a level
not below 50% of the annual benefit payable before the death of the surviving
annuitant) or merely because of the cessation or reduction of Social Security
supplements or qualified disability payments, actuarial equivalent shall be
determined on the basis of the interest on 30-year Treasury securities for the
look-back month for the stability period and the 1994 Group Annuity Reserve
(GAR) Mortality Table. The look-back month applicable to the stability period
is the second calendar month preceding the first day of the stability period.
The stability period is the successive period of one calendar month that
contains the annuity starting date for the distribution, and for which the
interest rate remains constant.
      (2)   For purposes of determining benefits not described in division (1)
of this definition, actuarial equivalent for benefits shall be determined on
the basis of 7.5% interest and the 1983 Group Annuity Mortality Table as set
forth in Revenue Ruling 95-6, 1995-1 C.B. 80.
      (3)   In any event, the preceding divisions (1) and (2) of this
definition shall not apply to the extent they would cause the Plan to fail to
satisfy the requirements of §§
38.026 and
38.027.
      (4)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Plan to the contrary,
effective for distributions with Annuity Starting Dates on or after December
31, 2002, but prior to January 1, 2008, the Applicable Mortality Table used for
purposes of adjusting any benefit or limitation under Code sections 415(b)(2)
(B), (C), or (D) is the table prescribed in Revenue Ruling 2001-62.
   AFFILIATED SERVICE GROUP. Any group of corporations, partnerships or other
organizations of which the employer is a part and that is affiliated within the
meaning of Code Section 414(m) and the regulations thereunder. The term
CONTROLLED GROUP, as it is used in this Plan, shall include the term AFFILIATED
SERVICE GROUP.
   ALTERNATE PAYEE. Any spouse, former spouse, child, or other dependent of a
participant who is recognized by a qualified domestic relations order as having
a right to receive all, or a portion of, the benefits payable under the Plan
with respect to such participant.
   ANNUITY CONTRACT. The annuity contract or contracts into which the employer
enters with the insurer for guaranteed benefits, for the investment of
contributions in separate accounts, and for the payment of benefits under this
Plan.
   ANNUITY STARTING DATE.  
      (1)   The first day of the first period for which an amount is payable to
the participant as an annuity or any other form.
      (2)   The annuity starting date for disability benefits shall be the date
such benefits commence if the disability benefit is not an auxiliary benefit.
An auxiliary benefit is a disability benefit that does not reduce the benefit
payable at normal retirement date.
   APPLICABLE INTEREST RATE. On any given date, the rate of interest set forth
in Code Section 417(e)(3).
      (1)   The applicable interest rate shall be the adjusted first, second,
and third segment rates applied under Code Section 430(h)(2)(C) (without the
24-month averaging under Code Section 430(h)(2)(D) and determined without
regard to the adjustment for the 25-year average segment rates provided in Code
Section 30(h)(2)(C)(iv)) for the look-back month before the first day of the
stability period, or such other time as the Secretary may by regulations
prescribe. The look-back month and stability period are defined in the
definition of actuarial equivalent. For this purpose, the first, second, and
third segment rates are the first, second, and third segment rates which would
be determined under Code Section 430(h)(2)(C) if:
         (a)   Code Section 430(h)(2)(D) were applied by substituting the
average yields for the month described above for the average yields for the 24-
month period described in such section;
         (b)   Code Section 430(h)(2)(G)(i)(II) were applied by substituting
"Section 417(e)(3)(A)(ii)(II)" for "Section 412(b)(5)(B)(ii)(II)"; and
         (c)   The applicable percentage under Code Section 430(h)(2)(G) is
treated as being 20% in 2008, 40% in 2009, 60% in 2010, and 80% in 2011.
      (2)   A plan amendment that changes the date for determining the
applicable interest rate (including an indirect change such as the result of a
change in Plan year when the stability period is the Plan year), shall not be
given effect with respect to any distribution during the period ending one year
after the later of the amendment's effective date or adoption date, if, during
such period and as a result of such amendment, the participant's distribution
would be reduced.
   APPLICABLE MORTALITY TABLE. On any date, the table according to the method
set forth in Code Section 417(e)(3).
   AVERAGE COMPENSATION.  
      (1)   On any given date, the average of an employee's monthly
compensation for those two highest compensation years (all compensation years,
if less than two) ending before such given date.
      (2)   However, the average compensation for an employee who is covered
under a collective bargaining agreement with the employer shall be his frozen
average compensation determined as of the date the accrued benefit is frozen as
stated in §
38.001. In determining such employee's frozen average compensation as of the
date the accrued benefit is frozen, compensation years ending after that date
shall be disregarded.
   BENEFICIARY. The person or persons named by a participant to receive any
benefits under the Plan when the participant dies. See §
38.095.
   CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
   COMPENSATION. A participant's wages, regular longevity pay, auto allowance,
and overtime income before contributions are deducted due to taxes, voluntary
contributions, or deferred compensation plans.
      (1)   Compensation shall also include differential wage payments.
      (2)   Except as provided herein, compensation for a specified period is
the compensation actually paid or made available (or if earlier, includible in
gross income) during such period.
      (3)   Compensation for a Plan year shall also include compensation paid
by the later of two and one-half months after an employee's severance from
employment with the employer maintaining the Plan or the end of the Plan year
that includes the date of the employee's severance from employment with the
employer maintaining the Plan, if the payment is regular compensation for
services during the employee's regular working hours, or compensation for
services outside the employee’s regular working hours (such as overtime or
shift differential), commissions, bonuses, or other similar payments, and,
absent a severance from employment, the payments would have been paid to the
employee while the employee continued in employment with the employer.
      (4)   Any payments not described above shall not be considered
compensation if paid after severance from employment, even if they are paid by
the later of two and one-half months after the date of severance from
employment or the end of the Plan year that includes the date of severance from
employment.
      (5)   Back pay, within the meaning of section 1.415(c)-2(g)(8) of the
regulations, shall be treated as compensation for the Plan year to which the
back pay relates to the extent the back pay represents wages and compensation
that would otherwise be included in this definition.
      (6)   Compensation paid or made available during a specified period shall
include amounts that would otherwise be included in compensation, but for an
election under Code Section 125(a), 132(f)(4), 402(e)(3), 402(h)(1)(B), 402(k),
or 457(b). Compensation shall also include employee contributions "picked up"
by a governmental entity and, pursuant to Code Section 414(h)(2), treated as
employer contributions.
      (7)   Compensation shall exclude any lump sum payments for accrued sick
leave or vacation made as of the date he has a severance from employment or the
date he retires.
      (8)   The annual compensation of each participant taken into account in
determining contributions and benefits for any determination period (the period
over which compensation is determined) shall not exceed $200,000, as adjusted
for cost-of-living increases in accordance with Code Section 401(a)(17)(B). The
cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to any
determination period beginning with or within such calendar year.
      (9)   Provided, however, with respect to an eligible participant, the
reduced dollar limitation in the preceding division (8) of this definition does
not apply to the extent that the amount of compensation allowed to be taken
into account under the Plan is reduced below the amount that was allowed to be
taken into account under the Plan in effect on July 1, 1993. For this purpose,
"eligible participant" means an individual who first became a participant in
the Plan during a Plan year beginning before the first yearly date in 1996.
      (10)   If a determination period consists of fewer than 12 months, the
annual compensation limit is an amount equal to the otherwise applicable annual
compensation limit multiplied by a fraction. The numerator of the fraction is
the number of months in the short determination period, and the denominator of
the fraction is 12.
      (11)   If compensation for any prior determination period is taken into
account in determining a participant's contributions or benefits for the
current Plan year, the compensation for such prior determination period is
subject to the applicable annual compensation limit in effect for that
determination period. For this purpose, in determining contributions and
benefits in Plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2002, the annual
compensation limit in effect for determination periods beginning before that
date is $150,000 for any determination period beginning in 1996 or earlier;
$160,000 for any determination period beginning in 1997, 1998, or 1999; and
$170,000 for any determination period beginning in 2000 or 2001, for a
participant who is not an "eligible participant" (as defined above).
      (12)   For this purpose, in determining contributions or benefits in Plan
years beginning on or after January 1, 2002, the annual compensation limit in
effect for determination periods beginning before January 1, 1990 is $200,000
for a participant who is an "eligible participant" (as defined above).
   COMPENSATION YEAR. The period used to determine compensation. The
compensation year is the one-year period ending on each September 30.
   CONTINGENT ANNUITANT. An individual named by the participant to receive a
life time benefit after the participant's death in accordance with a
survivorship life annuity.
   CONTINUOUS SERVICE. For an employee, any period of uninterrupted service
with the employer. However, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise,
continuous service means his latest period of uninterrupted service.
      (1)   For purposes of this definition, no interruption in service will
occur because of approved periods of absence from the employer due to temporary
lay-off; leave of absence (not to exceed one year), a temporary absence due to
illness or injury, pregnancy, or disability.
      (2)   When necessary, the employer shall use uniform, nondiscriminatory
guidelines for determining an approved leave of absence.
   CONTRIBUTIONS. Employer contributions, salary reduction contributions, and
participant contributions as set out in §§
38.015 through
38.018, unless the context clearly indicates only specific contributions are
meant.
   CONTROLLED GROUP. Any group of corporations, trades, or businesses of which
the employer is a part that is under common control. A controlled group
includes any group of corporations, trades, or businesses, whether or not
incorporated, that is either a parent-subsidiary group, a brother-sister group,
or a combined group within the meaning of Code Section 414(b), Code Section 414
(c) and the regulations thereunder and, for purposes of determining benefit
limitations under §
38.027, as modified by Code Section 415(h). The term CONTROLLED GROUP, as it is
used in this Plan, shall include the term affiliated service group and any
other employer required to be aggregated with the employer under Code Section
414(o) and the regulations thereunder.
   DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN. The optional program of transferring
accrued retirement benefits to a separate account within the Plan on a deferred
basis while remaining in the active employment of the employer.
   DESIGNATED BENEFICIARY. The individual who is designated by the participant
(or the participant's surviving spouse) as the beneficiary of the participant's
interest under the Plan and who is the designated beneficiary under Code
Section 401(a)(9) and Section 1.401(a)(9)-4 of the regulations.
   DIFFERENTIAL WAGE PAYMENTS. Any payments that are made by an employer to an
individual with respect to any period during which the individual is performing
qualified military service while on active duty for a period of more than 30
days. Such payments shall be made in accordance with Code Section 3401(h) and
represent all or a portion of the wages the individual would have received from
the employer if the individual were performing service for the employer.
   DIRECT ROLLOVER. A payment by the Plan to the eligible retirement plan
specified by the distributee.
   DISTRIBUTEE. An employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's (or
former employee's) surviving spouse and the employee's (or former employee's)
spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic
relations order, as defined in Code Section 414(p), are distributees with
regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse. A distributee includes
the employee's (or former employee's) nonspouse designated beneficiary, in
which case, the distribution can only be transferred to a traditional IRA or
Roth IRA established on behalf of the nonspouse designated beneficiary and that
will be treated as an inherited IRA pursuant to the provisions of Code Section
402(c)(11).
   DOMESTIC PARTNER. One of the two adults who are considered to be "domestic
partners" by the employer (i.e. the City of Pembroke Pines) pursuant to
Pembroke Pines City Ordinance No. 2014-18 (or any subsequent city ordinance or
other governing city pronouncement) at the relevant determination date.
   EARLY RETIREMENT DATE. The first day of any month before a participant's
normal retirement date that he selects for the start of his retirement
benefits. This day shall be on or after the date he has a severance from
employment and the date he meets the following requirement(s):
      (1)   He has attained age 50.
      (2)   He has completed five years of vesting service.
   ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE.
      (1)   Any employee of the employer who is any of the following:
         (a)   A general employee or utility employee of the employer
customarily employed for at least 30 hours per week; or
         (b)   An elected official, subject to the provisions of F.S. §
112.048.
      (2)   However, any employee of the employer who is covered under a
collective bargaining agreement (effective on or after July 1, 2010) with the
employer shall not be an eligible employee. In addition, any sworn police
officer, sworn firefighter, charter school employee, or early development
employee shall not be eligible employee.
      (3)   To the extent an employee becomes an employee as a result of a Code
Section 410(b)(6)(C) transaction, that employee shall not be an eligible
employee during the period beginning on the date of the transaction and ending
on the last day of the first Plan year beginning after the date of the
transaction. This period is called the transition period. The transition period
may end earlier if there is a significant change in the coverage under the Plan
or if the employer chooses to cover all similarly situated employees as of an
earlier date. A Code Section 410(b)(6)(C) transaction is an asset or stock
acquisition, merger, or similar transaction involving a change in the employer
of the employees of a trade or business.
   ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN. An eligible plan under Code Section 457(b) that is
maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or
instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees
to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this Plan, a
traditional IRA, a Roth IRA, an annuity plan described in Code Section 403(a),
an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b), or a qualified plan
described in Code Section 401(a), that accepts the distributee's eligible
rollover distribution. The definition of eligible retirement plan shall also
apply in the case of a distribution to a surviving spouse, or to a spouse or
former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations
order, as defined in Code Section 414(p).
   ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION.  
      (1)   Any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit
of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not
include: (i) any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal
periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or
life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life
expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary,
or for a specified period of ten years or more; (ii) any distribution to the
extent such distribution is required under Code Section 401(a)(9); (iii) the
portion of any other distribution(s) that is not includible in gross income
(determined without regard to the exclusion for net unrealized appreciation
with respect to employer securities); and (iv) any other distribution(s) that
is reasonably expected to total less than $200 during a year.
      (2)   A portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible
rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax employee
contributions that are not includible in gross income. However, such portion
may be transferred only to (i) a traditional individual retirement account or
annuity described in Code Section 408(a) or (b) (a "traditional IRA"); (ii) a
Roth individual retirement account or annuity described in Code Section 408A (a
"Roth IRA"); or (iii) a qualified defined contribution, defined benefit, or
annuity plan described in Code Section 401(a) or 403(a) or to an annuity
described in Code Section 403(b), if such plan or contract agrees to separately
account for amounts so transferred (including interest thereon), including
separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible
in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so
includible.
   EMPLOYEE. An individual who is employed by the employer or any other
employer required to be aggregated with the employer under Code Sections 414
(b), (c), (m), or (o).
      (1)   The term employee shall include any individual receiving
differential wage payments.
      (2)   The term employee shall also include any leased employee deemed to
be an employee of any employer described in the preceding division (1) as
provided in Code Section 414(n) or (o).
   EMPLOYER. Except for purposes of §
38.027, City of Pembroke Pines.
   EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS. Contributions made by the employer to fund this
Plan. See §
38.015.
   EMPLOYMENT COMMENCEMENT DATE. The date an employee first performs an hour of
service for the employer.
   ENTRY DATE. The date an employee first enters the Plan as an active
participant. See §
38.005.
   INACTIVE PARTICIPANT. A former active participant who has an accrued
benefit. See §
38.006.
   INSURER. Principal Life Insurance Company or the insurance company or
companies named by the employer.
   INVESTMENT MANAGER. Any fiduciary (other than a trustee):
      (1)   Who has the power to manage, acquire, or dispose of any assets of
the Plan;
      (2)   Who (i) is registered as an investment adviser under the Investment
Advisers Act of 1940; (ii) is not registered as an investment adviser under
such Act by reason of paragraph (1) of Section 203A(a) of such Act, is
registered as an investment adviser under the laws of the state (referred to in
such paragraph (1)) in which it maintains its principal office and place of
business, and, at the time it last filed the registration form most recently
filed by it with such state in order to maintain its registration under the
laws of such state, also filed a copy of such form with the Secretary of Labor;
(iii) is a bank, as defined in that Act; or (iv) is an insurance company
qualified to perform services described in division (1) above under the laws of
more than one state; and
      (3)   Who has acknowledged in writing being a fiduciary with respect to
the Plan.
   LATE RETIREMENT DATE. The first day of any month that is after a
participant's normal retirement date and on which retirement benefits begin. If
a participant continues to work for the employer after his normal retirement
date, his late retirement date shall be the earliest first day of the month on
or after the date he has a severance from employment. A later retirement date
(after a severance from employment) may apply if the participant so elects. See
§
38.050.
   MANDATORY DISTRIBUTION. A distribution to a participant that is made without
the participant's consent and is made to the participant before he attains the
older of age 62 or his normal retirement age.
   MONTHLY COMPENSATION.  
      (1)   For any compensation year, 1/12th of an employee’s compensation for
such year.
      (2)   To determine monthly compensation if an employee is an employee for
only part of a compensation year, his compensation for that compensation year
shall be converted to an annual basis as though he were employed for the full
compensation year.
   MONTHLY DATE. Each yearly date and the same day of each following month
during the plan year beginning on such yearly date.
   NORMAL FORM. A single life annuity with modified cash refund of
participant's required contribution account.
   NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE. For an active participant, the earliest first day of
the month on or after the later of the date the participant reaches his 55th
birthday or the date he completes ten years of vesting service. The normal
retirement date for an inactive participant shall be his normal retirement date
determined on the day immediately preceding the date on which he became an
inactive participant assuming his vesting service continued unchanged. Unless
otherwise provided in this Plan, a participant's retirement benefits shall
begin on his normal retirement date if he has had a severance from employment
on such date.
   PARTICIPANT. Either an active participant or an inactive participant.
   PARTICIPANT CONTRIBUTIONS. Required contributions as set out in §§
38.015 through
38.018.
   PERIOD OF MILITARY DUTY. For an employee
      (1)   Who served as a member of the armed forces of the United States,
and
      (2)   Who was reemployed by the employer at a time when the employee had
a right to reemployment in accordance with seniority rights as protected under
Chapter 43 of Title 38 of the U.S. Code, the period of time from the date the
employee was first absent from active work for the employer because of such
military duty to the date the employee was reemployed.
   PLAN. The defined benefit plan of the employer set forth in this chapter,
including any later amendments to it.
   PLAN ADMINISTRATOR. The person or persons who administer the Plan. The Plan
Administrator is the employer.
   PLAN YEAR. A consecutive 12-month period beginning on a yearly date and
ending on the day before the next yearly date. If the yearly date changes, the
change will result in a short plan year.
   PRERETIREMENT SURVIVOR ANNUITY. A straight life annuity payable to the
surviving spouse or domestic partner of a participant who dies before his
annuity starting date. Benefits shall be determined as if the participant had a
severance from employment on the date of his death (date he last had a
severance from employment, if earlier) and survived to retire on the earliest
date on or after the date of his death on which he could have elected to
retire. The monthly benefit payable to the spouse or domestic partner shall be
equal to the survivorship benefit that would have been payable to the spouse or
domestic partner if the participant retired under an immediate survivorship
life annuity, with a survivorship percentage of 50% and a contingent annuitant
who is the participant's spouse or domestic partner, on such date and died.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the preretirement survivor annuity may only be
payable to the surviving spouse or domestic partner if the conditions of
Section 5.01(a) have been satisfied on the date the participant dies. A former
spouse will be treated as the surviving spouse to the extent provided under a
qualified domestic relations order as described in Code Section 414(p).
   PRESENT VALUE. The actuarial equivalent of another benefit, expressed as a
single sum amount.
   QUALIFIED MILITARY SERVICE. Any service in the uniformed services (as
defined in Chapter 43 of Title 38 of the U.S. Code) by any individual if such
individual is entitled to reemployment rights under such chapter with respect
to such service.
   REENTRY DATE. The date a former active participant reenters the Plan. See §
38.005.
   REQUIRED CONTRIBUTION ACCOUNT. On any date prior to October 1, 1998, the
total of a participant's required contributions with interest. Contributions
previously paid to the participant or applied for him, and any interest that
would have been credited on those contributions, shall be excluded.
      (1)   On and after August 1, 2012, interest shall be credited in each
Plan year at the rate of 3% per annum compounded annually. Before August 1,
2012, interest was credited at the rate specified in the Plan as in effective
on the day immediately before August 1, 2012.
      (2)   Interest shall be credited on each required contribution from the
end of the Plan year for which it was made until the monthly date on or before
the date of determination.
      (3)   On any date on and after October 1, 1998, required contribution
account means the aggregate of a participant's required contributions with
interest and his salary reduction contributions which have not been previously
paid or applied.
   REQUIRED CONTRIBUTION ACCRUED BENEFIT. The amount of monthly retirement
benefit under the normal form accrued by an active participant as of any date
and payable at normal retirement date that is derived from his required
contributions. See §
38.026.
   REQUIRED CONTRIBUTIONS. Prior to October 1, nondeductible contributions
required from a participant in order to participate in this Plan. See §
38.016.
   RETIREMENT DATE. The date a retirement benefit will begin and is a
participant's early, normal, or late retirement date, as the case may be.
   SALARY REDUCTION CONTRIBUTIONS. On and after October 1, 1998, employee
contributions "picked up" by the employer pursuant to Code Section 414(h) and
treated as employer contributions. These contributions are not available to the
participant as current income, and the participant has no discretion to receive
them as such.
   SEVERANCE FROM EMPLOYMENT. Except for purposes of §
38.027, an employee has ceased to be an employee. An employee does not have a
severance from employment if, in connection with a change of employment, the
employee's new employer maintains this Plan with respect to the employee. The
Plan Administrator shall determine if a severance from employment has occurred
in accordance with the regulations that are applicable to such determination.
   TOTALLY AND PERMANENTLY DISABLED. A participant is disabled, as a result of
sickness or injury, to the extent that he is prevented from engaging in any
substantial gainful activity, and is eligible for and receives a disability
benefit under Title II of the Federal Social Security Act.
   VESTED ACCRUED BENEFIT. On any date, the participant's accrued benefit
resulting from employer contributions multiplied by his vesting percentage on
such date, plus his required contribution accrued benefit.
   VESTING PERCENTAGE. The percentage used to determine that portion of a
participant's accrued
benefit resulting from employer contributions which is nonforfeitable (cannot
be lost since it is vested).
      (1)   A participant's vesting percentage is shown in the following
schedule opposite the number of whole years of his vesting service.
Vesting Service Vesting Percentage
(whole years)
Vesting Service Vesting Percentage
(whole years)
Less than 5     0
5               50
6               60
7               70
8               80
9               90
10 or more      100
 
      (2)   The vesting percentage for a participant who is an employee on or
after his normal retirement date or the date he meets the requirement(s) for an
early retirement date shall be 100%. The vesting percentage for a participant
who is an employee on the date he becomes disabled shall be 100%. The vesting
percentage for a participant who becomes disabled while performing qualified
military service shall be 100%. For purposes of this division, disabled means
the disability is subsequently determined to meet the definition of totally and
permanently disabled.
      (3)   If the schedule used to determine a participant's vesting
percentage is changed, the new schedule shall not apply to a participant unless
he is credited with an hour of service with the employer on or after the date
of the change.
   VESTING SERVICE. The total of an employee's service with the employer. This
total is expressed in whole years and fractional parts of a year (counting a
complete month as a fractional part of a year). However, vesting service is
modified as follows:
      (1)   Inactive participant service excluded: Service during the period an
employee is an inactive participant is excluded.
      (2)   Voluntary discontinuance service excluded: Service while an
employee failed or refused to make a contribution required under the Plan is
excluded. This provision also applies to an employee's service while
contributions were not made because he failed or refused to complete a written
agreement to make such contributions.
      (3)   Other service excluded:
         (a)   Service for an employee who has a severance from employment and
who is 0% vested in his accrued benefit resulting from employer contributions
other than salary reduction contributions on such date shall be excluded if he
receives a distribution of his required contribution account. Such service
shall not be reinstated in the event he is later reemployed by the employer.
         (b)   Also, service for any participant who was covered under a
collective bargaining agreement with the employer on June 30, 2010, who was 0%
vested in his accrued benefit resulting from employer contributions other than
salary reduction contributions on such date, and who is later promoted to a
non-collectively bargained position shall be excluded if he received a
distribution of his required contribution account. Such service shall not be
reinstated in the event he again becomes an active participant as described in
§§
38.001 and
38.005.
      (4)   Period of military duty included:
         (a)   A period of military duty shall be included as service with the
employer to the extent it has not already been credited.
         (b)   If a participant dies, while performing qualified military
service, such service shall be included as service with the employer.
   VOLUNTARY DISCONTINUANCE DATE. The date a participant fails or refuses to
make a required contribution.
   YEARLY DATE. October 1, 1973, and the same day of each following year.
   YEARS OF SERVICE. Except for purposes of §
38.027, an employee's vesting service disregarding any modifications that
exclude service.
(Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15; Am. Ord. 1844, passed 4-6-16)
PARTICIPATION
§ 38.005 ACTIVE PARTICIPANT.
   (A)   Entry into the Plan is frozen for certain employees as stated in §
38.001. The following provisions shall continue to apply to those employees who
are not subject to such participation freeze:
      (1)   (a)   An employee shall first become an active participant (begin
active participation in the Plan) on the earliest date on which he is an
eligible employee. This date is his entry date.
         (b)   Each employee who was an active participant on the day before
the effective date of this restatement (as determined in §
38.001) shall continue to be an active participant if he is still an eligible
employee on such restatement effective date and his entry date shall not
change.
      (2)   (a)   An inactive participant shall again become an active
participant (resume active participation in the Plan) on the date he again
becomes an eligible employee. This date is his reentry date.
         (b)   Upon again becoming an active participant, he shall cease to be
an inactive participant.
         (c)   In no event, however, shall an employee who retires from
employment with the employer, who receives a retirement benefit from such
employment, and who is rehired by the employer be deemed to be an eligible
employee for the purposes of participating in this Plan to receive an increased
or second benefit under this Plan.
      (3)   (a)   A former participant shall again become an active participant
(resume active participation in the Plan) on the date he again becomes an
eligible employee. This date is his reentry date.
         (b)   In no event, however, shall an employee who retires from
employment with the employer, who receives a retirement benefit from such
employment, and who is rehired by the employer be deemed to be an eligible
employee for the purposes of participating in this Plan to receive an increased
or second benefit under this Plan.
   (B)   There shall be no duplication of benefits for a participant because of
more than one period as an active participant at the same time. (Ord. 1806,
passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.006 INACTIVE PARTICIPANT.
   (A)   An active participant shall become an inactive participant (stop
accruing benefits) on the earliest of the following:
      (1)   The date he ceases to be an eligible employee.
      (2)   The effective date of complete termination of the Plan under §
38.070.
      (3)   The date on which an eligible employee is transferred to a position
where he is eligible to join the city's Firefighters' and Police Officer's
Pension System.
   (B)   An employee or former employee who was an inactive participant on the
day before the effective date of this restatement (as determined in §
38.001) shall continue to be an inactive participant on such restatement
effective date. Eligibility for any benefits payable to the participant or on
his behalf and the amount of the benefits shall be determined according to the
provisions of the prior chapter, unless otherwise stated in this chapter or any
subsequent documents. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.007 CESSATION OF PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   A participant, whether active or inactive, shall cease to be a
participant on the earlier of the following:
      (1)   The date of his death.
      (2)   The date he receives a single sum distribution that is in lieu of
all of his benefits under the Plan if his vesting percentage is 100%.
   (B)   An inactive participant shall also cease to be a participant on the
earliest date on which he is not entitled to a deferred monthly income under §
38.041. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7- 15)
CONTRIBUTIONS
§ 38.015 EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   The amount and timing of employer contributions shall be determined
based on actuarial valuations and recommendations as to the amounts required to
fund benefits under this Plan. Dividends, if any, declared under the annuity
contract and forfeitures shall be applied to reduce future employer
contributions.
   (B)   A portion of the Plan assets resulting from employer contributions
(but not more than the original amount of those contributions) may be returned
if the employer contributions are made because of a mistake of fact. The amount
involved must be returned to the employer within one year after the date the
employer contributions are made by mistake of fact. Except as provided under
this division (B) and in §
38.070, the assets of the Plan shall never be used for the benefit of the
employer and are held for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to
participants and their beneficiaries and for defraying reasonable expenses of
administering the Plan. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.016 REQUIRED CONTRIBUTIONS BY PARTICIPANTS.
   (A)   No required contributions shall be made on or after October 1, 1998.
   (B)   The participant's required contribution account is 100% vested and
nonforfeitable at all times. (Ord. 1806, passed 1- 7-15)
§ 38.017 SALARY REDUCTION CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   On and after October 1, 1998, the employer shall make salary reduction
contributions on behalf of each participant. These contributions shall be made
for each payroll period in which that participant is an active participant.
   (B)   The amount of each salary reduction contribution for a participant
shall be equal to 7.25% of his compensation each payroll period as stated in
his acknowledgement form.
   (C)   Salary reduction contributions are 100% vested and nonforfeitable.
   (D)   After June 30, 2010, the amount of each salary reduction contribution
for a participant who is covered under a collective bargaining agreement with
the employer shall be equal to 0% of his compensation. If such participant is
0% vested in his accrued benefit resulting from employer contributions other
than salary reduction contributions, his salary reduction contributions, plus
interest at the rate in effect on June 30, 2010, shall be returned to such
participant. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.018 INVESTMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   The handling of contributions and Plan assets is governed by the
provisions of the annuity contract and any other relevant document.
   (B)   The employer may delegate to the investment manager investment
direction for Plan assets.
   (C)   All contributions are forwarded by the employer to the insurer to be
deposited under the annuity contract. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
RETIREMENT BENEFITS
§ 38.025 ACCRUED BENEFIT.
   (A)   An active participant's monthly accrued benefit as of any date,
subject to the modifications below, will be equal to the following:
      (1)   An amount equal to 2.85% of his average compensation for each year
of his accrual service. Such amount shall not exceed 80% of his average
compensation.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the above, for a participant who retired or was an
inactive participant prior to October 1, 1998, his monthly accrued benefit as
of any date is an amount equal to the sum of divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), and (B)
(3) below:
      (1)   Two percent of his average compensation multiplied by his accrual
service before October 1, 1980.
      (2)   The product of divisions (B)(2)(a) and (B)(2)(b) below:
         (a)   An amount equal to division (B)(2)(a)1. or (B)(2)(a)2. below:
            1.   Two percent of his average compensation, for a participant
making required contributions of 2%.
            2.   Two and one-half percent of his average compensation, for a
participant making required contributions of 5%.
         (b)   His accrual service on and after October 1, 1980 and before
October 1, 1982.
      (3)   The product of divisions (B)(3)(a) and (B)(3)(b) below:
         (a)   An amount equal to divisions (B)(3)(a)1. or (B)(3)(a)2. below:
            1.   Two percent of his average compensation, for a participant
making required contributions of 3%.
            2.   Two and one-half percent of his average compensation, for a
participant making required contributions of 6%.
         (b)   His accrual service on and after October 1, 1982.
   (C)   However, accrued benefit is modified as follows.
      (1)   An active participant's monthly accrued benefit shall be reduced by
the amount of deferred monthly retirement benefit under the normal form
beginning on his normal retirement date in lieu of which he has received a
single sum payment under the Plan.
      (2)   After the date the accrued benefit is frozen (as stated in §
38.001), no additional benefits shall accrue under the Plan.
      (3)   In no event shall an employee who retires from employment with the
employer, who receives a retirement benefit from such employment, and who is
rehired by the employer be deemed to be an eligible employee for purposes of
participating in this Plan to receive an increased or second benefit under this
Plan.
      (4)   If the employer rehires a participant after the participant's
retirement date, any monthly retirement benefits he is receiving shall continue
unchanged. If he also becomes an active participant, there shall be no
duplication of benefits for him under this Plan. See §
38.030.
      (5)   The participant's accrued benefit resulting from employer
contributions is equal to the participant's total accrued benefit reduced by
his required contribution accrued benefit. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.026 REQUIRED CONTRIBUTION ACCRUED BENEFIT.
   An active participant's required contribution accrued benefit is the accrued
monthly benefit derived from his required contributions. On any date, his
required contribution accrued benefit shall be determined as follows:
   (A)   Step one. Determine the amount of the participant's required
contribution account on such date.
   (B)   Step two. Add to the amount determined in step one, interest
compounded annually at the interest rate used to determine present value for
the period beginning with the determination date and ending on the date on
which the participant reaches his normal retirement date. Convert the amount
thus accumulated to a monthly retirement benefit under the normal form using
the interest rate and mortality table used to determine present value. (Ord.
1806, passed 1-7- 15)
§ 38.027 BENEFIT LIMITATION.
   Benefits under the Plan shall be limited in accordance with Code Section 415
and the regulations thereunder. The limitations of this section shall apply in
limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007, except as otherwise
provided herein.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of determining the benefit limitation set
forth in this section, the following terms are defined:
      ANNUAL BENEFIT.  
         (a)   A benefit that is payable annually in the form of a straight
life annuity. Except as provided below, where a benefit is payable in a form
other than a straight life annuity, the benefit shall be adjusted to an
actuarially equivalent straight life annuity that begins at the same time as
such other form of benefit and is payable on the first day of each month,
before applying the limitations of this section. For a participant who has or
will have distributions commencing at more than one annuity starting date, the
annual benefit shall be determined as of each such annuity starting date (and
shall satisfy the limitations of this section as of each such date),
actuarially adjusting for past and future distributions of benefits commencing
at the other annuity starting dates. For this purpose, the determination of
whether a new starting date has occurred shall be made without regard to
Section 1.401(a)-20, Q&A 10(d), and with regard to Section 1.415(b)-1(b)(1)
(iii)(B) and (C) of the regulations.
         (b)   No actuarial adjustment to the benefit shall be made for (i)
survivor benefits payable to a surviving spouse under a qualified joint and
survivor annuity to the extent such benefits would not be payable if the
participant's benefit were paid in another form; (ii) benefits that are not
directly related to retirement benefits (such as a qualified disability
benefit, preretirement incidental death benefits, and post-retirement medical
benefits); or (iii) the inclusion in the form of benefit of an automatic
benefit increase feature, provided the form of benefit is not subject to Code
Section 417(e)(3) and would otherwise satisfy the limitations of this section,
and the Plan provides that the amount payable under the form of benefit in any
limitation year shall not exceed the limits of this section applicable at the
annuity starting date, as increased in subsequent years pursuant to Code
Section 415(d). For this purpose, an automatic benefit increase feature is
included in a form of benefit if the form of benefit provides for automatic
periodic increases to the benefits paid in that form.
         (c)   The determination of the annual benefit shall take into account
Social Security supplements described in Code Section 411(a)(9) and benefits
transferred from another defined benefit plan, other than transfers of
distributable benefits pursuant to Section 1.411(d)-4, Q&A-3(c), of the
regulations, but shall disregard benefits attributable to employee
contributions or rollover contributions.
         (d)   Effective for distributions in Plan years beginning after
December 31, 2003, the determination of actuarial equivalence of forms of
benefit other than a straight life annuity shall be made in accordance with
divisions (d)1. or (d)2. of this definition of ANNUAL BENEFIT:
            1.   Benefit forms not subject to Code Section 417(e)(3). The
straight life annuity that is actuarially equivalent to the participant's form
of benefit shall be determined under this division 1. if the form of the
participant's benefit is either (i) a nondecreasing annuity (other than a
straight life annuity) payable for a period of not less than the life of the
participant (or, in the case of a qualified preretirement survivor annuity, the
life of the surviving spouse), or (ii) an annuity that decreases during the
life of the participant merely because of (a) the death of the survivor
annuitant (but only if the reduction is not below 50% of the benefit payable
before the death of the survivor annuitant), or (b) the cessation or reduction
of Social Security supplements or qualified disability payments (as defined in
Code Section 401(a)(11)).
               a.    Limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007. For
limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007, the actuarially equivalent
straight life annuity is equal to the annual amount of the straight life
annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date that has the same
actuarial present value as the participant's form of benefit computed using
whichever of the following produces the greater annual amount:
                  i.    The interest rate and the mortality table (or other
tabular factor) specified in the Plan for adjusting benefits in the same form;
and
                  ii.    A 5% interest rate assumption and the applicable
mortality table for that annuity starting date.
               b.    Limitation years beginning on and after July 1, 2007. For
limitation years beginning on and after July 1, 2007, the actuarially
equivalent straight life annuity is equal to the greater of:
                  i.    The annual amount of the straight life annuity (if any)
payable to the participant under the Plan commencing at the same annuity
starting date as the participant's form of benefit; and
                  ii.    The annual amount of the straight life annuity
commencing at the same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial
present value as the participant's form of benefit, computed using a 5%
interest rate assumption and the applicable mortality table for that annuity
starting date.
            2.   Benefit forms subject to Code Section 417(e)(3). The straight
life annuity that is actuarially equivalent to the participant's form of
benefit shall be determined under this division 2. if the form of the
participant's benefit is other than a benefit form described in division 1.
above. In this case, the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity shall be
determined as follows:
               a.    Annuity starting date in Plan years beginning after 2005.
If the annuity starting date of the participant's benefit occurs during a Plan
year beginning after 2005, the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity is
equal to the greatest of:
                  i.    The annual amount of the straight life annuity
commending at the same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial
present value as the participant's form of benefit, computed using the interest
rate and the mortality table (or other tabular factor) specified in the Plan
for adjusting benefits in the same form;
                  ii.    The annual amount of the straight life annuity
commencing at the same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial
present value as the participant's form of benefit, computed using a 5.5%
interest rate assumption and the applicable mortality table; and
                  iii.    The annual amount of the straight life annuity
commencing at the same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial
present value as the participant's form of benefit, computed using the
applicable interest rate and the applicable mortality table, divided by 1.05.
However, for an employer that is an eligible employer as defined in Code
Section 408(p)(2)(C)(i), the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity is
equal to the greater of divisions i. or ii. above.
               b.    Annuity starting date in Plan years beginning in 2004 and
2005. If the annuity starting date of the participant's form of benefit is in a
Plan year beginning in 2004 or 2005, the actuarially equivalent straight life
annuity is equal to the annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing
at the same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as
the participant's form of benefit, computed using whichever of the following
produces the greater annual amount:
                  i.    The interest rate and the mortality table (or other
tabular factor) specified in the Plan for adjusting benefits in the same form;
and
                  ii.    A 5.5% interest rate assumption and the applicable
mortality table. If the annuity starting date of the participant's benefit is
on or after the first day of the first Plan year beginning in 2004 and before
December 31, 2004, the application of this division (d)2.b. shall not cause the
amount payable under the participant’s form of benefit to be less than the
benefit calculated under the Plan taking into account the limitations of this
section, except that the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity is equal
to the annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the same
annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the
participant's form of benefit, computed using whichever of the following
produces the greatest annual amount:
                  iii.    The interest rate and the mortality table (or other
tabular factor) specified in the Plan for adjusting benefits in the same form
(as provided under the terms of the Plan in effect as of the date of
distribution);
                  iv.    The applicable interest rate and the applicable
mortality table (as provided under the terms of the Plan in effect as of the
date of distribution); and
                  v.    The applicable interest rate (as in effect on the last
day of the last Plan year beginning before January 1, 2004, under the
provisions of the Plan then adopted and in effect) and the applicable mortality
table.
      DEFINED BENEFIT DOLLAR LIMITATION. Effective for limitation years ending
after December 31, 2001, $160,000, automatically adjusted under Code Section
415(d), effective January 1 of each year, as published in the Internal Revenue
Bulletin, and payable in the form of a straight life annuity. The new
limitation shall apply to limitation years ending with or within the calendar
year of the date of the adjustment, but a participant's benefits shall not
reflect the adjusted limit prior to January 1 of that  calendar year. The
automatic annual adjustment of the defined benefit dollar limitation under Code
Section 415(d) shall not apply to participants who have had a severance from
employment.
      EMPLOYER. The employer that adopts this Plan, and all members of a
controlled group of corporations (as defined in Code Section 414(b), as
modified by Code Section 415(h)), all commonly controlled trades or businesses
(as defined in Code Section 414(c), as modified, except in the case of a
brother-sister group of trades or businesses under common control, by Code
Section 415(h)), or affiliated service groups (as defined in Code Section 414
(m)) of which the adopting employer is a part, and any other entity required to
be aggregated with the employer pursuant to Code Section 414(o).
      FORMERLY AFFILIATED PLAN. A plan that, immediately prior to the cessation
of affiliation, was actually maintained by the employer and immediately after
the cessation of affiliation, is not actually maintained by the employer. For
this purpose, cessation of affiliation means the event that causes an entity to
no longer be considered the employer, such as the sale of a member of a
controlled group of corporations, as defined in Code Section 414(b), as
modified by Code Section 415(h), to an unrelated corporation, or that causes a
plan to not actually be maintained by the employer, such as a transfer of plan
sponsorship outside a controlled group.
      LIMITATION YEAR. The consecutive 12-month period ending on the last day
of each Plan year, including corresponding consecutive 12-month periods before
the effective date of the Plan. All qualified plans maintained by the employer
must use the same limitation year. If the limitation year is other than a
calendar year, execution of this Plan (or any amendment to this Plan changing
the limitation year) constitutes the employer's adoption of a written
resolution electing the limitation year. If the limitation year is amended to a
different consecutive 12-month period, the new limitation year must begin on a
date within the limitation year in which the amendment is made.
      MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE BENEFIT. The defined benefit dollar limitation
(adjusted where required, as provided below).
         (a)   Adjustment for less than ten years of participation.
            1.   If the participant has less than ten years of participation in
the Plan, the defined benefit dollar limitation shall be multiplied by a
fraction, (i) the numerator of which is the number of years of participation
(or part thereof, but not less than one year) in the Plan, and (ii) the
denominator of which is ten.
            2.   The adjustments of this division (a) shall not apply to
survivor and disability benefits as provided in Code Section 415(b)(2)(I).
         (b)   Adjustment of defined benefit dollar limitation for benefit
commencement before age 62 or after age 65. Effective for benefits commencing
in limitation years ending after December 31, 2001, the defined benefit dollar
limitation shall be adjusted if the annuity starting date of the participant's
benefit is before age 62 or after age 65. If the annuity starting date is
before age 62, the defined benefit dollar limitation shall be adjusted under
division (b)1. below, as modified by division (b)3. below. If the annuity
starting date is after age 65, the defined benefit dollar limitation shall be
adjusted under division (b)2. below, as modified by division (b)3. below.
            1.   Adjustment of defined benefit dollar limitation for benefit
commencement before age 62:
               a.    Limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007. If the
annuity starting date for the participant's benefit is prior to age 62 and
occurs in a limitation year beginning before July 1, 2007, the defined benefit
dollar limitation for the participant's annuity starting date is the annual
amount of a benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing
at the participant's annuity starting date that is the actuarial equivalent of
the defined benefit dollar limitation (adjusted under division (a) above for
years of participation less than ten, if required) with actuarial equivalence
computed using whichever of the following produces the smaller annual amount:
(i) the interest rate and the mortality table (or other tabular factor)
specified in the Plan for purposes of determining actuarial equivalence for
early retirement benefits; or (ii) a 5% interest rate assumption and the
applicable mortality table. To the extent the Plan does not specify an interest
rate and mortality table (or other tabular factor) or for ages for which no
tabular factor is specified, a 5% interest rate and the applicable mortality
table shall be used to determine actuarial equivalence.
               b.    Limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007.
                  i.    Plan does not have immediately commencing straight life
annuity payable at both age 62 and the age of benefit commencement. If the
annuity starting date for the participant's benefit is prior to age 62 and
occurs in a limitation year beginning on or after July 1, 2007, and the Plan
does not have an immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both
age 62 and the age of benefit commencement, the defined benefit dollar
limitation for the participant's annuity starting date is the annual amount of
a benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing at the
participant's annuity starting date that is the actuarial equivalent of the
defined benefit dollar limitation (adjusted under division (a) above for years
of participation less than ten, if required) with actuarial equivalence
computed using a 5% interest rate assumption and the applicable mortality table
for the annuity starting date (and expressing the participant's age based on
completed calendar months as of the annuity starting date).
                  ii.    Plan has immediately commencing straight life annuity
payable at both age 62 and the age of benefit commencement. If the annuity
starting date for the participant's benefit is prior to age 62 and occurs in a
limitation year beginning on or after July 1, 2007, and the Plan has an
immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both age 62 and the age
of benefit commencement, the defined benefit dollar limitation for the
participant's annuity starting date is the lesser of the limitation determined
under division (b)1.b.i. above and the defined benefit dollar limitation
(adjusted under division (a) above for years of participation less than ten, if
required) multiplied by the ratio of the annual amount of the immediately
commencing straight life annuity under the Plan at the participant's annuity
starting date to the annual amount of the immediately commencing straight life
annuity under the Plan at age 62, both determined without applying the
limitations of this section.
               c.   The adjustments in this division 1. do not apply in the
case of a participant who is a qualified participant (as defined in Code
Section 415(b)(H)). The adjustments in this division (b)1. do not apply to
survivor and disability benefits as provided in Code Section 415(b)(2)(I).
               d.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this division
(b)1., the age adjusted defined benefit dollar limitation applicable to a
participant does not decrease on account of an increase in age or the
performance of additional service.
            2.   Adjustment of defined benefit dollar limitation for benefit
commencement after age 65.
               a.    Limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007. If the
annuity starting date for the participant's benefit is after age 65 and occurs
in a limitation year beginning before July 1, 2007, the defined benefit dollar
limitation for the participant's annuity starting date is the annual amount of
a benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing at the
participant's annuity starting date that is the actuarial equivalent of the
defined benefit dollar limitation (adjusted under division (b)1. above for
years of participation less than ten, if required) with actuarial equivalence
computed using whichever of the following produces the smaller annual amount:
(i) the interest rate and the mortality table (or other tabular factor)
specified in the Plan for purposes of determining actuarial equivalence for
late retirement benefits; or (ii) a 5% interest rate assumption and the
applicable mortality table.
               b.    Limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007.
                  i.    Plan does not have immediately commencing straight life
annuity payable at both age 65 and the age of benefit commencement. If the
annuity starting date for the participant's benefit is after age 65 and occurs
in a limitation year beginning on or after July 1, 2007, and the Plan does not
have an immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both age 65 and
the age of benefit commencement, the defined benefit dollar limitation at the
participant's annuity starting date is the annual amount of a benefit payable
in the form of a straight life annuity commencing at the participant's annuity
starting date that is the actuarial equivalent of the defined benefit dollar
limitation (adjusted under division (b)1. above for years of participation less
than ten, if required) with actuarial equivalence computed using a 5% interest
rate assumption and the applicable mortality table for that annuity starting
date (and expressing the participant's age based on completed calendar months
as of the annuity starting date).
                  ii.    Plan has immediately commencing straight life annuity
payable at both age 65 and the age of benefit commencement. If the annuity
starting date for the participant's benefit is after age 65 and occurs in a
limitation year beginning on or after July 1, 2007, and the Plan has an
immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both age 65 and the age
of benefit commencement, the defined benefit dollar limitation at the
participant's annuity starting date is the lesser of the limitation determined
under division (b)2.b.i. above and the defined benefit dollar limitation
(adjusted under division (b)1. above for years of participation less than ten,
if required) multiplied by the ratio of the annual amount of the adjusted
immediately commencing straight life annuity under the Plan at the
participant's annuity starting date to the annual amount of the adjusted
immediately commencing straight life annuity under the Plan at age 65, both
determined without applying the limitations of this section. For this purpose,
the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the Plan at the
participant's annuity starting date is the annual amount of such annuity
payable to the participant, computed disregarding the participant's accruals
after age 65 but including actuarial adjustments even if those actuarial
adjustments are used to offset accruals; and the adjusted immediately
commencing straight life annuity under the Plan at age 65 is the annual amount
of such annuity that would be payable under the Plan to a hypothetical
participant who is age 65 and has the same accrued benefit as the participant.
            3.    Notwithstanding the other requirements of this division (b),
no adjustment shall be made to the defined benefit dollar limitation to reflect
the probability of a participant's death between the annuity starting date and
age 62, or between age 65 and the annuity starting date, as applicable, if
benefits are not forfeited upon the death of the participant prior to the
annuity starting date. To the extent benefits are forfeited upon death before
the annuity starting date, such an adjustment shall be made. For this purpose,
no forfeiture shall be treated as occurring upon the participant's death if the
Plan does not charge participants for providing a qualified joint and survivor
annuity, as defined in Code Section 417(c), upon the participant's death.
         (c)   Minimum benefits permitted. Notwithstanding anything else in
this definition to the contrary, the benefit otherwise accrued or payable to a
participant under this Plan shall be deemed not to exceed the maximum
permissible benefit if:
            1.   The retirement benefits payable for a limitation year under
any form of benefit with respect to such participant under this Plan and under
all other defined benefit plans (without regard to whether a plan has been
terminated) ever maintained by the employer do not exceed $10,000 multiplied by
a fraction, (1) the numerator of which is the participant's number of years of
service (or part thereof, but not less than one year) with the employer (not to
exceed ten), and (2) the denominator of which is ten; and
            2.   The employer (or a predecessor employer) has not at any time
maintained a defined contribution plan in which the participant participated
(for this purpose, mandatory employee contributions under a defined benefit
plan are not considered a separate defined contribution plan).
The amount in division (c)1. above shall be equal to $10,000 when determining
the minimum benefit for survivor and disability benefits as provided in Code
Section 415(b)(2)(I).
      PREDECESSOR EMPLOYER. With respect to a participant, a former employer if
the employer maintains a plan that provides a benefit which the participant
accrued while performing services for the former employer. Predecessor employer
also means, with respect to a participant, a former entity that antedates the
employer if, under the facts and circumstances, the employer constitutes a
continuation of all or a portion of the trade or business of the former entity.
      SEVERANCE FROM EMPLOYMENT. An employee has ceased to be an employee of
the employer maintaining the plan.
      STRAIGHT LIFE ANNUITY. An annuity payable in equal installments for the
life of the participant that terminates upon the participant's death.
      YEAR OF PARTICIPATION. One year (computed to fractional parts of a year)
for each Plan year for which the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The participant is credited with continuous service for benefit
accrual purposes, and
         (b)   The participant is included as a participant under the
eligibility provisions of the Plan for at least one day of the Plan year.
If these two conditions are met, the portion of a year of participation
credited to the participant shall equal the amount of accrual service credited
to the participant for such Plan year. A participant who is totally and
permanently disabled within the meaning of Code Section 415(c)(3)(C)(i) for a
Plan year shall receive a year of participation with respect to that period. In
addition, for a participant to receive a year of participation (or part
thereof) for a Plan year, the Plan must be established no later than the last
day of such Plan year. In no event will more than one year of participation be
credited for any 12-month period.
      YEAR OF SERVICE. For purposes of the definition of MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE
BENEFIT, one year (computed to fractional parts of a year) for each Plan year
for which the participant is credited with continuous service for benefit
accrual purposes, taking into account only service with the employer or a
predecessor employer.
   (B)   The annual benefit otherwise payable to a participant at any time will
not exceed the maximum permissible benefit.
   (C)   If the participant is, or has ever been, a participant in another
qualified defined benefit plan (without regard to whether the plan has been
terminated) maintained by the employer or a predecessor employer, the sum of
the participant's annual benefits from all such plans may not exceed the
maximum permissible benefit. Where the participant's employer-provided benefits
under all such defined benefit plans (determined as of the same age) would
exceed the maximum permissible benefit applicable at that age, the benefit
shall be limited (or the rate of accrual reduced) in the plan most recently
established to the extent necessary so that the sum of the participant's annual
benefits from all such plan(s) does not exceed the maximum permissible benefit.
   (D)   The application of the provisions of this section shall not cause the
maximum permissible benefit for any participant to be less than the
participant's accrued benefit under all the defined benefit plans of the
employer or a predecessor employer as of the end of the last limitation year
beginning before July 1, 2007 under the provisions of the plans that were both
adopted and in effect before April 5, 2007. The preceding sentence applies only
if the provisions of such defined benefit plans that were both adopted and in
effect before April 5, 2007 satisfied the applicable requirements of statutory
provisions, regulations, and other published guidance relating to Code Section
415 in effect as of the end of the last limitation year beginning before July
1, 2007, as described in section 1.415(a)-1 (g)(4) of the regulations.
   (E)   The limitations of this section shall be determined and applied taking
into account the rules in division (F) below.
   (F)   Other rules.
      (1)   Benefits under terminated plans. If a defined benefit plan
maintained by the employer has terminated with sufficient assets for the
payment of benefit liabilities of all plan participants and a participant in
the plan has not yet commenced benefits under the plan, the benefits provided
pursuant to the annuities purchased to provide the participant's benefits under
the terminated plan at each possible annuity starting date shall be taken into
account in applying the limitations of this section. If there are not
sufficient assets for the payment of all participants' benefit liabilities, the
benefits taken into account shall be the benefits that are actually provided to
the participant under the terminated plan.
      (2)   Benefits transferred from the plan. If a participant's benefits
under a defined benefit plan maintained by the employer are transferred to
another defined benefit plan maintained by the employer and the transfer is not
a transfer of distributable benefits pursuant to section 1.411(d)-4, Q&A-3(c)
of the regulations, the transferred benefits are not treated as being provided
under the transferor plan (but are taken into account as benefits provided
under the transferee plan). If a participant's benefits under a defined benefit
plan maintained by the employer are transferred to another defined benefit plan
that is not maintained by the employer and the transfer is not a transfer of
distributable benefits pursuant to section 1.411(d)-4, Q&A-3(c), of the
regulations, the transferred benefits are treated by the employer's plan as if
such benefits were provided under annuities purchased to provide benefits under
a plan maintained by the employer that terminated immediately prior to the
transfer with sufficient assets to pay all participants' benefit liabilities
under the plan. If a participant's benefits under a defined benefit plan
maintained by the employer are transferred to another defined benefit plan in a
transfer of distributable benefits pursuant to section 1.411(d)-4, Q&A-3(c), of
the regulations, the amount transferred is treated as a benefit paid from the
transferor plan.
      (3)   Formerly affiliated plans of the employer. A formerly affiliated
plan of the employer shall be treated as a plan maintained by the employer, but
the formerly affiliated plan shall be treated as if it had terminated
immediately prior to the cessation of affiliation with sufficient assets to pay
participants' benefit liabilities under the plan and had purchased annuities to
provide benefits.
      (4)   Plans of a predecessor employer. If the employer maintains a
defined benefit plan that provides benefits accrued by a participant while
performing services for a predecessor employer, the participant's benefits
under a plan maintained by a predecessor employer shall be treated as provided
under a plan maintained by the employer. However, for this purpose, the plan of
the predecessor employer shall be treated as if it had terminated immediately
prior to the event giving rise to the predecessor employer relationship with
sufficient assets to pay participants' benefit liabilities under the plan, and
had purchased annuities to provide benefits; the employer and the predecessor
employer shall be treated as if they were a single employer immediately prior
to such event and as unrelated employers immediately after the event; and if
the event giving rise to the predecessor relationship is a benefit transfer,
the transferred benefits shall be excluded in determining the benefits provided
under the plan of the predecessor employer.
      (5)   Special rules. The limitations of this section shall be determined
and applied taking into account the rules in section 1.415(f)-1(d), (e), and
(h) of the regulations.
      (6)   Aggregation with multiemployer plans.
         (a)   If the employer maintains a multiemployer plan, as defined in
Code Section 414(f), and the multiemployer plan so provides, only the benefits
under the multiemployer plan that are provided by the employer shall be treated
as benefits provided under a plan maintained by the employer for purposes of
this section.
         (b)   Effective for limitation years ending after December 31, 2001, a
multiemployer plan shall be disregarded for purposes of division (a) of the
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE BENEFIT definition in this section to a plan which is not a
multiemployer plan. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.028 EXCESS BENEFIT PLAN.
   (A)   In the event that the retirement benefits of a participant exceed the
amount permitted by the Internal Revenue Code Section 415, an excess benefit
plan is hereby created. The payment of benefits to such participant shall be as
follows:
      (1)   The participant shall first receive the maximum amount payable by
the Retirement Income Plan for General Employees of the City of Pembroke Pines
(the Retirement Income Plan); and
      (2)   Thereafter, benefits shall be paid from the Excess Benefit Plan,
funded by the employer and which shall be paid annually, concurrently with the
employer's annual contribution to normal pension costs, which may cause the
employer to realize a reduction in normal pension costs; and
      (3)   Which sums are deposited in separate accounts for each respective
plan to receive the employer's excess retirement benefit contributions, which
accounts shall be separate and apart from the accounts established to receive
the employer's normal pension contributions for each retirement fund.
   (B)   The actuaries for the Retirement Income Plan shall calculate the
amounts necessary to fund the defined benefit plans giving effect to the
reductions caused by implementation of Section 415 of the Internal Revenue
Code.
   (C)   The excess benefits shall be paid to each eligible participant of the
Plan on a monthly basis in an amount equal to the difference between the
allowable pension to be paid under the Internal Revenue Code and the amount of
the defined benefit granted eligible participants pursuant to the provisions
set forth in the Plan.
   (D)   Should additional retirements occur during the year where the eligible
participant's retirement benefit exceeds the Section 415 limits, the actuaries
shall calculate the additional excess benefit amount required for the remainder
of the fiscal year and should such amount exceed the amount available from the
funds provided for the fiscal year, the actuaries shall notify the employer of
the additional funds required.
   (E)   Upon the employer's receipt of notice of additional funds required,
the employer shall forward the additional funds required. The requirement for
additional funds paid by the employer to fund the Excess Benefit Plan shall be
reflected as a reduction in the employer's annual contribution of normal
pension costs for the following year where applicable.
   (F)   No employee hired or rehired on or after October 1, 2013 shall become
eligible for this Excess Benefit Plan. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.029 AMOUNT OF BENEFIT AT RETIREMENT.
   (A)   The amount of retirement benefit to be provided under the normal form
for an active participant on his retirement date shall be determined according
to the provisions of this section.
      (1)   Normal retirement date. An active participant's retirement benefit
on his normal retirement date shall be equal to his accrued benefit on such
date.
      (2)   Early retirement date.
         (a)   An active participant's retirement benefit on his early
retirement date shall be equal to his accrued benefit on such date, multiplied
by the factor shown below corresponding to the number of years his early
retirement date precedes his normal retirement date.
 
Number of Years Early Retirement Date Precedes Normal Retirement Date Factor
1                                                                     .9333
2                                                                     .8667
3                                                                     .8000
4                                                                     .7333
5                                                                     .6667
 
         (b)   The above factors shall be prorated for a partial year (counting
a partial month as a complete month).
      (3)   Late retirement date. An active participant's retirement benefit on
his late retirement date shall be equal to the greater of divisions (A)(3)(a)
or (A)(3)(b) below:
         (a)   His accrued benefit on his late retirement date.
         (b)   His accrued benefit on his normal retirement date, multiplied by
the factor shown below corresponding to the number of years his late retirement
date follows his normal retirement date.
Number of Years Late Retirement Date Follows Normal Retirement Date Factor
Number of Years Late Retirement Date Follows Normal Retirement Date Factor
1                                                                   1.0600
2                                                                   1.1200
3                                                                   1.1900
4                                                                   1.2600
5                                                                   1.3400
6                                                                   1.4200
7                                                                   1.5000
8                                                                   1.5900
9                                                                   1.6900
10                                                                  1.7900
 
The above factors shall be prorated for a partial year (counting a partial
month as a complete month). Factors for years beyond ten shall be determined
using a consistently applied reasonable actuarially equivalent method.
   (B)   In any event, an active participant's retirement benefit under the
normal form on his retirement date will not be less than the greater of his
required contribution accrued benefit on his retirement date, reduced in the
same manner as his accrued benefit is reduced at early retirement date if his
retirement date is an early retirement date, or the monthly benefit under the
normal form that is the actuarial equivalent of his required contribution
account on such date.
   (C)   The participant's retirement benefits shall be distributed to the
participant according to the distribution of benefits provisions of §§
38.050 through
38.053 and the small amounts provisions of § 38.098. The amount of payment
under any form (other than the normal form) shall be determined as provided
under §
38.052. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.030 BENEFITS UPON EMPLOYMENT AFTER RETIREMENT DATE.
   (A)   If a participant is employed by the employer after his retirement
date, any monthly retirement benefit payment he is receiving shall continue
unchanged.
   (B)   If such participant continues to be or again becomes an active
participant after his retirement date, his benefits under this Plan shall not
be duplicated. The retirement benefit from the accrued benefit resulting from
such additional period of accrual service shall be payable according to the
provisions of §§
38.025 through
38.032 and §§
38.050 through
38.053. Any death benefit from the accrued benefit he accrued during his latest
period as an active participant shall be determined as provided in §
38.040. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.031 DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN.
   (A)   An active participant and any employee who is covered under a
collective bargaining agreement whose accrued benefit is frozen as of June 30,
2010 shall become eligible for participation in the Deferred Retirement Option
Plan (DROP) on the first day of the month on or after his normal retirement
date.
   (B)   At the time of a participant's entry into the DROP, the participant's
accrual service, accrued benefit and average compensation shall be calculated
as if the participant had actually retired from service. No additional accrual
service shall be earned after entry into the DROP. Any changes in plan benefits
shall not apply to participants in the DROP, unless otherwise applicable to
retired participants of the plan.
   (C)   The active participant shall select the retirement option from the
list available in §
38.052, and shall designate any beneficiary. In the absence of a beneficiary
designation, or should the designated beneficiary predecease the participant,
the participant's estate shall be the contingent beneficiary.
   (D)   The maximum period of DROP participation shall be eight years (five
years for a participant who entered the DROP prior to December 1, 2017).
   (E)   An election to participate in the DROP shall constitute an irrevocable
election to resign from the service of the employer not later than 96 months
(60 months for a participant who entered the DROP prior to December 1, 2017)
after commencement of DROP participation. Consistent with the provisions of the
Older Workers' Benefits Protection Act, 29 U.S.C 626(f), as amended from time
to time, all participants in the DROP shall be given 45 days in which to
consider the terms of the DROP agreement and, after election to participate in
the DROP, shall have seven calendar days following the execution of such
agreement to revoke said agreement to receive the full eight years (five years
for a participant who entered the DROP prior to December 1, 2017) of
participation.
   (F)   Election to participate in the DROP must be exercised within the first
eight years (five years for a participant who entered the DROP prior to
December 1, 2017) of eligibility for the DROP for a maximum number of years as
specified below. Election to participate must be made in writing in a time and
manner determined by the employer.
   (G)   The duration and participation in the DROP shall be specified and
shall not exceed eight years (five years for a participant who entered the DROP
prior to December 1, 2017) from the first day of eligibility for normal
retirement date, as chosen by the participant.
   (H)   Upon entry into the DROP, an amount equal to the participant's monthly
retirement benefit shall be transferred to an account designated by the
participant for investment. Participants may direct their DROP money to any of
the investment options approved by the Employer for the DROP. Participants
shall self-direct the value of their DROP account in investment options
selected by the employer for the DROP. The only permissible investment options
shall be "regulated investment companies" as defined in Code Section 851 or
similar entities (e.g., mutual funds, etc.) set forth on Appendix "A" (which is
incorporated into the terms of the Plan by this reference). The value of each
participant's DROP account at any particular time shall equal the sum of the
value(s) of his selected investment options (which shall be valued on a daily
basis). If the employer desires to alter the available investment options or
the manner of investing participant DROP accounts or the methodology for
allocating investment experience to participant DROP accounts, such changes
shall be set forth on Appendix “A” in a manner that satisfies the definitely
determinable benefit requirements contained in Code Section 401(a)(25) and
1.401-1(b)(1)(i) of the regulations.
   (I)   There shall be no guaranteed rate of investment return on DROP
deposits. Upon the direct transfer of the DROP money to the account designated
by the participant, neither the employer nor the retirement fund shall have any
obligation to the participant concerning investment gains or losses. Transfers
between accounts shall be in accordance with the rules of the deferred
compensation program.
   (J)   The decision to participate in the DROP is irrevocable.
   (K)   Upon entry into the DROP, a participant shall no longer be eligible
for death or disability benefits under the plan. In the event of a disability
or death, the participant shall be presumed to have retired on a normal
retirement on the day before his disability or death. Distribution from the
DROP account shall be made to the participant, or in the case of his death, to
his designated beneficiary.
   (L)   No participant may receive a distribution from the DROP until actual
separation from service with the employer. Distribution may be in a lump sum,
periodic payments, an annuity, or a combination thereof. A participant may also
elect to rollover the DROP account to another qualified retirement plan,
including an individual retirement account. Distribution must commence not
later than provided in Code Section 401(a)(9). It is the intent of the employer
that this plan at all times be a qualified plan as determined by Code Section
401(a).
   (M)   During DROP participation, a participant shall be considered a retiree
with deferred receipt of benefits for all plan purposes. For all other
purposes, the participant shall be considered an active employee of the
employer entitled to all rights of employment.
   (N)   The employer shall be empowered to promulgate uniform rules for the
administration of the DROP, provided the rules are not inconsistent with the
provisions of the plan.
   (O)   Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, a
participant who entered the DROP prior to December 1, 2017 shall be provided a
one-time option to elect, in writing, to change the duration of his
participation in the DROP from five years to eight years. Such election must
occur within 30 days of the adoption of this amendment.
(Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15; Am. Ord. 1844, passed 4-6-16; Am. Ord. 1894, passed
2-7-18)
§ 38.032 COST OF LIVING ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Each participant who meets the following requirements shall be
entitled to receive a cost of living adjustment to his retirement benefit:
      (1)   He is a participant in the DROP program, as provided in §
38.031; or
      (2)   He begins to receive retirement or disability benefits from the
Plan on or after October 1, 2001.
   (B)   (1)   Each yearly date on and after October 1, 2004, such
participant's monthly retirement benefit payments shall be increased as
follows:
         (a)   Three percent, if he is receiving monthly retirement benefit
payments or is participating in the DROP before February 1, 2010.
         (b)   Three percent, if he attained normal retirement date on or
before February 1, 2010, and he is still actively employed on February 1, 2010
and is not participating in the DROP.
         (c)   Two percent, if he attained normal retirement date or became a
participant in the DROP after February 1, 2010.
      (2)   An amount of monthly retirement benefit will be provided for him
under the annuity contract in the amount of such increase with payments being
made as to the monthly retirement annuity provided under the annuity contract
on the participant's retirement date or his entry into the DROP.
   (C)   On and after the effective date of termination of the Plan pursuant to
§
38.070, no further changes in monthly retirement benefit payments will be made
in accordance with this section.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the above, any participant who is covered under a
collective bargaining agreement with the employer who is an employee of the
employer and who meets the requirements for normal retirement date on or before
July 1, 2010, will continue to be eligible for benefits under this section.
However, any participant who is covered under a collective bargaining agreement
with the employer who has not met the requirements for normal retirement date
on or before July 1, 2010, and has not commenced receiving his monthly
retirement benefit as of July 1, 2010, shall not be eligible for the cost of
living adjustment. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
OTHER BENEFITS
§ 38.040 DEATH BENEFITS.
   (A)   If a participant dies before his annuity starting date, death benefits
shall be determined under divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section. The
distribution of death benefits shall be subject to the distribution of benefits
provisions of §§
38.050 through
38.053 and the provisions of §
38.098.
      (1)   Preretirement survivor annuity.
         (a)   A preretirement survivor annuity shall be payable if the
following requirements are met:
            1.   The participant is survived by a spouse to whom he was
continuously married throughout the one-year period ending on the date he dies
or the participant is survived by his domestic partner that has continuously
been his domestic partner throughout the one-year period ending on the date he
dies.
            2.   The participant dies while he is an employee.
            3.   The participant had met the requirements for early retirement
date, or reached normal retirement date, if earlier.
         (b)   If the requirements above are met on the date the participant
dies, a preretirement survivor annuity shall be payable on the earliest date on
or after the date of his death on which he could have elected to retire if he
had a severance from employment on the date of his death (the date he last had
a severance from employment, if earlier) and survived to retire. The spouse or
domestic partner may elect to start benefits on any later first day of the
month. If the spouse or domestic partner chooses to start benefits later, the
preretirement survivor annuity shall be the actuarial equivalent of the
preretirement survivor annuity that would have been payable on the date the
preretirement survivor annuity would otherwise have been payable. Benefits must
start to a surviving spouse by the date the participant would have been age 70-
1/2. Benefits must start to a domestic partner by December 31st of the calendar
year following the calendar year in which the participant dies. If the spouse
or domestic partner dies before the preretirement survivor annuity starts, the
only death benefit payable from the participant's accrued benefit is that
provided in division (A)(2) below.
         (c)   If a single sum death benefit would otherwise be payable in
division (A)(2) below, the monthly benefit payable to the spouse or domestic
partner under the preretirement survivor annuity on the date the preretirement
survivor annuity first becomes payable shall not be less than the preretirement
survivor annuity that is the actuarial equivalent of the single sum death
benefit on that date.
         (d)   If the participant waives the preretirement survivor annuity,
according to the provisions of §
38.053, by electing to have the single sum death benefit in division (A)(2)
below paid to his beneficiary after the requirements above are met or if the
spouse or domestic partner waives the preretirement survivor annuity, according
to §
38.053, by electing to have the single sum death benefit in division (A)(2)
below paid to himself as beneficiary after the requirements above are met, the
preretirement survivor annuity on the date the preretirement survivor annuity
first becomes payable shall be reduced. The amount of the reduction shall be
equal to the preretirement survivor annuity that is the actuarial equivalent of
what would have been the single sum death benefit on that date.
      (2)   Single sum death benefit.
         (a)   If the requirements of division (A)(1) above have not been met
on the date a participant dies, a single sum death benefit equal to his
required contribution account on the date he died shall be payable to the
participant's beneficiary. If the requirements of division (A)(1) above have
been met on the date such participant dies and the preretirement survivor
annuity has not been waived, but the participant's spouse or domestic partner
dies before the preretirement survivor annuity starts, this single sum death
benefit, determined as of the date of the spouse's or domestic partner's death,
shall be paid to the spouse's or domestic partner's beneficiary.
         (b)   Before a single sum death benefit will be paid on account of the
death of a participant who would have met all the requirements in division (A)
(1) above if he had a spouse to whom he had been continuously married
throughout the one-year period ending on the date of his death, it must be
established to the satisfaction of a plan representative that there is no
spouse or that the participant had not been continuously married throughout the
one-year period ending on the date of his death. Likewise, before a single sum
death benefit will be paid on account of the death of a participant who would
have met all the requirements in division (A)(1) above if he had a domestic
partner that had continuously been his domestic partner throughout the one-year
period ending on the date of his death, it must be established to the
satisfaction of the plan representative that there is no domestic partner or
that he had not continuously been the participant's domestic partner throughout
the one-year period ending on the date of the participant's death.
   (B)   If a participant dies on or after his normal retirement date and
before his annuity starting date and such participant is survived by a spouse
to whom he was continuously married throughout the one-year period ending on
the date of his death (or is survived by a domestic partner that has been his
domestic partner throughout the one-year period ending on the date of his
death), the death benefit shall be payable in like manner as provided under
divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above, unless such participant is an active
participant who has waived the preretirement survivor annuity, according to §
38.053, by electing the preservation of retirement options death benefit.
   (C)   If an active participant dies on or after his normal retirement date
and before his annuity starting date and such participant is not survived by a
spouse to whom he was continuously married throughout the one-year period
ending on the date of his death (or is not survived by a domestic partner that
has been his domestic partner throughout the one-year period ending on the date
of his death), the provisions of divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above shall not
apply. Instead, the death benefit shall be the preservation of retirement
option death benefit. This death benefit is the death benefit that would have
been payable to such participant's beneficiary or contingent annuitant if the
participant's retirement date had occurred on the date he died. The optional
form of distribution elected according to the provisions of §
38.053 before such participant's death is the form in effect for determining
the death benefit. The automatic form of distribution for retirement benefits
under §
38.051 shall be in effect if an election has not been made or an election is
revoked without a subsequent election according to the provisions of §
38.053. Any death benefit payable shall be subject to the distribution
limitations of §
38.062.
   (D)   If, after any death benefit above is distributed in a single sum, the
present value of the remaining preretirement survivor annuity payable under
division (A)(1) above is $5,000 or less, the spouse or domestic partner may
receive such present value in a single sum payment in lieu of the preretirement
survivor annuity. It will be distributed only if the spouse or domestic partner
so elects. This election shall be subject to the requirements in §
38.053 for an election of a death benefit payable in a form other than a
preretirement survivor annuity.
   (E)   Any death benefit after a participant's annuity starting date will be
determined by the form of retirement benefit in effect on such date. (Ord.
1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.041 VESTED BENEFITS.
   (A)   A participant who becomes an inactive participant before retirement or
death (and, if applicable, before the date a disability payment begins under §
38.042) will be entitled to one of the following vested benefits whichever is
applicable. Any distribution of vested benefits shall be a retirement benefit
and shall be subject to the distribution of benefits provisions of §§
38.050 through
38.053 and the provisions of §
38.098, except as otherwise specifically provided bellow:
      (1)   A deferred monthly retirement benefit under the normal form to
begin on his normal retirement date. The deferred retirement benefit will be
equal to the sum of divisions (A)(1)(a) and (A)(1)(b) below:
         (a)   The participant's required contribution accrued benefit as of
the date of determination (the date the participant's required contribution
account is paid in a single sum, if earlier).
         (b)   The product of divisions (A)(1)(b)1. and (A)(1)(b)2. below:
            1.   The excess of the participant's accrued benefit on the day
before he became an inactive participant over the amount determined under
division (A)(1)(a) above.
            2.   The participant's vesting percentage on the date he has a
severance from employment or his voluntary discontinuance date.
      (2)   A deferred monthly retirement benefit under the normal form to
begin on his early retirement date. The deferred retirement benefit shall be
equal to the amount under division (A)(1) above multiplied by the applicable
early retirement factor in §
38.029.
      (3)   A deferred monthly retirement benefit under the normal form to
begin on his late retirement date. The deferred retirement benefit shall be
determined as follows:
         (a)   For a participant who became an inactive participant on or
before his normal retirement date, an amount equal to the amount under division
(A)(1) above multiplied by the late retirement factor in §
38.029 that corresponds to the number of years his late retirement date follows
his normal retirement date.
         (b)   For a participant who became an inactive participant after his
normal retirement date, an amount equal to the greater of division (A)(3)(b)1.
or (A)(3)(b)2. below:
            1.   The participant's accrued benefit on the day before the date
he became an inactive participant.
            2.   His accrued benefit on his normal retirement date multiplied
by the late retirement factor in §
38.029 that corresponds to the number of years his late retirement date follows
his normal retirement date.
      (4)   The inactive participant may receive his required contribution
account in a single sum payment at any time after he has a severance from
employment and before his retirement date, provided he has not again become an
employee. If such amount is not payable under the provisions of §
38.098, it will be distributed only if the participant so elects. Such payment
shall result in a portion of his accrued benefit under division (A)(1)(a) of
this section being disregarded.
      (5)   The inactive participant may receive his required contribution
account in a single lump sum payment at any time after he is transferred to a
position with the city where he is eligible to join the city's Firefighters and
Police Officers Pension System.
   (B)   The deferred retirement benefit for the participant on his retirement
date shall not be less than the monthly benefit that is the actuarial
equivalent of his required contribution account on such date.
   (C)   The amount of payment under any form (other than the normal form)
shall be determined as provided under §
38.052.
   (D)   The participant may receive his required contribution account in a
single sum payment at any time after he has a severance from employment and
before his retirement date, provided he has not again become an employee. If
such amount is not payable under the provisions of §
38.098, it will be distributed only if the participant so elects. The
participant's election shall be subject to the requirements in §
38.053. Such payment shall be in lieu of his required contribution accrued
benefit.
   (E)   If, after any single-sum distribution above which occurs before a
participant's retirement date, the present value of the participant's remaining
vested accrued benefit payable at normal retirement date is $5,000 or less, the
participant may receive such present value in a single-sum payment, provided he
has not again become an employee. Such amount will be distributed only if the
participant so elects. The participant's election shall be subject to the
requirements in §
38.053. Such payment shall be in lieu of all other benefits under the Plan.
   (F)   If the participant dies before his annuity starting date, death
benefits shall be distributed according to the provisions of § 38.040. (Ord.
1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.042 DISABILITY BENEFITS.
   (A)   If an active participant becomes disabled (and such disability is
determined to meet the definition of totally and permanently disabled) before
his retirement date (normal retirement date, if earlier), an immediate monthly
disability benefit shall be payable to him as follows:
      (1)   If the participant's disability is not service related, and he has
completed ten years of vesting service, the disability benefit shall be equal
to his accrued benefit on the day before his monthly disability benefit begins.
      (2)   If the participant's disability is service related, the disability
benefit shall be equal to the greater of (i) his accrued benefit on the day
before his monthly disability benefit begins; or (ii) 40% of his current
monthly compensation on such date.
   (B)   Monthly disability benefit payments shall begin on the earliest first
day of the month on or after the date the participant meets the requirements
under this section. Such payments shall continue through the last monthly
payment made before the earliest of his retirement date (normal retirement
date, if earlier), the date of his death, or the day following the date he is
no longer totally and permanently disabled.
   (C)   If the payments continue through the month immediately preceding the
participant's retirement date (normal retirement date, if earlier), retirement
benefits shall be provided for him on his retirement date under the provisions
of §§
38.025 through
38.032 as if he were an active participant. His accrued benefit shall be equal
to his accrued benefit as of the day before the disability benefit began.
However, such accrued benefit shall not be less than the amount of monthly
disability payment paid to him under this section. If, before the participant's
retirement date (normal retirement date, if earlier), he recovers and returns
to active work, for the employer within one month of his recovery, the payments
shall stop and he shall again become an active participant under §
38.005. If, before the participant's retirement date (normal retirement date,
if earlier), he recovers and does not return to active work for the employer
within one month of his recovery, the payments shall stop and his benefits
shall be redetermined, on the date he had a severance from employment, under §
38.041. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
WHEN BENEFITS START AND DISTRIBUTION OF BENEFITS
§ 38.050 WHEN BENEFITS START.
   (A)   The participant may elect to have benefits begin after the later of
his normal retirement date or the date he has a severance from employment,
subject to the following provisions of this section. The participant shall make
the election in writing. Such election must be made before his normal
retirement date or the date he has a severance from employment, if later. The
participant shall not elect a date for beginning benefits or a form of
distribution that would result in a benefit payable when he dies which would be
more than incidental within the meaning of governmental regulations.
   (B)   Benefits shall begin as provided in the Plan. For example, the
participant's retirement date or required beginning date, as defined in §
38.061. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.051 AUTOMATIC FORMS OF DISTRIBUTION.
   Unless an optional form of benefit is selected pursuant to an election
within the election period (see §
38.053), the automatic form of benefit payable to or on behalf of a participant
is determined as follows:
   (A)   Retirement benefits. The automatic form of retirement benefit for a
participant who does not die before his annuity starting date shall be the
normal form.
   (B)   Death benefits. The automatic form of death benefit for a participant
who dies before his annuity starting date is determined according to the
provisions of §
38.040. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.052 OPTIONAL FORMS OF DISTRIBUTION.
   (A)   Retirement benefits.
      (1)   The optional forms of retirement benefit shall be the following:
(i) a straight life annuity; (ii) single life annuities with certain periods of
5, 10, or 15 years; (iii) a single life annuity with modified cash refund of
the participant's required contribution account; and (iv) survivorship life
annuities with survivorship percentages of 50%, 66-2/3%, 75%, or 100%.
      (2)   The benefit payable under any optional form available above (other
than the normal form) shall be the actuarial equivalent of the benefit that
would otherwise be payable to the participant under the normal form on his
retirement date. If the participant's retirement date is before his normal
retirement date, the benefit payable under any optional form other than (i) a
nondecreasing annuity payable for a period of not less than the life of the
participant or (ii) an annuity that decreases during the life of the
participant merely because of (a) the death of the survivor annuitant (but only
if the reduction is not below 50% of the benefit payable before the death of
the survivor annuitant), or (b) the cessation or reduction of Social Security
supplements or qualified disability payments (as defined in Code Section 401(a)
(11)), shall not be less than the actuarial equivalent of the benefit that
would otherwise be payable to the participant under the normal form on his
normal retirement date.
      (3)   Election of an optional form is subject to the election provisions
of §
38.053 and the distribution requirements of §§
38.060 through 38.063.
      (4)   Any annuity contract distributed shall be nontransferable.
   (B)   Death benefits.
      (1)   The optional forms of death benefit are any of the optional forms
of retirement benefit stated in division (A) above that are not survivorship
life annuities.
      (2)   Election of an optional form is subject to the election provisions
of §
38.053 and the distribution requirements of §§
38.060 through
38.063. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7- 15)
§ 38.053 ELECTION PROCEDURES.
   The participant, beneficiary, or spouse shall make any election under this
section in writing. The Plan Administrator may require such individual to
complete and sign any necessary documents as to the provisions to be made. Any
election permitted under divisions (A) and (B) below shall be subject to the
election provisions of division (C) below.
   (A)   Retirement benefits. A participant may elect his beneficiary or
contingent annuitant and may elect to have retirement benefits distributed
under any of the optional forms of retirement benefit available in §
38.052.
   (B)   Death benefits.  
      (1)   An active participant may waive the preretirement survivor annuity
by electing not to have the provisions of §
38.040(A)(1) and (2) continue to apply on and after his normal retirement date.
If such participant makes this election and dies on or after his normal
retirement date, the preservation of retirement option death benefit shall be
paid as if he had not been survived by a spouse or domestic partner.
      (2)   A participant may elect his beneficiary for any single sum death
benefits and may elect to have such death benefits distributed under any of the
optional forms of death benefit available in §
38.052.
      (3)   If the participant has not elected an optional form of distribution
for the death benefit payable to his beneficiary, the beneficiary may, for his
own benefit, elect the form of distribution, in like manner as a participant.
      (4)   The participant may waive the preretirement survivor annuity by
electing not to have the single sum death benefit used to provide a minimum
preretirement survivor annuity as described in §
38.040. If the participant makes this election, the single sum death benefit
shall be paid as if the requirements of §
38.040(A)(1) had not been met.
      (5)   The spouse or domestic partner may waive the preretirement survivor
annuity by electing not to have the single sum death benefit used to provide a
minimum preretirement survivor annuity as described in §
38.040. If the spouse or domestic partner makes this election, the single sum
death benefit shall be paid as if the requirements of §
38.040(A)(1) had not been met and the participant had named his spouse or
domestic partner as beneficiary.
      (6)   In lieu of the preretirement survivor annuity described in §
38.040, the spouse or domestic partner may, for his own benefit, waive the
preretirement survivor annuity by electing to have the benefit distributed
under any of the optional forms of death benefit available in §
38.052.
   (C)   Election. The participant, beneficiary, spouse or domestic partner may
make an election at any time during the election period. The participant,
beneficiary, spouse or domestic partner may revoke the election made (or make a
new election) at any time and any number of times during the election period.
      (1)   Election period for retirement benefits. A participant may make an
election as to retirement benefits at any time before the annuity starting
date.
      (2)   Election period for death benefits. A participant may make an
election as to death benefits at any time before he dies. The spouse's election
period begins on the date the participant dies and ends on the date benefits
begin. The beneficiary's election period begins on the date the participant
dies and ends on the date benefits begin. If an active participant has a spouse
or domestic partner who is entitled to a preretirement survivor annuity his
election period as to the preservation of retirement option death benefit
begins 90 days before the first day of the Plan year in which such participant
reaches his normal retirement date. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
REQUIRED MINIMUM DISTRIBUTIONS
§ 38.060 APPLICATION.
   The optional forms of distribution are only those provided in §§
38.050 through
38.053. An optional form of distribution shall not be permitted unless it meets
the requirements of this subchapter. The timing of any distribution must meet
the requirements of this subchapter. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.061 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms are defined:
   ACTUARIAL GAIN. The difference between an amount determined using the
actuarial assumptions (i.e., investment return, mortality, expense, and other
similar assumptions) used to calculate the initial payments before adjustment
for any increases and the amount determined under the actual experience with
respect to those factors. ACTUARIAL GAIN also includes differences between the
amount determined using actuarial assumptions when an annuity was purchased or
commenced and such amount determined using actuarial assumptions used in
calculating payments at the time the actuarial gain is determined.
   DISTRIBUTION CALENDAR YEAR. A calendar year for which a minimum distribution
is required. For distributions beginning before the participant's death, the
first distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately preceding the
calendar year that contains the participant's required beginning date. For
distributions beginning after the participant's death, the first distribution
calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are required to begin
under §
38.062(B)(2).
   ELIGIBLE COST-OF-LIVING INDEX. An index described in paragraph (b)(2), (b)
(3), or (b)(4) in Q&A-14 in section 1.401(a)(9)-6 of the regulations.
   LIFE EXPECTANCY. Life expectancy as computed by use of the Single Life Table
in Q&A-1 in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the regulations.
   REQUIRED BEGINNING DATE. For a participant, April 1 of the calendar year
following the later of the calendar year in which he attains age 70-1/2 or the
calendar year in which he retires. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.062 REQUIRED MINIMUM DISTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   General rules.
      (1)   Precedence. The requirements of this subchapter shall apply to any
distribution of a participant's interest and will take precedence over any
inconsistent provisions of this Plan.
      (2)   Requirements of regulations incorporated. All distributions
required under this subchapter shall be determined and made in accordance with
Code Section 401(a)(9), including the incidental death benefit requirement in
Code Section 401(a)(9)(G), and the regulations thereunder. Any annuity
distribution option provided under the terms of the Plan as in effect on April
17, 2002 will not fail to satisfy Code Section 401(a)(9), provided the
distribution option satisfies Code Section 401(a)(9) based on a reasonable and
good faith interpretation of the provisions of Code Section 401(a)(9).
   (B)   Time and manner of distribution.
      (1)   Required beginning date. The participant's entire interest will be
distributed, or begin to be distributed, no later than the participant's
required beginning date.
      (2)   Death of participant before distributions begin.
         (a)   If the participant dies before distributions begin, the
participant's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed,
no later than as follows:
            1.   If the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's
sole designated beneficiary, distributions to the surviving spouse will begin
by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in
which the participant died, or by December 31 of the calendar year in which the
participant would have attained age 70-1/2, if later, except to the extent that
an election is made to receive distributions in accordance with the five-year
rule under division (F) of this section. Under the five-year rule, the
participant's entire interest will be distributed to the designated beneficiary
by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the
participant's death.
            2.   If the participant's surviving spouse is not the participant's
sole designated beneficiary, distributions to the designated beneficiary will
begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar
year in which the participant died, except to the extent that an election is
made to receive distributions in accordance with the five-year rule under
division (F) of this section. Under the five-year rule, the participant's
entire interest will be distributed to the designated beneficiary by December
31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the participant's
death.
            3.   If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of
the year following the year of the participant's death, the participant's
entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year
containing the fifth anniversary of the participant's death.
            4.   If the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's
sole designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after the participant
but before distributions to the surviving spouse are required to begin, this
division (B)(2), other than (B)(2)(a)1., will apply as if the surviving spouse
were the participant.
         (b)   For purposes of this division (B)(2) and division (E) below,
unless division (B)(2)(a)4. above applies, distributions are considered to
begin on the participant's required beginning date. If division (B)(2)(a)4.
above applies, distributions are considered to begin on the date distributions
are required to begin to the surviving spouse under division (B)(2)(a)1. above.
If distributions under an annuity meeting the requirements of this subchapter
commence to the participant before the participant's required beginning date
(or to the participant's surviving spouse before the date distributions are
required to begin to the surviving spouse under division (B)(2)(a)1. above),
the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions
actually commence.
      (3)   Forms of distribution. Unless the participant's interest is
distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company or in
a single sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first
distribution calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with
divisions (C), (D), and (E) below. If the participant's interest is distributed
in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions
thereunder will be made in accordance with the requirements of Code Section 401
(a)(9) and section 1.401(a)(9) of the regulations. Any part of the
participant's interest that is in the form of an individual account described
in Code Section 414(k) will be distributed in a manner satisfying the
requirements of Code Section 401(a)(9) and section 1.401(a)(9) of the
regulations that apply to individual accounts.
   (C)   Determination of amount to be distributed each year.
      (1)   General annuity requirements. If the participant's interest is paid
in the form of annuity distributions under the Plan, payments under the annuity
shall satisfy the following requirements:
         (a)   The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made
at uniform intervals not longer than one year;
         (b)   The distribution period will be over the life (or lives) or over
a period certain not longer than the period described in division (D) or (E)
below;
         (c)   Once payments have begun over a period, the period may only be
changed in accordance with division (G) below;
         (d)   Payments will either be nonincreasing or increase only as
follows:
            1.   By an annual percentage increase that does not exceed the
percentage increase in an eligible cost-of-living index for a 12-month period
ending in the year during which the increase occurs or a prior year;
            2.   By a percentage increase that occurs at specified times and
does not exceed the cumulative total of annual percentage increases in an
eligible cost- of-living index since the annuity starting date, or if later,
the recent percentage increase;
            3.   By a constant percentage of less than 5% per year, applied not
less frequently than annual;
            4.   As a result of dividend or other payments resulting from
actuarial gains provided:
               a.    Actuarial gain is measured not less frequently than
annually,
               b.   The resulting dividend or other payments are either paid no
later than the year following the year for which the actuarial experience is
measured or paid in the same form as the payment of the annuity over the
remaining period of the annuity (beginning no later than the year following the
year for which the actuarial experience is measured),
               c.   The actuarial gain taken into account is limited to
actuarial gain from investment experience,
               d.   The assumed interest rate used to calculate such actuarial
gains is not less than 3%, and
               e.   The annuity payments are not increased by a constant
percentage as described in division (C)(1)(d)3. above;
            5.   To the extent of the reduction in the amount of the
participant's payments to provide for a survivor benefit, but only if there is
no longer a survivor benefit because the beneficiary whose life was being used
to determine the distribution period described in division (D) below dies or is
no longer the participant's beneficiary pursuant to a qualified domestic
relations order within the meaning of Code Section 414(p);
            6.   To provide a final payment upon the participant's death not
greater than the excess of the actuarial present value of the participant's
accrued benefit (within the meaning of Code Section 411(a)(7)) calculated is of
the annuity starting date using the applicable interest rate and the applicable
mortality table (or if greater, the total amount of employee contributions)
over the total payments before the participant's death;
            7.   To allow a beneficiary to convert the survivor portion of a
joint and survivor annuity into a single sum distribution upon the
participant's death; or
            8.   To pay increased benefits resulting from a plan amendment.
      (2)   Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date and
later payment intervals. The amount that must be distributed on or before the
participant's required beginning date (or, if the participant dies before
distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under
division (B)(2)(a)1. or 2. above) is the payment that is required for one
payment interval. The second payment need not be made until the end of the next
payment interval even if that payment interval ends in the next calendar year.
All of the participant's benefit accruals as of the last day of the first
distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation of the amount of
the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the participant's
required beginning date.
      (3)   Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year. Any
additional benefits accruing to the participant in a calendar year after the
first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning with the first
payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar
year in which such amount accrues.
   (D)   Requirements for annuity distributions that commence during
participant's lifetime.
      (1)   Joint life annuities where the beneficiary is not the participant's
spouse. If the participant's interest is being distributed in the form of a
joint and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the participant and a
nonspouse beneficiary, annuity payments to be made on or after the
participant's required beginning date to the designated beneficiary after the
participant's death must not at any time exceed the applicable percentage of
the annuity payment for such period that would have been payable to the
participant, using the table set forth in Q&A-2(c)(2), in the manner described
in Q&A-2(c)(1), in section 1.401(a)(9)-6 of the regulations, to determine the
applicable percentage. If the form of distribution combines a joint and
survivor annuity for the joint lives of the participant and a nonspouse
beneficiary and a period certain annuity, the requirement in the preceding
sentence will apply to annuity payments to be made to the designated
beneficiary after the expiration of the period certain.
      (2)   Period certain annuities. Unless the participant's spouse is the
sole designated beneficiary and the form of distribution is a period certain
and no life annuity, the period certain for an annuity distribution commencing
during the participant's lifetime may not exceed the applicable distribution
period for the participant under the uniform lifetime table set forth in Q&A-
2 in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the regulations for the calendar year that
contains the annuity starting date. If the annuity starting date precedes the
year in which the participant reaches age 70, the applicable distribution
period for the participant is the distribution period for age 70 under the
uniform lifetime table set forth in Q&A-2 in section 1.401 (a)(9)-9 of the
regulations plus the excess of 70 over the age of the participant as of the
participant's birthday in the year that contains the annuity starting date. If
the participant's spouse is the participant's sole designated beneficiary and
the form of distribution is a period certain and no life annuity, the period
certain may not exceed the longer of the participant's applicable distribution
period, as determined under this division (D)(2), or the joint life and last
survivor expectancy of the participant and the participant's spouse as
determined under the joint and last survivor table set forth in Q&A-3 in
section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the regulations, using the participant's and spouse's
attained ages as of the participant's and spouse's birthdays in the calendar
year that contains the annuity starting date.
   (E)   Requirements for minimum distributions after the participant's death.
      (1)   Death after distributions begin. If the participant dies after
distribution of his interest begins in the form of an annuity meeting the
requirements of this subchapter, the remaining portion of the participant's
interest will continue to be distributed over the remaining period over which
distributions commenced.
      (2)   Death before distributions begin.
         (a)   Participant survived by designated beneficiary. Except to the
extent that an election is made to receive distributions in accordance with the
five-year rule under division (F) below, if the participant dies before the
date distribution of his interest begins and there is a designated beneficiary,
the participant's entire interest will be distributed, beginning no later than
the time described in division (B)(2)(a)1. or 2. above, over the life of the
designated beneficiary or over a period certain) not exceeding:
            1.   Unless the annuity starting date is before the first
distribution calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary
determined using the beneficiary's age as of the beneficiary's birthday in the
calendar year immediately following the calendar year of the participant's
death; or
            2.   If the annuity starting date is before the first distribution
calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary determined
using the beneficiary's age as of the beneficiary's birthday in the calendar
year that contains the annuity starting date.
Under the five-year rule, the participant's entire interest will be distributed
to the designated beneficiary by December 31 of the calendar year containing
the fifth anniversary of the participant's death.
         (b)   No designated beneficiary. If the participant dies before the
date distributions begin and there is no designated beneficiary as of September
30 of the year following the year of the participant's death, distribution of
the participant's entire interest will be completed by December 31 of the
calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the participant's death.
         (c)   Death of surviving spouse before distributions to surviving
spouse begin. If the participant dies before the date distribution of his
interest begins the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's sole
designated beneficiary, and the surviving spouse dies before distributions to
the surviving spouse begin, this division (E) will apply as if the surviving
spouse were the participant, except that the time by which distributions must
begin will be determined without regard to division (B)(2)(a)1. above.
   (F)   Election of five-year rule. Participants or beneficiaries may elect on
an individual basis whether the five-year rule in divisions (B)(2) and (E)
above applies to distributions after the death of a participant who has a
designated beneficiary. The election must be made no later than the earlier of
September 30 of the calendar year in which the distribution would be required
to begin under division (B)(2) above if no such election is made, or by
September 30 of the calendar year which contains the fifth anniversary of the
participant's (or, if applicable, surviving spouse's) death.
   (G)   Changes to annuity payment period.
      (1)   Permitted changes. An annuity payment period may be changed only in
association with an annuity payment increase described in division (C)(1)(d)
above or in accordance with division (G)(2) below.
      (2)   Reannuitization. An annuity payment may be changed and the annuity
payments modified in accordance with that change if the conditions in division
(G)(3) below are satisfied and:
         (a)   The modification occurs when the participant retires or in
connection with a plan termination;
         (b)   The payment period prior to modification is a period certain
without life contingencies; or
         (c)   The annuity payments after modification are paid under a
qualified joint and survivor annuity over the joint lives of the participant
and a designated beneficiary, the participant's spouse is the sole designated
beneficiary, and the modification occurs in connection with the participant's
becoming married to such spouse.
      (3)   Conditions. The conditions in this division (G)(3) are satisfied
if:
         (a)   The future payments after the modification satisfy the
requirements of Code Section 401(a)(9), section 1.401(a)(9) of the regulations,
and this subchapter (determined by treating the date of the change as a new
annuity starting date and the actuarial present value of the remaining payments
prior to modification as the entire interest of the participant);
         (b)   For purposes of Code Sections 415 and 417, the modification is
treated as a new annuity starting date;
         (c)   After taking into account the modification, the annuity
(including all past and future payments) satisfies Code Section 415 (determined
at the original annuity starting date, using the interest rates and mortality
tables applicable to such date); and
         (d)   The end point of the period certain, if any, for any modified
payment period is not later than the end point available to the participant at
the original annuity starting date under Code Section 401(a)(9) and this
subchapter.
   (H)   Payments to a surviving child.
      (1)   Special rule. For purposes of this subchapter, payments made to a
participant's surviving child until the child reaches the age of majority (or
dies, if earlier) shall be treated as if such payments were made to the
surviving spouse to the extent the payments become payable to the surviving
spouse upon cessation of the payments to the child.
      (2)   Age of majority. For purposes of this division (H), a child shall
be treated as having not reached the age of majority if the child has not
completed a specified course of education and is under the age of 26. In
addition, a child who is disabled within the meaning of Code Section 72(m)(7)
when the child reaches the age of majority shall be treated as having not
reached the age of majority so long as the child continues to be disabled.
(Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.063 TEFRA SECTION 242(b)(2) ELECTIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the other requirements of this subchapter,
distribution on behalf of any participant who has made a designation under
section 242(b)(2) of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (a section
242(b)(2) election) may be made in accordance with all of the following
requirements (regardless of when such distribution commences):
      (1)   The distribution by the Plan is one that would not have
disqualified such Plan under Code Section 401(a)(9) as in effect prior to
amendment by the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984.
      (2)   The distribution is in accordance with a method of distribution
designated by the participant whose interest in the Plan is being distributed
or, if the participant is deceased, by a beneficiary of such participant.
      (3)   Such designation was in writing, was signed by the participant or
the beneficiary, and was made before January 1, 1984.
      (4)   The participant had accrued a benefit under the Plan as of December
31, 1983.
      (5)   The method of distribution designated by the participant or the
beneficiary specifies the time at which distribution will commence, the period
over which distributions will be made, and in the case of any distribution upon
the participant's death, the beneficiaries of the participant listed in order
of priority.
   (B)   A distribution upon death will not be covered by this transitional
rule unless the information in the designation contains the required
information described above with respect to the distributions to be made upon
the death of the participant.
   (C)   For any distribution that commences before January 1, 1984, but
continues after December 31, 1983, the participant, or the beneficiary, to whom
such distribution is being made, will be presumed to have designated the method
of distribution under which the distribution is being made if the method of
distribution was specified in writing and the distribution satisfies the
requirements in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(5) above.
   (D)   If a designation is revoked, any subsequent distribution must satisfy
the requirements of Code Section 401(a)(9) and the regulations thereunder. If a
designation is revoked subsequent to the date distributions are required to
begin, the Plan must distribute by the end of the calendar year following the
calendar year in which the revocation occurs the total amount not yet
distributed that would have been required to have been distributed to satisfy
Code Section 401(a)(9) and the regulations thereunder, but for the section 242
(b)(2) election. For calendar years beginning after December 31, 1988, such
distributions must meet the minimum distribution incidental benefit
requirements. Any changes in the designation will be considered to be a
revocation of the designation. However, the mere substitution or addition of
another beneficiary (one not named in the designation) under the designation
will not be considered to be a revocation of the designation, so long as such
substitution or addition does not alter the period over which distributions are
to be made under the designation, directly or indirectly (for example, by
altering the relevant measuring life).
   (E)   In the case in which an amount is transferred or rolled over from one
plan to another plan, the rules in Q&A-14 and Q&A-15 in section 1.401(a)(9)-
8 of the regulations shall apply. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
TERMINATION OF THE PLAN
§ 35.070 TERMINATION AND LIMITATION.
   (A)   The employer expects to continue the Plan indefinitely but reserves
the right to terminate the Plan in whole or in part at any time upon giving
written notice to all parties concerned.
   (B)   In the event of the complete termination of this Plan, the rights of
all affected participants to benefits accrued as of the date of such
termination shall be nonforfeitable. Upon complete termination of the Plan, no
further employees shall become participants, and no further contributions shall
be made except as required by any governmental agency to which the Plan's
termination is subject.
   (C)   This Plan is not subject to Title IV of the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act of 1974 (ERISA). Benefits shall not be insured by the Pension
Benefit Guaranty Corporation and the participant's recourse towards
satisfaction of his right to his nonforfeitable accrued benefit will be limited
to the Plan assets. However, the assets of the Plan that are available to
provide benefits shall be allocated and applied as of the effective date of
termination of the Plan according to the classifications and order of
precedence provided under Title IV of ERISA and under any rules, regulations,
interpretations or opinions implementing said Title IV or any other equitable
method as determined by the Plan Administrator and agreed upon by the insurer.
   (D)   No part of the Plan assets shall be paid to the employer at any time,
except that, after the satisfaction of all liabilities under the Plan, any
assets remaining shall be paid to the employer. No payment shall be made to the
employer if it would contravene any provision of law. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-
15)
ADMINISTRATION OF PLAN
§ 38.080 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this subchapter, the Plan Administrator
has complete control of the administration of the Plan. The Plan Administrator
has all the powers necessary for it to properly carry out its administrative
duties. Not in limitation, but in amplification of the foregoing, the Plan
Administrator has complete discretion to construe or interpret the provisions
of the Plan, including ambiguous provisions, if any, and to determine all
questions that may arise under the Plan, including all questions relating to
the eligibility of employees to participate in the Plan and the amount of
benefit to which any participant, beneficiary, spouse, or contingent annuitant
may become entitled. The Plan Administrator's decisions upon all matters within
the scope of its authority shall be final.
   (B)   Unless otherwise set out in the Plan or annuity contract, the Plan
Administrator may delegate recordkeeping and other duties that are necessary to
assist it with the administration of the Plan to any person or firm which
agrees to accept such duties. The Plan Administrator shall be entitled to rely
upon all tables, valuations, certificates and reports furnished by the
consultant or actuary appointed by the Plan Administrator and upon all opinions
given by any counsel selected or approved by the Plan Administrator.
   (C)   The Plan Administrator shall receive all claims for benefits by
participants, former participants, beneficiaries, spouses, and contingent
annuitants. The Plan Administrator shall determine all facts necessary to
establish the right of any claimant to benefits and the amount of those
benefits under the provisions of the Plan. The Plan Administrator may establish
rules and procedures to be followed by claimants in filing claims for benefits,
in furnishing and verifying proofs necessary to determine age, and in any other
matters required to administer the Plan. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.081 EXPENSES.
   Expenses of the Plan, to the extent that the employer does not pay such
expenses, may be paid out of the assets of the Plan provided that such payment
is consistent with any law to which the Plan is subject. Expenses of the Plan
will be paid in accordance with the most recent service and expense agreement
or such other documents duly entered into by or with regard to the Plan that
govern such matters. Such expenses include, but are not limited to, expenses
for recordkeeping and other administrative services; fees and expenses of the
annuity contract; expenses for investment education service; and direct costs
that the employer incurs with respect to the Plan. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.082 RECORDS.
   (A)   All acts and determinations of the Plan Administrator shall be duly
recorded. All these records, together with other documents necessary for the
administration of the Plan, shall be preserved in the Plan Administrator's
custody.
   (B)   Writing (handwriting, typing, printing), photostating, photographing,
microfilming, magnetic impulse, mechanical or electrical recording, or other
forms of data compilation shall be acceptable means of keeping records. (Ord.
1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.083 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   All or any part of the administrative duties and responsibilities under this
subchapter may be delegated by the Plan Administrator to a retirement
committee. The duties and responsibilities of the retirement committee shall be
set out in a separate written agreement. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.084 EXERCISE OF DISCRETIONARY AUTHORITY.
   The employer, Plan Administrator, and any other person or entity who has
authority with respect to the management, administration, or investment of the
Plan may exercise that authority in its/his full discretion, subject only to
the duties imposed under any laws to which the Plan is subject. This
discretionary authority includes, but is not limited to, the authority to make
any and all factual determinations and interpret all terms and provisions of
the Plan documents relevant to the issue under consideration. The exercise of
authority will be binding upon all persons. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS
§ 38.090 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The employer may amend this Plan at any time. Such amendments shall
include any remedial retroactive changes (within the time specified by Internal
Revenue Service regulations), to comply with any law or regulation issued by
any governmental agency to which the Plan is subject.
   (B)   An amendment may not allow reversion or diversion of Plan assets to
the employer at any time, except as may be required to comply with any law or
regulation issued by any governmental agency to which the Plan is subject.
(Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.091 DIRECT ROLLOVERS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Plan to the contrary that would
otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may
elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the Plan Administrator, to
have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid, directly to an
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
   (B)   In the event of a mandatory distribution of an eligible rollover
distribution greater than $1,000 in accordance with §
38.098, if the participant does not elect to have such distribution paid
directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the participant in a
direct rollover or to receive the distribution directly, the Plan Administrator
will pay the distribution in a direct rollover to an individual retirement plan
designated by the Plan Administrator.
   (C)   In the event of any other eligible rollover distribution to a
distributee in accordance with §
38.098, if the distributee does not elect to have such distribution paid
directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a
direct rollover or to receive the distribution directly, the Plan Administrator
will pay the distribution to the distributee.
   (D)   In the event of an eligible rollover distribution to a distributee, in
accordance with § 38.098, if the distributee does not elect to have such
distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the
distributee in a direct rollover or to receive the distribution directly, the
Plan Administrator will pay the distribution to the distributee. (Ord. 1806,
passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.092 PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE INSURER.
   (A)   The obligations of an insurer shall be governed solely by the
provisions of the annuity contract. The insurer shall not be required to
perform any act not provided in or contrary to the provisions of the annuity
contract. Each annuity contract when purchased shall comply with the Plan. See
§
38.096.
   (B)   The insurer is not a party to the Plan, nor bound in any way by the
Plan provisions. It shall not be required to look to the terms of this Plan,
nor to determine whether the employer or the Plan Administrator have the
authority to act in any particular manner or to make any contract or agreement.
   (C)   Until notice of any amendment or termination of this Plan has been
received by the insurer at its home office, the insurer is and shall be fully
protected in assuming that the Plan has not been amended or terminated
according to the latest information which it has received at its home office.
(Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.093 EMPLOYMENT STATUS.
   Nothing contained in this Plan gives an employee the right to be retained in
the employer's employ or to interfere with the employer's right to discharge
any employee. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.094 RIGHTS TO PLAN ASSETS.
   (A)   An employee shall not have any right to or interest in any assets of
the Plan upon termination of employment or otherwise except as specifically
provided under this Plan, and then only to the extent of the benefits payable
to such employee according to the Plan provisions.
   (B)   Any final payment or distribution to a participant or his legal
representative or to any beneficiaries, spouse, or contingent annuitant of such
participant under the Plan provisions shall be in full satisfaction of all
claims against the Plan, the Plan Administrator, the insurer, and the employer
arising under or by virtue of the Plan. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.095 BENEFICIARY.
   (A)   Each participant may name a beneficiary to receive any death benefit
(other than any income payable to a contingent annuitant) that may arise out of
his participation in the Plan. The participant may change his beneficiary from
time to time. The participant's beneficiary designation and any change of
beneficiary shall be subject to the provisions of §
38.053.
   (B)   It is the responsibility of the participant to give written notice to
the Plan Administrator of the name of the beneficiary on a form furnished for
that purpose. The Plan Administrator shall maintain records of beneficiary
designations for participants before their retirement dates. However, the Plan
Administrator may delegate to another party the responsibility of maintaining
records of beneficiary designations. In that event, the written designations
made by participants shall be filed with such other party. If a party other
than the insurer maintains the records of beneficiary designations and a
participant dies before his retirement date, such other party shall certify to
the insurer the beneficiary designation on its records for the participant.
   (C)   If there is no beneficiary named or surviving when a participant dies,
the participant's beneficiary shall be the participant's surviving spouse or
domestic partner, or where there is no surviving spouse or domestic partner,
the executor or administrator of the participant's estate. (Ord. 1806, passed
1-7-15)
§ 38.096 CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The validity of the Plan or any of its provisions is determined under
and construed according to federal law and, to the extent permissible,
according to the laws of the state in which the employer has its principal
office. In case any provision of this Plan is held illegal or invalid for any
reason, such determination shall not affect the remaining provisions of this
Plan, and the Plan shall be construed and enforced as if the illegal or invalid
provision had never been included.
   (B)   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the Plan and
the terms of an annuity contract issued hereunder, the provisions of the Plan
control. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.097 LEGAL ACTIONS.
   No person employed by the employer; no participant, former participant, or
their beneficiaries; nor any other person having or claiming to have an
interest in the Plan is entitled to any notice of process. A final judgment
entered in any such action or proceeding shall be binding and conclusive on all
persons having or claiming to have an interest in the Plan. (Ord. 1806, passed
1-7-15)
§ 38.098 SMALL AMOUNTS.
   (A)   If the present value of the participant's vested accrued benefit does
not exceed $5,000, and the participant has not had an annuity starting date
with respect to any portion of such vested accrued benefit, the present value
of the participant's entire vested accrued benefit shall be distributed as of
the earliest of his retirement date or the date he has a severance from
employment for any reason other than death (the date the employer provides
notice to the record keeper of the Plan of such event, if later). For purposes
of this section, if the present value of the participant's vested accrued
benefit is zero, the participant shall be deemed to have received a
distribution of such present value. This is a small amounts payment. Such small
amounts payment is in full settlement of all benefits otherwise payable.
   (B)   In the event a participant has a severance from employment (for any
reason other than death or retirement) and does not elect to have a small
amounts payment paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the
participant in a direct rollover or to receive the distribution directly and
the present value of his vested accrued benefit is greater than $1,000, a
mandatory distribution will be made in accordance with §
38.091. If the present value of his vested accrued benefit is $1,000 or less,
the present value of the participant's entire vested accrued benefit shall be
paid directly to him.
   (C)   If the present value of the preretirement survivor annuity derived
from the participant's accrued benefit does not exceed $5,000, on the date of
the participant's death, the present value of the preretirement survivor
annuity shall be distributed as of the date the participant dies. If the single
sum death benefit payable to a beneficiary does not exceed $5,000, on the date
of the participant's death, such death benefit shall be distributed in a single
sum as of the date the participant dies. This is a small amounts payment. Such
small amounts payment shall be made to the participant's beneficiary (spouse if
the death benefit is payable to the spouse or domestic partner if the death
benefit is payable to the domestic partner).
   (D)   A small amounts payment is in full settlement of the death benefit
otherwise payable. No other small amounts payments shall be made. (Ord. 1806,
passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.099 WORD USAGE.
   (A)   The masculine gender, where used in this Plan, shall include the
feminine gender and the singular words, where used in this Plan, shall include
the plural, unless the context indicates otherwise.
   (B)   The words "in writing" and "written," where used in this Plan, shall
include any other forms, such as voice response or other electronic system, as
permitted by any governmental agency to which the Plan is subject. (Ord. 1806,
passed 1-7-15)
§ 38.100 MILITARY SERVICE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision of this Plan to the contrary, the Plan
shall provide contributions, benefits, and service credit with respect to
qualified military service in accordance with Code Section 414(u).
   (B)   A participant who dies on or after January 1, 2007 while performing
qualified military service is treated as having resumed and then terminated
employment on account of death, in accordance wth Code Section 401(a)(37) and
any subsequent guidance. The survivors of such participant are entitled to any
additional benefits (other than an accrued benefit relating to the period of
qualified military service) provided under the Plan on account of death of the
participant. (Ord. 1806, passed 1-7-15)
CHAPTER 39: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
Section
   39.01   Findings and intent
   39.02   Economic development program
   39.03   Annual review
§ 39.01 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   In accordance with F.S. § 166.021, as may be amended from time to
time, the city finds that the expenditure of public funds to attract or retain
businesses in an effort to enhance economic development goals constitutes a
public purpose.
   (B)   The city intends to utilize its general obligation bond funds
expressly allocated for economic development to fund economic development
initiatives, as set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   The city desires to implement an economic development program.
   (D)   The intent of the economic development program is to promote local
business, enhance economic activity, attract and retain businesses and increase
property value.
(Ord. 1755, passed 6-19-13)
§ 39.02 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.
   (A)   The City of Pembroke Pines shall have an economic development program
which may be funded by general obligation bond funds specifically allocated for
that purpose.
   (B)   The city’s Planning Department shall establish an economic development
plan which shall include, but not be limited to, the program’s eligibility
criteria, permitted uses for economic development funds, and appropriate
application procedures. The economic development plan shall be adopted by the
City Commission by resolution.
(Ord. 1755, passed 6-19-13)
§ 39.03 ANNUAL REVIEW.
   The City Commission shall review the city’s economic development plan one
year after the implementation thereof, and at least annually thereafter no
later than September 30.
(Ord. 1755, passed 6-19-13)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
      
51.   PUBLIC WATERWAYS
      
52.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
53.   UTILITY TAXATION
CHAPTER 50: WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Required connections to city utilities; policy
   
50.03   Extension of city systems
   
50.04   Procedures
   
50.05   Guarantee of developer agreement reimbursements
   
50.06   Public utilities to be in public rights-of-way easements
   
50.07   Monthly service charges; policy
   
50.08   Procedures
   
50.09   Temporary turn-off of services
   
50.10   City Commission approval for connection to a city utility
   
50.11   Payment of interest on security deposit; return of security deposit
   
50.12   Tampering with city utility facilities
   
50.13   Unauthorized use of city utility systems
   
50.14   Modification of service connections and/or laterals
   
50.15   Privilege fee
Water
   
50.31   General
   
50.32   Charges at initial connection to city water system
   
50.33   Water and sewer security deposits
   
50.34   Monthly water service charges
   
50.35   Use of water for irrigation
   
50.36   Water shortage management
   
50.37   Adequacy of water quantities and pressures
   
50.38   Separate fire service connections
   
50.39   [Reserved]
   
50.40   Cross connection control program
Sewer
   
50.51   General
   
50.52   Charges at initial connection to city sewer system
   
50.53   Sewer security deposits
   
50.54   Monthly sewer service charges
   
50.55   Prohibited discharges into city sewer system
   
50.56   Required use of grease traps
   
50.57   Permits required for some commercial sewer customers and all industrial
sewer customers
   
50.58   Control of infiltration and inflow into sewer system
   
50.59   Close out of septic tanks
   
50.60   Maintenance of water meter boxes
Cross-reference:
   Utility tax, see
Ch. 53
Statutory reference:
   Municipal public works, see F.S. § 180.01 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words and
terms used in this chapter which are not included in this section shall be
interpreted in accordance with standard reference books, such as dictionaries
and engineering texts and technical papers, as expanded by accepted local
usage. In the event of conflict between any portion of a definition in this
section and any other reference, the definition herein shall govern insofar as
interpretations and applications of the provisions of this chapter are
concerned.
   BOD. Biochemical Oxygen Demand of a liquid sample. The BOD of the sample is
the concentration, in parts per million, of oxygen which will be utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in the sample, when subjected to a
standard laboratory procedure test for five days at a temperature of 200° C.
   BUSINESS UNIT. A physically separated, identifiable non-dwelling unit
serviced by one water meter.
   CITY. City of Pembroke Pines, Broward County, Florida.
   COMMERCIAL CUSTOMER. A non-governmental customer that is neither a
residential customer nor an industrial customer.
   CONNECTION CHARGE. A charge which a developer shall be required to pay for
the privilege of connecting to an overall city utility system. There shall be a
separate connection charge for each system, as described in the appropriate
article of this chapter. The connection charge is not a revenue of the system.
It is a reimbursement to the city of the developer’s share of the costs
incurred by the city in providing the major portions of the overall system, as
identified by a master plan for the system. Connection charges shall be paid at
the time a property first connects to the city’s utility systems. In most
cases, these will be one-time charges. However, if a property owner
subsequently applies for a Building Permit for new or revised construction on
his property, there may be additional connection charges. At the time of
application for the new building permit, the city shall compute what the total
connection charges would be if the revised property were applying for initial
connections to the systems. If the computed charges are higher than the total
connection charges previously paid, then the property owner shall be required
to pay new connection charges, equal to the difference. If the computed charges
are equal to, or less than, those previously paid, there will be no requirement
for new charges, or a refund.
   CONSTRUCTION CHARGE. A one-time charge which a developer might be required
to pay for the privilege of connecting to a sub-portion of a city utility
system, located between the owner’s property and the portion of the system
identified in a city master plan. When required, a construction charge shall be
intended as reimbursement of the developer’s share of the costs  of
constructing the applicable sub-portion of the utility system. In each case,
the magnitude and distribution of the construction charge shall have been
previously established in one or more developer’s agreement between the city
and a previous developer, who paid the costs of constructing the sub-portion.
Construction charges received by the city from the future developers are used
by the city to reimburse the original developer for that portion of the
construction costs considered to be for oversized facilities, as defined in
this section.
   CUSTOMER. The owner of the property or an individual or corporate entity
authorized by the owner to open the utility account.
   DEVELOPER. Owner of a development, as defined in this section. If an agent
of the owner has the full legal authority to negotiate with the city for
connection to the city’s utility services, then the agent shall be considered
as the developer.
   DEVELOPER’S AGREEMENT. A written agreement entered into between the city and
a developer, if funding of the construction of some of the mains of a utility
service to serve a development entails the use of special procedures. If used,
it shall be negotiated between the developer and the City Manager, or his
representative, and shall be accepted by the city by resolution of the City
Commission. As a minimum, a developer’s agreement shall be required whenever
all of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The development cannot proceed unless there is some construction of
new mains for a public utility system.
   (B)   The developer is to contribute some or all of the cost of the
construction of those mains, either by constructing them himself and then
giving title to the city, or by paying some or all of the construction costs
incurred by others.
   (C)   The mains being constructed:
      (1)   Either are in a portion of the system identified in a master plan,
and the value of the developer’s contribution to construction costs will be
larger than the required connection charge;
      (2)   Or include one or more oversized facilities in a sub-portion of the
utility system to be situated between the individual lots of the development
and the portion of the system identified in the master plan.
   (D)   The city has determined that future developments will benefit from the
current construction and, because of the current developer’s excess
contribution, he will be entitled to some reimbursement from the future
developments, either from their required connection charges or from special
construction charges established in the developer’s agreement.
   DEVELOPMENT. A parcel of land, regardless of size or location, which is
proposed for development to the extent that utility services will be required,
and for which one or more of the proposed lots will not be able to receive
adequate utility service unless one or more new utility mains and/or service
laterals are constructed.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any collection of one or more rooms which includes at least
one bathroom and which normally either is used to provide overnight lodging for
only the owner and his immediate family, or is offered as a unit for overnight
lodging of others. If a collection of rooms is capable of being offered to the
public both as a single unit and as several individual units, then each of the
individual units shall be considered a dwelling unit.
   ENGINEER. For purposes of this chapter, ENGINEER shall mean either the
consulting engineering firm engaged by the city for engineering services
related to utilities, or an employee of that firm who is registered to practice
engineering in the state.
   EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency, a federal agency
responsible for regulation of sewage treatment and disposal, and for issuance
of federal grants to aid in construction of sewage facilities.
   EPA INDUSTRIAL USER. An industrial customer of the city’s sewer system
meeting one of the following criteria, as defined in Federal Regulations 40 CFR
35.905;
      (1)   Any non-governmental, non-residential customer meeting both of the
following:
         (a)   Performs an activity identified in the Federal Standard
Classification Manual, 1972, OMB (as amended and supplemented) in either
Division A, Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing; or Division B, Mining; or Division
D, Manufacturing; or Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas,
Sanitary Services; or Division I, Services.
         (b)   Discharges into the city’s system non-domestic/ non-sanitary
sewage either which exceed 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of total flow, or which
contain an equivalent weight of Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) or Suspended
Solids (SS) in excess of the BOD or SS found in 25,000 gpd of sanitary wastes
containing 300 PPM of BOD and 300 PPM of SS.
      (2)   Any non-governmental customer that discharges into the city’s
system sewage which contain toxics or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
sufficient quantity (either singly or by interaction with other wastes) to
contaminate the sludge of any municipal systems or to injure or interfere with
any sewage treatment process; or which constitutes a hazard to humans or
animals, or creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in or has an
adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the city’s system.
      (3)   Non-applicable.
   EPA MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. A customer of the city’s sewer system that
is an “EPA Industrial User” and that meets one of the following additional
criteria, as defined in Federal Regulations 40 CFR 128.124:
      (1)   Average work day discharge equal to or greater than 50,000 gpd.
      (2)   Average work day discharge greater than 5% of the average daily
flow treated by the treatment plant receiving the city’s flows (presently the
City of Hollywood Wastewater Treatment Plant).
      (3)   Discharge contains a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts, as defined
in standards issued under Section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendments of 1972 (PL 92-500).
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL CONNECTION (ERC). A unit of measure used to identify
the annual average water consumption or sewer generation for an average
customer in each of the various categories of customer of the city’s utilities.
One ERC is defined to be 300 gallons per day.  ERC values for various
structures shall be calculated based on the design flow established by the
Broward County Code of Ordinance Chapter 27 Article V, Section 201(a)(3), as
may be amended from time to time. The design flow for sewer generation shall be
considered equal to water consumption. ERC values for industrial customers
shall be determined by the city on a case-by-case basis.
   FIRE FLOW. The rate of flow and pressure necessary to provide an adequate
capability to fight a fire. Wherever possible there should be two or more
primary feeders from a point of supply which may be tapped with a line size
capable of delivering the fire flow needed to that specific area of the city
wherein the outlet is located. The magnitudes required for an adequate
capability are dependent upon many factors. It is the intention that the city’s
water distribution system be capable of delivering a fire flow equal to the
flow calculated in accordance with the “Fire Suppression Rating Schedule”, by
insurance service office in effect at the time of installation.
   FIXTURE UNIT. A measure of the instantaneous rate of flow normally required
by a particular type of plumbing fixture. The sum of the fixture units of all
plumbing fixtures in a building is a measure of the total water used by that
building. From time to time, the city will analyze available consumption data
and establish a list of fixture unit values for various types of plumbing
fixtures. The current values authorized for use in connection with this chapter
are:
Type Fixture                                         Fixture Units
Bathtub (with or without overhead shower)            2
Bidet                                                1
Dental unit or cuspidor                              1
Dental lavatory                                      1
Drinking fountain                                    ½
Dishwasher domestic                                  2
Floor drains                                         3
Lavatory Small P.O.                                  1
Lavatory Large P.O.                                  2
Lavatory, barber, beauty parlor                      2
Laundry tray (1 or 2 compartments)                   2
Shower stall, domestic                               2
Showers (group) per head sinks                       3
Combination sink-and-tray                            3
Kitchen sink, domestic                               2
Flushing rim sink (with valve)                       8
Pedicure chair                                       2
Pot. scullery, etc., sink                            4
Wash sink (circular or multiple) each set of faucets 1
Urinal, wall                                         4
Urinal stall, washout                                4
Water closet, tank operated                          4
Automatic clothes washer, (commercial)               4
 
   FRONTAGE. If a parcel of land abuts only one public right-of-way, and the
property line at that right-of-way is composed only of one or more straight
lines, then the total length of the abutting property line is the frontage of
the property. If a portion of the abutting property line is composed of an arc,
then  the frontage of that portion shall be measured along lines tangent to the
arc. If a parcel abuts two different rights-of-way, then the frontage shall be
the shorter of the two. The frontage of a parcel having any other relationship
to rights-of-way is defined to be equal to the square root of the total square
foot area of the parcel.
   GPD. Gallons per day.
   GPM. Gallons per minute.
   INDUSTRIAL CUSTOMER. A customer that obtains a utility service for the
purpose of manufacturing, producing, assembling or processing one or more
products, and; either the average quantity of service required for that purpose
exceeds 20,000 gallons per day; or the type of sewage generated by that
purpose, prior to any pretreatment, is such that without pretreatment the
conditions of division (2) of EPA INDUSTRIAL USER, as defined herein, would be
applicable.
   LINE. See MAIN.
   MAIN. The terms MAIN, LINE and PIPE shall be used interchangeably. The
following are some of the types referred to in this chapter:
      (1)   Gravity Main: A pipe in a sewer system in which flow is caused by
force of gravity.
      (2)   Force Main: A pipe in a sewer system in which flow is caused by the
force of one or more pumps.
      (3)   Distribution Main: Any pipe in a water system by which water is
carried from the treatment plant to one or more water service laterals.
      (4)   Looped Main: A water distribution main which has both of its ends
connected to one or more other distribution mains.
   MASTER PLAN. A planning document adopted by the city as a guide to expansion
of the major portions of a utility system, in order to satisfy projected future
needs for service. The city water and sewer systems each have a separate master
plan.
   (A)   The water master plan depicts the sizes and locations of existing and
proposed supply and treatment facilities and the approximate sizes and
locations of a looped grid of major distribution mains, approximately a mile
apart in each direction. Although not depicted in the master plan, it is
intended that the city water system also include a system of looped smaller
distribution mains interior to each loop depicted in the master plan.
   (B)   The City of Pembroke Pines has an agreement with the City of Hollywood
whereby Pembroke Pines pays Hollywood to receive, treat, and dispose of all
Pembroke Pines sewage. The Pembroke Pines Sewer Master Plan depicts a network
of major pumping stations and force mains for transmission of sewage to
Hollywood. Although not depicted in the master plan, it is intended that the
city sewer system also include subsystems of gravity sewers and small pumps and
force mains, with each subsystem collecting the sewage from approximately a
square mile, and introducing it into the transmission system depicted in the
master plan.
   METER CHARGE. A charge paid to the city by a developer or property owner as
reimbursement to the city for the costs of furnishing and installing the meter
and all other facilities at a water service connection, either at the time of
initial installation or whenever a change in size or capacity is performed. If
the city authorizes a developer to construct a service connection, then
acceptance by the city of the completed work shall constitute payment in full
of the meter charge, without regard to the magnitude of actual costs incurred
by the developer or published schedules of charges.
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A residential customer that pays a single
monthly service charge but provides utilities to two or more residential
dwelling units.
   OVERSIZED FACILITY. A pipe or pumping facility which satisfies all of the
following:
      (1)   It is constructed in order to serve a new development and is
located in a sub-portion of a city utility system which connects the individual
lots of the development to a portion of the system indicated in the master
plan.
      (2)   The developer has contributed to its construction, either by
constructing it himself or by making total or partial reimbursement of the
costs of construction by others.
      (3)   The city has determined that adequate service to future nearby
developments will not be
possible unless the current facility is constructed larger than would be
required to serve only the current development. In determining the size that
would be required to service only the current development, the city shall use
generally accepted design criteria and shall apply all of the provisions of
this chapter, such as required minimums, looped distribution mains, fire flows,
and the like.
   pH. A number, determined by standard laboratory test, which serves as a
measure of the concentration of hydrogen ions in a liquid.
   PLAN REVIEW CHARGES. Charges paid by a developer to defray costs incurred by
the city in reviewing utility plans submitted by the developer. Construction
plans for all water and sewer facilities to be constructed by the developer
between the service connections of his individual lots and the existing city
water and sewer mains must be submitted with the application for connection to
the city’s utility systems. At that time, the developer shall pay a plan review
charge as provided in Ordinance No. 1111, as amended from time to time, as his
share of all “normal” plan review costs incurred by the city. “Normal” plan
review costs are defined to be all costs associated with: pre-submittal
meetings with the city staff and the engineer, the first review of the final
plans submitted with the application, the preparation of a letter to the
developer itemizing any required plan modifications identified in the first
review, and the inspection of a first resubmittal, to verify that the
previously identified modifications have been made. “Abnormal” review costs are
defined to be any and all review costs that are incurred by the city subsequent
to a determination that the first resubmittal has not complied with all
requirements identified during the initial plan review. If the city incurs any
abnormal plan review costs, the developer shall be required to pay an
additional plan review charge in an amount equal to the one-for-one
reimbursement of the actual abnormal costs incurred by the city. The additional
plan review charge shall be due and payable at the time a final set of
construction plans is approved.
   PLUMBING. All piping, fittings, and appurtenances on the property owner’s
side of the service connection, not including the service connection. All
plumbing is to be constructed, owned and maintained by the property owner.
   PRE-TREATMENT. Any chemical, biological or physical treatment (other than
use of a grease trap) applied to sewage by a customer in order to  reduce an
actual or potential adverse impact upon the sewer system or public health and
safety.
   RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER. A customer that utilizes utility services for one or
more dwelling units.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. That type of sewage normally originating from dwelling
units. That is, sewage generated by bathrooms, preparation and serving of food
for family consumption, and laundry in family-size loads. Sewage introduced
into the city sewer system by a commercial or industrial customer shall be
considered to be sanitary sewage only if its potential as a hazard to public
health and safety or as an adverse impact upon the sewer system and/or the
sewer treatment processes is similar to, or less severe than that caused by
sewage normally originating from dwelling units. The following are some, but
not necessarily all, of the criteria which shall be used in identifying
sanitary sewage. If any one of these criteria is exceeded, then the sewage in
question automatically shall be considered as not being sanitary sewage. The
potential as a hazard or adverse impact of any characteristic not listed herein
shall be determined by the city on a case-by-case basis.
Characteristics Maximum (or Minimum) For Sanitary Sewage (ppm)
Characteristics                        Maximum (or Minimum) For Sanitary Sewage
                                       (ppm)
BOD                                    300
Suspended Solids                       300
Grease, Fat or Oil                     100 - Instantaneous
                                       20 - Daily Average
Chlorine Demand                        15
Surfactants (MBAS)                     2
Nitrogen, Total                        35
Phosphorus, Total                      10
Sulfides
Dissolved Oxygen                       (Mini 0.2mum 1 ppm)
pH                                     9.5 Maximum
                                       (5.5 Minimum)
Temperature                            150° F.
Heavy Metals, Phenols, and Other Toxic Zero
or Poisonous Substances
 
   SECURITY DEPOSIT. A deposit which must be made by each customer to receive
any utility service. The purpose of the deposit is to ensure payment of the
final bill charges on the account, and/or penalties and payment of any
reimbursements to the city for the cost of any repairs to city-owned property
which are determined by the city to be the responsibility of the  customer.
Whenever any such amounts are due to the city and have not been paid within the
prescribed time, service will be shut-off until all amounts due are paid. The
required security deposit will be applied towards the final bill charges when
the account is closed.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. A point at or near the property line at which the
property owner’s plumbing is connected to the city’s service lateral. The term
SERVICE CONNECTION also includes all city-owned fittings and appurtenances at
the point of connection. A water service connection includes the city-owned
meter box or vault, together with all of its contents, and any valve and valve
box installed immediately adjacent to the public side of the meter box or
vault. A sewer service connection includes the fitting to which the owner’s
plumbing is connected, the clean-out and plug, and any markings or devices
installed as an aid to locating the service connection.
   SERVICE LATERAL. A pipe which connects a service connection to a water
distribution main or sewer main.
   SEWAGE. Liquid wastes and waterborne solid wastes originating from
residential commercial or industrial establishments, together with such ground
water, surface water or storm drainage as may unintentionally enter into the
sewer system.
   SEWER OR SEWER SYSTEM. A network of gravity mains, pump stations and force
mains used to transport sewage from points of origin to a treatment/disposal
plant.
   SEWER RESERVED CAPACITY CHARGE. A one-time charge which a developer or
property owner shall be required to pay when a property first is connected to
the city’s sewer system, in addition to the required sewer connection charge
and the sewer construction charge, if required. Commencing in 1975, the city
has been required to pay to the city annual “Capital Charges” to reimburse
Hollywood for Pembroke Pines’ share of costs to construct Hollywood’s sewer
transmission and treatment facilities. The “Capital Charge” includes payment
for facilities sufficient to provide the city not only with the then  current
needs of the city, but also projected future needs. The sewer reserve capacity
charge paid to the city by developers and property owners is intended to
reimburse the city for their share of the city’s capital charges payments to
Hollywood during the period from January 1, 1975, to the date the property
begins to receive city sewer services. The amount of the sewer reserve capacity
charge is defined to be: (Number of Months from January 1, 1975, to the date
service begins) times (Number of ERC’s in the Development, as defined herein)
times (1.75).
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE. A detached single-family home. Also, each one of
several single family homes which are attached to each other, or are in the
same structure, but which each are billed individually for utility services.
   SS or SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solid particles floating or suspended in a liquid
that are removable by laboratory filtration.
   STORM DRAIN OR STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. A system of conduits, open channels
and/or sloped ground intended to restrict and/or direct the flow of run-off
resulting from rainfall. All run-off from any source, including building roofs
and surfaces, shall be directed to a storm drain. There shall be no intentional
connections between any storm drain and any sewer, and both type systems shall
be designed, constructed and maintained in such a manner as to minimize the
likelihood of any unintentional introduction of run-off or ground water into a
sewer, and vice versa.
   TAPPING CHARGE. A charge paid to the city by a developer or property owner
as reimbursement to the city for the costs of furnishing and installing a water
or sewer service lateral, and the necessary fittings and valves at the main,
either at the time of initial installation or whenever a change in size or
capacity is performed. If the city authorizes a developer to construct a
service lateral, then acceptance by the city of the completed work shall
constitute payment in full of the tapping charge, without regard to the
magnitude of actual costs incurred by the developer or published schedules of
charges.
(Ord. 1040, passed 6-23-93; Am. Ord. 1326, passed 1-19-00; Am. Ord. 1754,
passed 6-19-13; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.02 REQUIRED CONNECTIONS TO CITY UTILITIES; POLICY.
   It shall be the policy of the city that if a city utility service is
available to any facility requiring that type of service, then the city utility
system shall be extended to a service connection and the plumbing of the
facility shall be connected to the service connection. Availability shall be
determined as follows:
   (A)   Facility in Existence as of Time This Chapter Adopted. The city shall
issue written notice whenever the utility does become available. Within 45 days
of the date of notification, the property owner shall have entered into a
contract with the city for connection to the utility.
   (B)   Developments Authorized Subsequent To Adoption Of This Chapter.
      (1)   If a utility main exists in any right-of-way abutting the property,
then that utility shall be considered available. Prior to receipt of a permit
for any construction, the developer shall have entered into a contract with the
city for the connection.
      (2)   Zoning, platting and development ordinances and regulations of the
city and county establish criteria as to what public facilities and services
must be available before a new development can be constructed. If those
criteria require availability of either a public water system or a public sewer
system, then approval of the development by the city will be contingent upon
mutual agreement between the developer and the city as to how and when the city
utility system will be extended to the development.
      (3)   If a new development is approved without a utility being available,
then the provisions of §
50.02(A) shall apply to future connection of that utility.
   (C)   Unless otherwise provided for herein, all utility accounts with the
city shall be opened by the property owner, in accordance with the application
provided by the city's Utilities division.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1754, passed 6-19-13; Am. Ord. 1978,
passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.03 EXTENSION OF CITY SYSTEMS.
   Requirements related to extensions of utility systems vary depending upon
whether the extension: includes only service laterals and/or service
connections, or includes new mains located between one or more service laterals
and a portion of the system depicted in the master plan, or includes a portion
of the system depicted in the master plan.
   (A)   Service Laterals and Service Connections.
      (1)   If a main already exists in a right-of-way abutting a property
line, but there is no service lateral, or a replacement lateral is necessary,
then the city shall construct the service lateral and service connection, and
the developer or property owner shall pay a meter charge (water only) and a
tapping charge. If only a new or replacement water service connection is
required, then the city shall do the work and a meter charge shall be paid.
      (2)   If a new main also is required, then both the main and the service
lateral shall be constructed at the same time as the new main. A water service
connection may, at the discretion of the city, be constructed either at the
same time as the lateral or subsequently. If either one is constructed by the
developer, title to the completed product shall be transferred to the city. In
that event, payment of the tapping and/or meter charge corresponding to the
transferred work shall not be required and this fact shall be stated in the
connection contract. The relationship between actual costs incurred by the
developer and standard tapping and/or meter charges shall be immaterial, and no
credits for any differences shall accrue to either the city or the developer.
If either the lateral or the water service connection is constructed by the
city, then the corresponding charge shall be paid.
   (B)   New Mains Not in Master Plan.
      (1)   In general, any new facilities between those depicted in a master
plan and the service laterals for a development shall be constructed by the
developer, at his own expense. Drawings and specifications shall be submitted
to the City Utility Director for review. Assisted as he sees fit by
recommendations of the engineer, the revision and resubmittal. If the director
determines that any portion of the work must be an oversized facility, then the
developer shall obtain two cost estimates for the portion designated to be
oversized - one if built oversized and one if built to the size required to
serve only the development, where both sizes are as approved by the utility
director. The director also shall obtain two such estimates. The developer and
the director then shall negotiate both a contract for the utility connection,
which will indicate whether the oversized facility is to be built by the
developer or by the city, and a developer’s agreement, which will indicate: the
amount of reimbursement from future construction charges to which the developer
will be entitled because of the oversizing, the specific properties that are
considered to be the future beneficiaries of the oversizing, and the specific
formula to be used in calculating the construction charges to be paid to the
city by the owners when those properties are connected to the system. If the
city is to construct the oversized facilities, the developer shall be required
to fully reimburse the city for all costs actually incurred, including any
costs for engineering services during design and construction. That full
reimbursement shall be due and payable at the same time as payment of the
required connection charge. Any reimbursements back to the developer for
oversizing shall not be made until the city has received construction charges
from future beneficiaries of the oversizing, as stipulated in the developer’s
agreement.
      (2)   If mutually agreeable, the contract for the connection might
stipulate that the city shall construct not only the oversized facility but
also all other new facilities needed to serve the development. In this case,
the developer shall reimburse the city for all costs for design and
construction of all work done by the city, but he shall not receive any
subsequent reimbursement from future users for the portions not considered to
be oversized.
   (C)   Master Plan Facilities. In general, all facilities depicted in a
master plan are to be built by the city, using funds already available to the
city and without immediate one-for-one reimbursement from a specific developer.
However, it is intended that connection charges shall reimburse the city for
those costs. It shall be the policy of the city that the costs of master plan
facilities needed for future developments shall be borne primarily by
reimbursements to the city from those developments, and that connection charges
paid by those developments shall serve as an equitable means of accomplishing
the reimbursements. Accordingly, at a frequency of every two to three years the
city will review projected future developments, connection charges to be paid
by those developments, and projected costs of existing and new master plan
facilities needed to serve those developments. After each such review, the
required connection charges will be adjusted in an attempt to ensure:
      (1)   Approximate equality between the then current projected total
connection charges to be received from future developments and the then current
projected costs of master plan facilities constructed to serve those
developments.
      (2)   The ratio of any one connection charge to projected total
connection charges from new developments approximately equal to the ratio of
the utility services that development is expected to receive from new master
plan facilities and the total services to be provided by those facilities.
      (3)   (a)   It may occur that some of the facilities shown in a master
plan will be needed to serve a proposed development, but the then current city
construction program will not ensure that those facilities will be available at
the time the developer desires to start his construction. In such a case, the
developer may, if he wishes, request that he be allowed to assist in
accelerating the construction of those master plan facilities needed to serve
his development. Upon receipt of such a request, the city will attempt to
negotiate mutually agreeable terms concerning: whether the needed master plan
facilities will be built by the developer or by the city; who shall pay the
costs of the construction; and how much, if any, of the master plan costs paid
by the developer will be returned to him in the future. The amount of any such
reimbursement will be negotiated on a case-by-case basis, and shall be
determined in a manner similar to that described for reimbursement of costs for
“Oversized” non-master plan facilities, in §
50.03(B).
         (b)   Regardless of the size of the agreed upon reimbursement for a
developer’s payment of the costs of master plan facilities, that reimbursement
shall be made from future connection charges. The reimbursement initially shall
serve as a direct credit against the connection charges which the developer
will be required to pay, as established in this chapter. In the event the
agreed upon reimbursement exceeds his own connection charges, then the
remainder of the reimbursement will be made from future connection charges, as
they are received by the city from other developments.
         (c)   Details of the reimbursement shall be stipulated in a negotiated
developer’s agreement, which will indicate: the amount of the reimbursement the
developer is to receive, the period of reimbursement, whether reimbursement
shall be from all connection charges collected in that period or only from
those collected from specified geographical locations, and whether all or only
a specified fraction of each eligible connection charge shall be used for
reimbursement.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 692, passed 5-16-84; Am. Ord. 1978, passed
11-17-21)
§ 50.04 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Prior to preparing any detailed plans for either water or sewer
facilities to serve a new development, the developer shall submit to the City
Utility Director written notification of intention to connect to a city
utility. Included with the notification should be a preliminary layout of the
proposed development, including general location and proposed size of all
proposed utility mains, both interior to the development and those necessary to
connect to the existing system. He also should submit data as to projected
water requirements, both for daily use and fire flow, and projected sewer
requirements, both flow rates and type sewage. Unless otherwise indicated, it
will be assumed that the developer intends to perform construction of all
indicated new mains, without regard to location but subject to any future
reimbursement to which he might be entitled.
   (B)   After allowing two weeks for review of his submittal by the city and
the engineer, the developer shall make telephone contact with the engineer to
schedule a meeting with the Utility Director and the engineer. The purpose of
the meeting will be to reach tentative agreement as to design criteria, who
will be performing the work, and if there will be a need for any oversizing
and/or special construction of any master plan facilities. At the same time,
the developer should request information as to whether his development will be
subject to any construction charges because of any previous oversizing that had
been considered as beneficial to his development.
   (C)   Subsequently, the developer will submit to the Utility Director a
formal application for connection to the city utility, using forms furnished by
the Utility Department. Included with the application will be final
construction drawings and specifications, signed and sealed by a Professional
Engineer registered in Florida, for all public facilities to be constructed by
the developer and the required plan review charge. Upon review and approval of
the application, the connection contract and developer’s agreement, if
required, will be executed.
   (D)   If it has been agreed that the city is to perform any of the work,
then prior to the city beginning to prepare the design and construction
documents for that work, the developer will make a deposit cash or check with
the city equal to 5% of the estimated total costs to be incurred by the city.
The deposit shall be made at the same time as submittal of the application for
connection to the city system. As soon as the city receives bids for its
construction work, the developer shall deposit with the city an amount which,
when added to the previous deposit, equals 110% of the total city costs, as
then estimated. This deposit shall be in the form of cash, a check, or a letter
of credit. Upon completion of the work, a final accounting shall be made, with
the developer making a formal payment to the city equal to actual final total
costs incurred, and any unused deposit being returned to the developer.
   (E)   Any connection charges, construction charges, sewer reserve capacity
charges, tapping charges, or meter charges which are due on each structure in a
development shall be due and payable no later than issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the structure, and evidence of full payment of those charges
shall be a prerequisite of issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
   (F)   In addition to the above requirements, the developer shall be
responsible for accomplishing the following prior to receipt of a certificate
of occupancy:
      (1)   Designing and constructing all water and sewer plumbing on the
property owner’s side of each service connection. Application for permits, and
payment of associated permit fees, for construction of this work shall be in
accordance with ordinances and regulations for building permits and
certificates of occupancy, as administered by the City Building Department.
However, in addition to any review done by the Building Department, the
portions of plumbing between buildings and service connections also shall be
reviewed by the Engineering Department. Therefore, whenever application is made
to the Building Department for a permit which includes plumbing to a service
connection, a copy shall be submitted to the Engineering Department by the
developer. It shall be the responsibility of the Engineering and Building
Departments to ensure that review and comment by the Engineering Department are
taken into consideration by the Building Department.
      (2)   Obtaining all permits required by the Building Department and the
City Engineer for any work to be done by the developer in city rights-of-ways
or easements. Application and payment of fees shall be as required in
ordinances and regulations administered by those departments.
      (3)   Obtaining all permits required by county and state regulatory
authorities for any mains to be constructed by the developer. Application and
payment of fees shall be as required by those agencies.
      (4)   Submitting to the City Engineer the following for any service
connections, service laterals, mains, or other portions of the city’s utility
systems that have been constructed by the developer.
         (a)   Three prints of "as-built" drawings, as signed and sealed by the
engineer of record, one electronic copy in PDF and AutoCAD format.
         (b)   A legal document providing transfer of title to the city for all
such property, using forms and/or samples as prepared or approved by the City
Attorney.
         (c)   A one-year maintenance guarantee bond in the amount of 20% of
the construction costs. For one year subsequent to approval of the work by the
City Engineer, any repairs or replacements required by the work either shall be
performed by the developer, or the bond shall be used to reimburse the city for
costs incurred by the city in correcting the work.
         (d)   The developer shall provide one emergency generator and/or one
emergency by-pass pump at the city’s discretion for each new lift station
constructed or upgraded.
         (e)   When required by the city, the developer shall provide a
revision to the city's water and/or sewer hydraulic model(s) by retaining a
Florida Registered Engineer to providing model output as a result of the
subject development. When model output results indicate the subject development
will negatively impact the city's facilities, the developer shall enter into a
developer's agreement for the necessary improvement as determined by the model
output and approved by the city.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1328, passed 1-19-00; Am. Ord. 1978,
passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.05 GUARANTEE OF DEVELOPER AGREEMENT REIMBURSEMENTS.
   (A)   Section
50.03(B) and (C) describe conditions under which a developer shall be entitled
to reimbursement for certain portions of his contribution to construction of
extensions of city utility systems. Those divisions also stipulate that the
money for said reimbursement shall be obtained by the city from construction
and/or connection charges to be paid by future developers. It shall be the
policy of the city that a developer is entitled to receive at least 50% of the
agreed reimbursement by no later than five years after the agreement, and the
full amount of the agreed reimbursement by no later than ten years. During the
first five years, the city will make payments to the developer only when
charges from future developers are received by the city in accordance with the
formulas established in the developer’s agreement. At the end of the first five
years, if the total payments made to the developer up to then are less than 50%
of the total agreed reimbursement, the city shall use other available city
funds to make a payment to the developer in an amount to bring the total to
50%. In the second five years, payments from received construction and/or
connection charges again will be made as received, until the total payments to
the developer, including adjustments by the city, reach 100% of the agreed
reimbursement. Any construction and/or connection charges received by the city
subsequent to payment of 100% of the agreed reimbursement shall be retained by
the city.
   (B)   Total to-date payments also will be reviewed annually at the end of
the sixth through tenth years. If totals are less than 60% through 100%,
respectively, the city again will use other funds to make a payment in an
amount needed to bring the total up to the applicable percentage of the agreed
reimbursement.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.06 PUBLIC UTILITIES TO BE IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY EASEMENTS.
   It shall be the policy of the city that subsequent to adoption of this
chapter all new city utility facilities shall be located either in a public
right-of-way or in an easement formally dedicated to public use. Easements
shall be used only if specifically approved by the city, and approval shall be
made only if it is demonstrated the restriction to locations in rights-of-way
will result in undue hardship upon the developer. When used, easements shall be
a minimum of 15 feet wide, with all utilities located at least five feet inside
the easement.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.07 MONTHLY SERVICE CHARGES; POLICY
   It shall be the policy of the city that monthly charges for use of the
city’s water and sewer systems shall be sufficient to recover: all
administrative costs associated with the systems; all operation and maintenance
costs of the systems (including cost to renew and/or replace existing
facilities); and all bond debt service associated with the system. It shall be
the responsibility of the City Utility Department and the City Finance
Department to maintain detailed records of actual expenses incurred by the city
in providing water and sewer services, and a breakdown of those expenses at
least into the following categories:
   (A)   Administrative Costs of the Combined Water and Sewer System. For
identification purposes, such costs shall be deemed to be essentially the same
categories of expenses as are identified under “Customer Accounts Expenses”
(Accts 901-905) and “Administrative and General Expenses” (Accts 920-932) in
the Uniform System of Accounts for Class A and B Water Utilities published by
the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners. For accounting
purposes, it shall be assumed that one-half of the combined administrative
costs are incurred by the water system, and one-half by the wastewater system.
   (B)   Separate Costs for Water System Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Costs
and Sewer O&M Costs. Included therein shall be the costs of providing for
replacement of worn or obsolete facilities. Also included shall be all charges
to the city by the city which have been identified by Hollywood as charges to
cover O&M costs of Hollywood’s sewer system.
   (C)   Original Construction Costs, Including Associated Debt Service. As in
the case of O&M costs, original construction costs shall be separated into
those incurred by the water system and those incurred by the wastewater system.
   (D)   It shall be the policy of the city that administrative costs shall be
borne equally by all customers, without regard to gallons of service received.
Accordingly, the City Commission shall establish a minimum monthly water charge
and a minimum monthly sewer charge. It shall be the policy of the city that
payment of the established minimum monthly charges shall entitle each customer
to receive the specified minimum amount of water and sewer services during that
month.
   (E)   It shall be the policy of the city that all users of the city’s water
and sewer systems shall ensure that all water obtained from the city’s water
system passes through a city-owned water meter. Each customer shall have one
service connection designated as its principal connection, at which one or more
meters shall measure all water for which any significant portion ultimately can
be introduced into the city sewer system. If a customer desires water for a use
in which no significant portion can enter the sewer systems, and if the
customer’s distribution system for that use has no cross-connections either
with the distribution system for another use or the city’s sewer system, then
that user may, at his option and expense, receive water for that use through a
separate secondary service connection. No user of the city’s sewer system
shall, without the city’s explicit consent, introduce into that system any
water which has not been measured through that owner’s principal service
connection. One prerequisite of such city consent shall be the installation, at
the user’s expense, of a properly designed sewage flow meter which measures all
flows, regardless of origin, introduced into the city sewer system by that
user.
   (F)   It shall be the policy of the city that monthly service charges for
use of its sewer system shall be based on: either the water flow measured
through the customer’s principal service connection or the wastewater flow
measured by a meter which measures the customer’s total wastewater flows.
Monthly service charges based on a wastewater flow meter shall be allowed only
if the wastewater meter has been installed in connection with the city’s
explicit consent of the introduction into the sewer system of water originating
from some source other than the city’s water system. In either event, monthly
service charges for use of the sewer system shall be computed by multiplying a
rate per 1000 gallons times the metered flow (minus any initial amount which
has been designated by the City Commission as being associated with the minimum
monthly sewer charge). The same rate shall be used for all customers that
discharge the same type of sewage, without regard to whether the meter used is
the principal water meter or an authorized wastewater meter, and without regard
to how many gallons are being billed.
   (G)   It shall be the policy of the city that all O & M costs of its water
and sewer systems shall be recovered by the monthly water and sewer service
charges, respectively. If authorized by the City Commission, the monthly
service charges may be established sufficiently high as to be used to recover
not only O & M costs but also other costs, but they shall not be reduced below
that necessary to recover O & M costs.
   (H)   It shall be the policy of the city that monthly service charges for
water, sewer and sanitation may be suspended for individual accounts under
extenuating circumstances and as approved by the City Manager or his designee.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.08 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   At the time the plumbing of a lot first is connected to a service
connection, the property owner shall open an account with the city for payment
of monthly service charges, including payment of required security deposits and
fee in accordance with §
50.08(B) for opening the account. The property shall be added to the applicable
monthly billing cycle and, effective with the next scheduled billing date for
that cycle, the property owner shall begin receiving bills for monthly service
charges, in amounts as established in §§
50.31 through
50.59. Specified minimum monthly charges shall be due and payable, and billed
to the customer of record, for each and every month thereafter, without regard
to whether the water service has been shut off for any reason.
   (B)   Effective October 1, 2021, deposits and other fees required for the
use of city water and sewer facilities shall be as set forth in the document
Customer Service Fee Schedule, prepared by the Utility Department and approved
by the City Manager, for the purposes of recovering city costs. The deposits
and fees will be annually adjusted each October 1, and effective that same date
for the subsequent year, using the change in the Consumer Price Index for all
urban consumers in the United States – Water and Sewerage Maintenance Series
published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the 12 months ending April of
each year or 3% or actual costs, whichever is greater, effective annually as of
October 1. It is the city's intent to recover its actual costs and adjust the
fees accordingly. Therefore, adjustments due to changes in city costs may be
issued by the City Manager on an as-needed basis. Upon approval by the City
Manager, the Customer Service Fee Schedule, and any amendments or adjustments
thereto, shall be reported to the City Commission and absent objection will
take effect on the dates provided in the schedule.
   (C)   The original property owner shall remain as the customer of record
until the account is closed and the security deposit has been applied to the
final bill. The account will not be closed until the department is notified
that ownership of the property has changed, sold or otherwise transferred.
   (D)   Each time that a new utility account is opened, either upon addition
of a new service connection or upon changing the customer of record for an
existing service connection, the new customer shall pay a fee in accordance
with § 50.08(B) to defray the administrative costs involved.
   (E)   Each bill for water and sewer monthly service charges, plus any other
water and sewer charges which are due, shall be due and payable when rendered.
If the city has not received payment in full within 20 days after the date of
mailing of a utility bill, that bill shall be deemed delinquent. The monthly
bill immediately following a delinquent bill shall have a penalty fee added to
it. The penalty fee shall be equal to 10% of the total of all previous water
and sewer billings which had not been received by the city.
   (F)   If a customer believes that a billed monthly service charge is
incorrect, he must submit a written protest to the Utility Department within 20
days of the date of the bill. Any bill not protested within 20 days shall be
presumed to be correct as billed, without further recourse. Without regard to
whether protested or not, all bills are due and payable as received. All timely
protests will be reviewed by the city. If the protest is determined to be
valid, the excess amount paid will be credited against future billings.
   (G)   Utility services are billed monthly. If a customer does not pay
delinquent balances within 60 days of the past-due date, service will be
discontinued and additional charges incurred.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 720, passed 1-2-85; Am. Ord. 728, passed
3-6-85; Am. Ord. 1156, passed 5-1-96; Am. Ord. 1397, passed 2-20-02; Am. Ord.
1754, passed 6-19-13; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.09 TEMPORARY TURN-OFF OF SERVICES.
   If a customer desires a temporary turn-off of utility services for a period
of one month or more, he may make request to do so. Once turned off, a request
for resumption of services prior to one month later will be honored only if
accompanied by written documentation of the changes in circumstances that have
occurred subsequent to the request for turn-off. The turn-off of services will
not relieve the customer of payment of all minimum monthly charges during the
turn-off period. The turn-off serves only to assist the customer in attempting
to avoid damage or unintended consumption due to leaks or unauthorized uses
during his absence. The first billing subsequent to the turn- off shall include
a fee to reimburse the city for costs incurred. A similar fee shall be paid
when service is turned back on.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.10 CITY COMMISSION APPROVAL FOR CONNECTION TO A CITY UTILITY.
   (A)   Within City Limits. All new and existing developments located within
the city limits, either as established at the time of adoption of this chapter
or as amended in the future, shall be required to connect to the city’s utility
systems when they are available. Such connections shall be made without any
action by the City Commission, except as follows:
      (1)   If a developer’s agreement is required, then the developer’s
agreement shall be accepted by resolution of the City Commission, prior to
execution of the connection contract between the developer and the city.
      (2)   The city utility systems are designed and constructed primarily for
use by residential and commercial customers. No industrial customer shall
connect to a city utility system unless the connection is specifically
authorized in advance by the City Commission.
      (3)   The City Commission has determined that as of the adoption of this
chapter, no existing or presently proposed user of the city’s sewer system is
an “EPA Industrial User,” as defined herein. Further, it has been determined
that existing zoning regulations make it highly unlikely that a prospective
user shall be an EPA Industrial User. However, it shall be the policy of the
city that an EPA Industrial User shall not be permitted to connect to the
city’s sewer system unless, and until, the city shall have amended this Code so
as to incorporate an EPA approvable “Industrial Cost Recovery System,” as
defined in Federal Regulations 40 CFR 35.
   (B)   Outside City Limits. The City of Pembroke Pines has not established a
service area outside of its municipal boundaries. With one exception, property
located outside the city limits shall not be allowed to connect to a city
utility system unless the connection is authorized by the City Commission. The
one exception is that Commission approval shall not be required for any
connection in that area covered by the developer’s agreements identified in
Exhibit “H”, Agreement for Sale and Purchase, September 27, 1962, between the
city and the West Hollywood Water Company and the West Hollywood Utility
Company. The city shall not provide water or sewer service to property outside
of its boundaries when the City Commission has determined that the proposed
uses on such property are contrary to the best interests of the city or adverse
to the health, safety, and welfare of the city's residents. (Ord. 641, passed
12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21; Am. Ord. 2009, passed 9-20-23)
§ 50.11 PAYMENT OF INTEREST ON SECURITY DEPOSIT; RETURN OF SECURITY DEPOSIT.
   Customers with utility accounts for which the city is holding a security
deposit as specified in the City Code shall earn interest as set forth herein.
The city shall pay interest on such deposits based on the average rate of
return earned for the 12 months ended August 31, less an amount equal to an
administrative fee of 30 basis points. Interest will be prorated for the
portion of the year that the deposit was held. The interest earned shall be
shown on the customer’s account statement for the month of October of each
fiscal year. Unless the customer specifically requests a refund of the interest
earned, it shall be credited to his next due statement.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1115, passed 3-20-95; Am. Ord. 1132,
passed 9-20-95; Am. Ord. 1706, passed 10-5-11; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.12 TAMPERING WITH CITY UTILITY FACILITIES.
   Whosoever shall, without consent of the city, operate the valves or controls
of, deface, injure, destroy, remove, or otherwise tamper with or tap any pipe,
for any use including the use of potable water for irrigation, main meter,
meter box, valve or other facility of the utility systems of the city shall
make restitution to the city for any costs incurred by the city resulting from
the tampering. In addition, the tampering shall be punishable by a fine in
accordance with §
50.08(B) and/or as provided by §
10.99 of the City Code or by other lawful method provided in the City Code,
including but not limited to Code Enforcement penalties authorized by law.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.13 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF CITY UTILITY SYSTEMS.
   Whosoever shall, without the permission of the city, take or use water from
the city water system, for any use including the use of potable water for
irrigation, or introduce any liquid or solid substance into the city sewer
system, or make a connection to any utility system shall make restitution to
the city for any costs incurred by the city resulting from the unauthorized
use. In addition, the unauthorized use shall be punishable by a fine in
accordance with §
50.08(B) and/or as provided by §
10.99 of the City Code or by other lawful method provided in the City Code,
including but not limited to Code Enforcement penalties authorized by law.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.14 MODIFICATION OF SERVICE CONNECTIONS AND/OR LATERALS.
   If the capacity of an existing service lateral or an existing service
connection is inadequate to provide the quantity of service needed by a
customer, the modification will be performed by the city, and the property
owner shall reimburse the city for all costs actually incurred by the city. At
the same time, all security deposits and schedules of charges for the customer
shall be adjusted to correspond to the changed capacities.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.15 PRIVILEGE FEE.
   The sewer service provider shall, as compensation for its use of the public
rights-of-way, pay the city a privilege fee in the amount equal to 12% of
billed revenue from sewer billed services, or in the amount as thereafter
amended by resolution of the City Commission. The utility shall pay the
privilege fee to the city on a monthly basis, with each payment being made not
later than 30 calendar days after the end of the subject month. This privilege
fee is not a payment in lieu of any other tax, fee, or assessment.
(Ord. 1458, passed 9-17-03; Am. Ord. 1553, passed 8-2-06; Am. Ord. 1978, passed
11-17-21)
WATER
§ 50.31 GENERAL.
   Sections
50.01 through
50.14 of this Code of Ordinances apply equally to the city’s water and sewer
systems. This subchapter contains only those provisions which apply uniquely to
the water system.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.32 CHARGES AT INITIAL CONNECTION TO CITY WATER SYSTEM.
   The following one-time water charges shall be paid by a developer at the
time of issuance of his certificate of occupancy, or by an existing property
owner at the time water service first is made available to his property.
   (A)   Water Connection Charge. The water connection charge shall be equal
to; 1,183.00 per ERC effective January 1, 1992; subsequent years will be
adjusted using the change in the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers
in the United States - Water and Sewerage Maintenance Series published by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics for the 12 months ending April of each year. These
adjustments will be effective on the following October 1.
   (B)   Water Construction Charge. As established by one or more prior
developer’s agreements related to sub-portions of the water system to serve the
current development.
   (C)   Reimbursement of City Costs. If the city constructs any facilities
specifically to serve the development. See §§
50.03 and
50.04.
   (D)   Water Tapping Charge. Each customer shall be charged a water tapping
charge in accordance with §
50.08(B) for each water service lateral constructed by the city to serve the
property.
   (E)   Water Meter Charge. Each customer shall be charged a water meter
charge in accordance with §
50.08(B) for each water service connection constructed to serve the property.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 723, passed 2-6-85; Am. Ord. 1852, passed
9-7-16; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.33 WATER AND SEWER SECURITY DEPOSITS.
   Each customer shall pay a water and sewer security deposit in accordance
with §
50.08(B).
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 728, passed 3-6-85; Am. Ord. 1682, passed
1-25-11; Am. Ord. 1754, passed 6-19-13; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.34 MONTHLY WATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   Monthly water service charges shall include a minimum charge per month
for each dwelling unit and/or business unit served, to cover administrative
costs and the thousands of gallons of water received up to a specified minimum
per month per dwelling unit and/or business unit, plus a charge per 1,000
gallons above the stated minimum per unit. Monthly sewer service charges shall
be based upon readings of the water meter and shall be as indicated in the
following table. In the table, the term "per unit" means per each dwelling unit
and/or business unit served by a customer.
Customer Type Meter (Inches)* Gallons Minimum Per Unit 1/ Gallons Over Minimum
                                      1/2018              1/1/2018
Customer Type    Meter (Inches)* Gallons Minimum Per Unit 1/ Gallons Over
                                         1/2018              Minimum 1/1/2018
Single Family/   All             3,000   $17.58              $6.83
Multi-Unit
                 5/8             3,000   $21.96              $8.49
                 1               5,000   $36.42              $8.49
Commercial       1 1/2           10,000  $72.81              $8.49
                 2               16,000  $116.72             $8.49
                 3               30,000  $218.40             $8.49
                 4               50,000  $364.10             $8.49
City of Pembroke N/A             3,000   $17.58              $6.83
Pines accounts
Holly Lake                      3,000   $17.58              $6.83
South Florida                   1,000   $8.49               $8.49
State Hospital
C.B. Smith Park                 100,000 $728.28             $8.49
                 5/8             3,000   $17.58              $6.83
Temporary or     1               3,000   $17.58              $6.83
Construction     1.5             3,000   $17.58              $6.83
                 2               3,000   $17.58              $6.83
 
* Meter sizes not shown shall be as determined by the city on a case-by-case
basis.
   (B)   The water and sewer service charges and basic minimum charges for
subsequent years will be increased administratively using the change in the
Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers in the United States - Water and
Sewerage Maintenance Series as published by the Bureau of Labor and Statistics
for the 12 months ending April of each year. These adjustments will be
effective on the following October 1 and will be pro-rated as required by the
applicable account billing cycle.
   (C)   In addition to the above, monthly billings shall include any of the
following charges which are applicable:
      (1)   Water rate surcharge.  In order to encourage water conservation
during periods of mandated water restrictions by the South Florida Water
Management District (SFWMD), the following surcharge shall automatically be
instituted as an adjustment to the monthly water service charge:
         (a)   During a Phase I Restriction issued by SFWMD, a 25% surcharge
will be added to the water service charge. During a Phase II Restriction issued
by SFWMD, a 50% surcharge will be added to the water service charge.
         (b)   The surcharge will be based on a user’s average monthly
consumption. The user’s monthly consumption shall be based upon the user’s
water consumption during the 12 months prior to the South Florida Water
Management District’s declaration of either Phase I or Phase II Water Use
Restrictions. For residential users, the surcharge shall apply to consumption
which exceeds 70% of the user’s average monthly consumption. For commercial
users, the surcharge shall apply to consumption which exceeds 90% of the user’s
average monthly consumption. In no instances shall the surcharge be applied to
the water service of any user who consumes 5,000 gallons or less during any
billing period.
      (2)   Delinquent turn-on/turn-off recovery charges.  When the city incurs
time and expense to secure collection of a delinquent utility account, there
shall be assessed a turn-off and turn-on recovery charge in accordance with §
50.08(B). This fee shall not preclude the assessment to disconnect or re-
connect-charges, as delineated in division (3) below.
      (3)   Disconnect or reconnect recovery charges. When the city makes a
disconnect or reconnect, irrespective of cause, there may be assessed a cost
recovery charge in accordance with §
50.08(B).
      (4)   Meter testing charge.  If a customer believes that his or her meter
is producing erroneous results, this should be reported to the Utility
Department. If an in-place inspection reveals that the meter is malfunctioning,
the meter will be replaced. Otherwise, no action shall be taken unless the
customer requests that the meter be removed and tested. If this is done, and
the test indicates that the meter is operating within the accuracies published
by the meter manufacturer, then the customer shall pay a meter testing charge
equal to the actual costs incurred by the city in conducting the test.
Otherwise, there shall be no charge for the test.
      (5)   Meter replacement.  If a meter has to be replaced due to damage for
which the customer is responsible, charges for replacement shall be in
accordance with § 50.08(B), Water meter charge.
(Ord. 1378, passed 8-1-01; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 12-17-01; Am. Ord. 1682,
passed 1-25-11; Am. Ord. 1852, passed 9-7-16; Am. Ord. 1888, passed 10-4-17;
Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.35 USE OF WATER FOR IRRIGATION.
   (A)   Intent and purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to
implement procedures that promote water conservation through the efficient use
of landscape irrigation. It shall be unlawful for anyone to utilize water from
the city potable water system for any type of irrigation, excepting hand
watering, unless specifically approved by the City Commission. The use of city
potable water for irrigation is also a violation of the city's Cross Connection
Control Ordinance (§
50.40) and is subject to enforcement action. Any such use of city potable water
for irrigation shall be disconnected by the user within seven days of
notification by the city.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meaning listed below. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular
include the plural.
      ADDRESS. The "house number" (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that,
together with the street name, describes the physical location of a specific
property. This includes "rural route" numbers, but excludes post office box
numbers. If a lot number in a mobile home park or similar community is used by
the U.S. Postal Service to determine a delivery location, the lot number shall
be the property's address. If a lot number in a mobile home park or similar
residential community is not used by the U.S. Postal Service (e.g., the park
manager sorts incoming mail delivered to the community's address), then the
community's main address shall be the property's address. If a property has no
address, it shall be considered "even-numbered."
      ATHLETIC PLAY AREA. All golf course fairways, tees, roughs, greens, and
other athletic play surfaces; including, football, baseball, soccer, polo,
tennis, and lawn bowling fields, and rodeo, equestrian, and livestock arenas.
      CONSUMPTIVE USE PERMIT (CUP). A permit issued pursuant to Chapter 40E-2,
F.A.C., authorizing the consumptive use of water.
      DISTRICT. The South Florida Water Management District, a government
entity created under F.S. Ch. 373.
      EVEN NUMBERED ADDRESS. An address ending in the numbers 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or
rights-of-way or other locations with no address, or the letters A-M.
      EXISTING LANDSCAPING. Any landscaping which has been planted and in the
ground for more than 90 days.
      LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION. The outside watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns,
sod, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, ornamental gardens, and such other
flora not intended for resale, which are planted and situated in such diverse
locations as residential landscapes, recreation areas, cemeteries, public,
commercial, and industrial establishments, public medians, and rights-of-way,
except athletic play areas.
      LANDSCAPING. Shrubbery, trees, lawns, sod, grass, ground covers, plants,
vines, ornamental gardens, and such other flora not intended for resale, which
are situated in such diverse locations as residential landscapes, recreation
areas, cemeteries, public, commercial, and industrial establishments, public
medians, and rights-of-way, except athletic play areas, as defined in this
division.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS. City of Pembroke Pines Police Officer, Code
Enforcement Officer, or other official designated by the City Manager.
      LOW VOLUME HAND WATERING. The watering of landscape by one person, with
one hose, fitted with a self-canceling or automatic shutoff nozzle.
      LOW VOLUME IRRIGATION. The use of equipment and devices specifically
designed to allow the volume of water delivered to be limited to a level
consistent with the water requirement of the plant being irrigated, and to
allow that water to be placed with a high degree of efficiency in the root zone
of the  plant. The term also includes water used in mist houses and similar
establishments for plant propagation. Overhead irrigation and flood irrigation
are not included.
      MICRO-IRRIGATION. The application of small quantities of water on or
below the soil surface as drops or tiny streams of spray through emitter or
applicators placed along a water delivery line. MICRO-IRRIGATION includes a
number of methods or concepts, such as bubbler, drip, trickle, mist or
microspray, and subsurface irrigation.
      NEW LANDSCAPING. Any landscaping which has been planted in the ground for
90 days or less.
      ODD NUMBERED ADDRESS. An address ending in the numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, or
the letters N-Z.
      RECLAIMED WATER. Wastewater that has received at least secondary
treatment and basic disinfection, and is reused after flowing out of a
wastewater treatment facility as defined by Rule 62-40.210, F.A.C.
      USER. Any person, individual, firm, association, organization,
partnership, business trust, corporation, company, agent, employee, or other
legal entity whether natural or artificial, the United States of America, and
the state and all political subdivisions, regions, districts, municipalities,
and public agencies thereof, which directly or indirectly takes water from the
water resource, including uses from private systems uses under water use
permits issued pursuant to Chapter 40E-2, F.A.C., or uses from individual wells
or pumps.
      WASTEFUL AND UNNECESSARY. Allowing water to be dispersed without any
practical purpose to the water use; for example, excessive landscape
irrigation, leaving an unattended hose on a driveway with water flowing,
allowing water to be dispersed in a grossly inefficient manner regardless of
the type of water use; for example, allowing landscape irrigation water to
unnecessarily fall onto pavement, sidewalks, and other impervious surfaces; or
allowing water flow through a broken or malfunctioning water delivery or
landscape irrigation system.
      WATER RESOURCE. Any and all water on or beneath the surface of the
ground, including natural or artificial watercourses, lakes, ponds, or diffused
surface water, and water percolating, standing, or flowing beneath the surface
of the ground. WATER RESOURCE specifically excludes water from the city potable
water system.
      WATER SHORTAGE. When the District determines there is the possibility
that insufficient water will be available to meet the present and anticipated
needs of the users, or when conditions are such as to require a temporary
reduction in total use within a particular area to protect water resources from
serious harm. A water shortage usually occurs due to drought.
      WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCY. When the District determines the provisions
listed in Part II of Chapter 40E-21, F.A.C., are not sufficient to protect the
public health, safety, or welfare, the health of animals, fish, or aquatic
life, a public water supply, or commercial, industrial, agricultural,
recreational, or other reasonable-beneficial uses.
   (C)   Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to each
user, as defined in division (B), providing landscape irrigation from all water
resources within the boundaries of the city with the following exceptions:
      (1)   The use of reclaimed water, which may or may not be supplemented
from another source;
      (2)   Irrigation at agricultural and nursery operations; and
      (3)   Irrigation of athletic play areas.
   (D)   Year-round landscape irrigation conservation measures. The city adopts
the rules of the South Florida Water Management District, listed in Subsection
40E-24.201 (1)-(6), F.A.C., including subsequent additions or corrections which
are set out as follows:
      (1)   The year-round landscape irrigation conservation measures contained
in this section are applicable to all users including permitted and exempt
users under Chapter 40E-2, F.A.C., unless otherwise indicated. These
conservation measures apply to all water resources, unless otherwise indicated.
In addition to the requirements of this section, all permitted users under
Chapter 40E-2, F.A.C., are required to maintain compliance with all CUP
conditions and terms, including requirements to implement water conservation
practices.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of each user to keep informed as to the
landscape irrigation conservation measures within this section which affect
each particular water use.
      (3)   In addition to the specific conservation measures, all wasteful and
unnecessary water use, as defined in division (B), is prohibited.
      (4)   The following requirements shall apply to all users, unless
specified in division (C) or (E).
         (a)   Landscape irrigation shall be prohibited between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., except as otherwise provided.
         (b)   Irrigation of existing landscaping shall comply with the
following provisions:
            i.   Even addresses, as defined in division (B), installations with
irrigation systems that irrigate both even and odd addresses within the same
zones, such as multi-family units and homeowners' associations, and rights-of-
way or other locations with no address shall have the opportunity to accomplish
necessary landscape irrigation two days a week, only on Thursday and/or Sunday.
            ii.   Odd addresses, as defined in division (B), shall have the
opportunity to accomplish necessary landscape irrigation two days a week, only
on Wednesday and/or Saturday.
         (c)   Irrigation of new landscaping shall comply with the following
provisions:
            i.   New landscaping may be irrigated once on the day it is
installed without regard to the listed watering days and times. Irrigation of
the soil immediately prior to the installation of the new landscaping is
allowed without regard to the normal watering days and times.
            ii.   A 90-day establishment period begins on the day the new
landscaping is installed. The new landscaping shall be installed within a
reasonable time from the date of purchase, which may be demonstrated with a
dated receipt or invoice.
            iii.   Irrigation of new landscaping which has been in place for 30
days or less may be accomplished on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday,
Saturday, and/or Sunday.
            iv.   Irrigation of new landscaping which has been in place for 31
to 90 days may be accomplished on Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, and/or Saturday.
            v.   Irrigation of new landscaping is limited to areas only
containing the new landscaping. An entire zone of an irrigation system shall
only be utilized for landscape irrigation under this division if the zone
contains at least 50% new landscaping. If a zone contains less than 50% new
landscaping, or if the new landscaping is in an area that will not typically be
irrigated by an irrigation system, only the individual new plantings are
eligible for additional irrigation. Targeted watering may be accomplished by
low volume hand watering, as defined in division (B), or any appropriate method
which isolates and waters only the new landscaping.
      (5)   Any water shortage, as defined in division (B), restrictions or
other measures declared pursuant to Chapter 40E-21, F.A.C., or related District
Governing Board or Executive Director orders which are more restrictive than a
measure contained within this section, shall supersede this section for the
duration of the applicable water shortage declaration.
   (E)   Exceptions to the landscape irrigation schedules. Landscape irrigation
scheduling shall be subject to the following exceptions:
      (1)   Landscape irrigation systems may be operated during restricted days
and/or times for cleaning, maintenance, and repair purposes with an attendant
on site in the area being tested. Landscape irrigation systems may routinely be
operated for such purposes no more than once per week, and the run time for any
one test should not exceed ten minutes per zone.
      (2)   Landscape irrigation for the purpose of watering-in fertilizers,
insecticides, pesticides, fungicides and herbicides, where such watering-in is
recommended by the manufacturer, or by federal, state or local law, or best
management practices, shall be allowed under the following conditions:
         (a)   Such watering-in shall be limited to one application, unless the
need for more than one application is stated in the directions for application
specified by the manufacturer; and
         (b)   Such watering-in shall be accomplished during normally allowable
watering days and times set forth in division (D)(4)(a) and (b), unless a
professional licensed applicator has posted a temporary sign containing the
date of application and the date(s) of needed watering-in activity.
      (3)   Any plant material may be watered using low volume irrigation, as
defined in division (B), micro-irrigation, as defined in division (B), low
volume hand watering method, rain barrels, cisterns, or other similar rain-
harvesting devices without regard to the watering days or times allowed
pursuant to this section.
   (F)   Additional requirements. Any user who purchases and installs an
automatic landscape irrigation system shall properly install, maintain, and
operate technology that inhibits or interrupts operation of the system during
periods of sufficient moisture in accordance with F.S. § 373.62.
   (G)   Variances.
      (1)   A variance from the specific day or days identified in division (D)
(4)(b) may be granted by the city if strict application of the restrictions
would lead to unreasonable or unfair result; provided the applicant
demonstrates with particularity that compliance with the schedule will result
in substantial economic, health, or other hardship on the applicant or those
served by the applicant. If granted, the applicant shall be required to post a
notice at each parcel to which the variance pertains. Relief may be granted
only upon a demonstration that such hardship exists, is peculiar to the person
or the affected property, is not self-imposed, and further demonstrates that
granting the variance would be consistent with the general intent and purpose
of this division or as may otherwise be authorized by applicable law or policy.
      (2)   The city recognizes all irrigation variances or waivers issued by
the District under Rule 40E-24.501, F.A.C.
   (H)   Declaration of water shortage or water shortage emergency. Declaration
of a water shortage condition and/or water shortage emergency, as defined in
division (B), within all or parts of the city by the District's Governing Board
or Executive Director shall supersede this section for the duration of the
applicable water shortage declaration in accordance with §
50.36 of the City Code. A water shortage usually occurs due to drought.
   (I)   Enforcement.
      (1)   In the absence of a declaration of water shortage or water shortage
emergency within all or any part of the city by the District's Governing Board
or Executive Director, the listed landscape irrigation restrictions shall be
subject to enforcement action. Any violation of the provisions of divisions (D)
and (E) shall be a violation of this section.
      (2)   The City of Pembroke Pines authorizes law enforcement officials, as
defined in division (B), having jurisdiction in the area governed by this
section, to enforce the provisions of this section. In addition, the City
Manager may delegate this section's enforcement responsibility to agencies and
departments within the city government.
   (J)   Penalties. Violations of this section shall be punishable as provided
by §
10.99 of the City Code or any other lawful method provided in the City Code,
including but not limited to, Code Enforcement penalties authorized by law.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1964, passed 3-17-21; Am. Ord. 1978,
passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.36 WATER SHORTAGE MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Intent and purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to
protect the water resources of the city from the harmful effects of
overutilization during periods of water shortage by assisting the District in
the implementation of its water shortage plan, or issued water shortage orders,
under Chapter 40E-21, F.A.C.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this Code, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning listed below. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense also include
the future, and words used in the singular also include the plural. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
      DISTRICT. The South Florida Water Management District, a government
entity created under F.S. Ch. 373.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL(S). City of Pembroke Pines Police Officer, Code
Enforcement Officer, or other official designated by the City Manager.
      USER. Any person, individual, firm, association, organization,
partnership, business trust, corporation, company, agent, employee or other
legal  entity, whether natural or artificial, the United States of America, and
the state and all political subdivisions, regions, districts, municipalities,
and public agencies thereof, which directly or indirectly takes water from the
water resource, including uses from private systems, uses under water use
permits issued pursuant to Chapter 40E-2, F.A.C., or uses from individual wells
or pumps.
      WATER RESOURCE. Any and all water on or beneath the surface of the
ground, including natural or artificial watercourses, lakes, ponds, or diffused
surface water, and water percolating, standing, or flowing beneath the surface
of the ground.
      WATER SHORTAGE. When the District determines there is the possibility
that insufficient water will be available to meet the present and anticipated
needs of the users, or when conditions are such as to require a temporary
reduction in total use within a particular area to protect water resources from
serious harm. A water shortage usually occurs due to drought.
      WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCY. When the District determines the provisions
listed in Part II of Chapter 40E-21, F.A.C., are not sufficient to protect the
public health, safety, or welfare; the health of animals, fish, or aquatic
life; a public water supply; or commercial, industrial, agricultural,
recreational, or other reasonable- beneficial uses.
   (C)   Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to each
user, as defined in division (B), using the water resource, as defined in
division (B), within the geographical areas subject to the water shortage
condition or water shortage emergency, as defined in division (B), as
determined by the District, from privately-owned water utility systems, private
wells, or private connections with surface water bodies. This section shall not
apply to users using reclaimed water or saltwater.
   (D)   Declaration of water shortage or water shortage emergency.
      (1)   A declaration of a water shortage condition and/or water shortage
emergency in accordance with Part II of Chapter 40E-21, F.A.C., within all or
parts of the city by the District's Governing Board or Executive Director,
shall invoke the provisions of this section.
      (2)   A water shortage, as defined in division (B), or water shortage
emergency order shall supersede mandatory year-round water irrigation measures
until the more restrictive measure is rescinded by the District.
      (3)   Upon the District issuing a water shortage order, all water use
restrictions or other measures adopted by the District applicable to the city,
or any portion thereof, shall be subject to enforcement action by the city
officials pursuant to division (F) of this section. Any violation of Chapter
40E-21, F.A.C., or any order issued pursuant thereto, shall be a violation of
this section.
   (E)   Variances. The city recognizes all variances issued by the District
pursuant to Rule 40E-21.275, F.A.C.
   (F)   Enforcement. Every law enforcement official having jurisdiction in the
area governed by this section shall, in connection with all other duties
imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this section. The City
Manager may also delegate enforcement responsibility for this section to other
departments of the city government.
   (G)   Penalties. Violations of this section shall be punishable as provided
by §
10.99 of the City Code or by other lawful method provided in the City Code,
including but not limited to Code Enforcement penalties authorized by law.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1964, passed 3-17-21; Am. Ord. 1978,
passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.37 ADEQUACY OF WATER QUANTITIES AND PRESSURES.
   (A)   The city shall attempt to provide in each area of the city the water
quantities and pressures normally required for the daily uses and fire flows
usually associated with buildings of up to three stories in height which are
constructed and utilized in accordance with the zoning applicable to each area.
All extensions to the city water system constructed by a developer also shall
be designed and constructed to provide at least that capability in every area
that may be served by the extension. However, nothing in this code shall be
construed as a guarantee, expressed or implied, that either the city or a
developer shall provide any specific quantity or pressure of water.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of each property owner to ascertain the
quantity and pressure actually available to the property. In the event the
property owner believes the quantity or pressure is not adequate for his
purposes, then the property owner shall construct, operate and maintain on his
own property such auxiliary pumping and storage facilities as he deems
appropriate for his needs. This provision shall be particularly applicable to
any structure having a height of more than three stories.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.38 SEPARATE FIRE SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Any customer operating structures which have a required fire flow
greater than 1,000 gallons per minute may request that he have one or more
separate fire service connections. If provided, the customer shall provide two
separate plumbing systems on his property, one for normal water uses connected
to his standard service connection, and a second system connected to the fire
service connection. With the exception of monthly service charges, all
provisions and charges of this chapter applicable to standard service
connections shall apply individually to each fire service connection.
   (B)   A fire service connection and the plumbing attached to it shall be
reserved exclusively for fire fighting. The fire service connection shall
include a backflow preventer, and there shall be no connection of any kind
between the owner’s fire plumbing and any plumbing connected to the standard
service connection. The fire service connection shall include a weighted check
valve fitted with a by-pass having a detector meter. No water shall be drawn
from a fire service connection except for fire fighting purposes and periodic
tests of the fire systems. A city representative shall be present for all
tests, and city representatives shall be allowed unlimited access to inspect
any and all portions of the fire system.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.39 [RESERVED].
§ 50.40 CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this Program is:
      (1)   To protect the public water main against actual or potential cross-
connections, backflow by backpressure and backsiphonage by isolating within the
premises or private property contamination or pollution that has occurred or
may occur because of same undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the
premises or private property.
      (2)   To protect the water supply system within the premise or private
property against actual or potential cross-connections, backflow by
backpressure and backsiphonage by requiring such air gaps, vacuum breakers,
backflow preventers, special devices as required by this Program, or other
applicable regulations.
      (3)   To eliminate cross-connections, backflow by backpressure and
backsiphonage on any other source of water or process water used for any
purpose whatsoever which may jeopardize the safety of the water supply or which
may endanger the health and welfare of the general public.
      (4)   To establish a cross-connection control and backflow prevention
program that includes provisions for inspection and maintenance to ensure
compliance.
   (B)   Responsibilities.
      (1)   Director of Utilities. The Director of the Utilities System, or
their designee, shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable
water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to backflow of
contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the
judgment of said Director, or their designee, an approved backflow prevention
assembly is required, at the city's water service connection to any customer's
premises, for the safety of the water system, the Director, or his designated
agent, shall give notice in writing to said customer to install such an
approved backflow prevention assembly at each service connection to his
premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved device, or
devices, or assemblies at his own expense; and, failure, refusal, or inability
on the part of the customer to install said device, or assemblies, immediately
shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water service to the premises until
such device, or assemblies, have been properly installed. Cross-connection
control devices or assemblies shall comply with Florida Administrative Code
(FAC) 62-555.360. The Director, at the Director's discretion, may assume the
maintenance requirements for backflow prevention assemblies and backflow
prevention program and pass along the cost to the customer.
Enforcement of this Program shall be administered by the Director, or his
designee.
      (2)   Water Purveyor (City of Pembroke Pines). Except as otherwise
provided herein, the water purveyor's (City of Pembroke Pines) responsibility
to ensure a safe water supply begins at the source and includes all of the
public water distribution system, including the service connection, and ends at
the point of delivery to the consumer's water system(s).
      (3)   Consumer. The consumer has the primary responsibility of preventing
pollutants and contaminants from entering the consumer's potable water systems
or the public potable water system. It is the responsibility of the consumer
and/or his designee to determine the size of the backflow prevention assembly.
The consumer's responsibility starts at the point of delivery from the public
potable water system and includes all of the property's water system(s).
The consumer, at their own expense, shall install, operate, test, and maintain
approved backflow prevention assemblies as set forth in this manual, unless
otherwise stated in this manual. Prior to installation, replacement or
relocation of a backflow prevention assembly, the consumer must apply for all
necessary permits through the Building Department. The Building Department must
be notified and provided copies of required testing reports upon completion of
the installation of a backflow prevention device. Subsequent tests shall be
maintained and performed at the customer's expense by a plumbing contractor
licensed in the State of Florida. The consumer shall maintain accurate records
of tests and repairs made by the consumer to backflow prevention assemblies and
shall maintain such records for a minimum period of five years. The records
shall be on a test form approved by the city and shall include the list of
materials or replacement parts used. Following any repairs, overhaul, re-piping
or relocation of an assembly the consumer shall have it tested to insure that
it is in good operating condition and will prevent backflow. Tests, maintenance
and repairs of backflow prevention assemblies shall be made by a Certified
Plumbing Contractor that is a Certified Backflow Prevention Assembly Tester or
a certified Backflow Prevention Assembly Repair and Maintenance Technician,
whichever is applicable.
      (4)   Building Department. The Building Department of the City of
Pembroke Pines has the responsibility to not only review building plans and
inspect plumbing as it is installed; but they have the explicit responsibility
of preventing cross connections from being designed and built into the plumbing
system within their jurisdiction. Where the review of building plans suggests
or detects the potential for cross connections being made as an integral part
of the plumbing system, the plumbing inspector has the responsibility, under
the Florida Building Code, for requiring that such cross connections be either
eliminated or provided with backflow prevention equipment approved by the
Florida Building Code.
The plumbing inspector's responsibility, with respect to backflow prevention,
begins at the point of delivery and continues throughout the entire length of
the consumer's water system. The plans inspector should inquire about the
intended use of water at any point where it is suspected that a cross
connection might be made or where one is actually called for by the plans. When
such is discovered, it shall be mandatory that a suitable, approved backflow
prevention assembly/device be required by the plans and be properly installed.
      (5)   Certified Backflow Prevention Assembly Testers and Repairers. All
individuals or companies who install, test, repair, overhaul, or maintain
backflow prevention assemblies within the City of Pembroke Pines Utilities
Service area, must submit the following current documents to the Building
Department:
         (a)   Certified Plumbing Contractor - State of Florida Occupational
License.
         (b)   County or City Local Business Tax Receipt from where the
business originates.
         (c)   Backflow Prevention Assembly Tester Certification for the
tester.
         (d)   Backflow Prevention Assembly Repair Certification for the repair
technician.
         (e)   Annual Testing Kit Calibration Report/Certification for the
testing kit that will be used by the plumber or technician.
Such individuals will be responsible for the following:
         (a)   Making competent installations, inspections, repairs and/or the
overhauling of backflow prevention assemblies.
         (b)   Making reports of such repairs to the consumer and responsible
authorities on forms approved by the city.
         (c)   Include the list of materials or replacement parts used.
         (d)   Maintain equipment and be competent to use all the necessary
tools, gauges, manometers and other equipment necessary to properly install,
test, repair, and maintain backflow prevention assemblies.
         (e)   Ensuring original manufactured parts are used in the
installation, repair and maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies.
         (f)   It will be the tester's further responsibility not to change the
installation, design, material or operational characteristics of an assembly
during installation, repair or maintenance without prior approval of the
Building Department.
         (g)   A certified tester and repairer will perform the work and be
responsible for the competency and accuracy of all tests and reports.
         (h)   Provide a copy of all test and repair reports to the consumer
and to the Building Department within ten business days of any completed test
or repair work.
         (i)   A certified tester shall maintain such records for a minimum
period of five years.
         (j)   Report to the Building Department if a containment backflow
prevention assembly has been by-passed or removed by the consumer.
         (k)   Carry all necessary credentials while testing and repairing
backflow prevention assemblies (e.g. tester and repairer certification, testing
kit calibration report) and present to city personnel upon request.
         (l)   The city reserves the right to prevent any testers or companies
from testing and repairing backflow prevention assemblies within the city's
service area due to falsification of records and non-compliance with the city's
Cross Connection Control Manual, the city at large, county and state
regulations, laws, etc.
It is the sole responsibility of the approved plumbing contractor to maintain
current, all required certifications, licenses, etc. Further, it is the
approved plumbing contractor's responsibility to submit all required
certifications to the Building Department to avoid any undue delays to the
consumer to whom services are being rendered. The Building Department may not
accept any test or repair report if any of the required certifications were
expired when services were performed.
City Utilities Personnel or their contractor may install dual check devices on
residential service meters without the requirements listed above.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
      APPROVED. Accepted by the Building Department, Director of Utilities or
his designee, as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this
Program, or as suitable for the proposed use.
      AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY. Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary
waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or
any natural source(s) such as well, spring, lake, pond, canal, river, stream,
etc., or "used waters" or "industrial fluids". These waters may be polluted or
contaminated or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water
source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control.
      BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
under pressure into the  distributing pipes of a potable water supply system
from any source or sources other than its intended source.
      BACKFLOW PREVENTER. A device, assembly or means designed to prevent
backflow. These devices or assemblies are described below:
         (a)   AIR-GAP. A physical separation between the free-flowing
discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure
receiving vessel. An "approved air gap separation" shall be at least double the
diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top of the rim of the
vessel. In no case shall it be less than one inch. When an air-gap is used at
the service connection to prevent the contamination or pollution of the public
potable water system and an emergency by-pass is desired to be installed around
the air-gap system, an approved reduced pressure principle assembly shall be
installed in the bypass system. Air gaps shall be inspected annually.
         (b)   APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Must include isolation
valves and test cocks to facilitate in-line testing and repair. The assembly
must appear on a current approval list from the American Society of Sanitary
Engineering (ASSE) or on a current approval list from the Foundation of Cross-
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research at the University of Southern
California (FCCC & HR @ USC).
         (c)   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY (DC). A testable assembly composed
of two single, independently acting, check valves, including tightly closing
shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for
testing the water tightness of each check valve, plus properly located test
cocks for the testing of each check valve. A check valve is a valve that is
drip-tight in the normal direction of flow when the inlet pressure is one psi
and the outlet pressure is zero. The check valve shall permit no leakage in a
direction reverse to the normal flow. The closure element (e.g., clapper) shall
be internally weighted or otherwise internally loaded to promote rapid and
positive closure. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance
specifications and approval of a recognized and city-approved testing agency
for backflow prevention assemblies. To be approved, these assemblies must be
readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing.
         (d)   DOUBLE CHECK DETECTOR ASSEMBLY (DCDA). A DCDA shall consist of a
main-line DC with a bypass (detector) arrangement around the main-line DC that
shall contain a bypass water meter and a bypass DC. The DCDA shall be installed
as an assembly as designed and constructed by the manufacturer. This assembly
shall only be used on fire lines to protect against non-health hazards.
         (e)   DUAL CHECK DEVICE (DuC). A compact unit manufactured with two
independent spring actuated check valves and meets ASSE Standard #1024.
         (f)   PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER (PVB). An assembly containing one
independently operated internally loaded check valve and an independently
operated internally loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the
check. Assembly includes tightly closing shut-off valves on the inlet and
outlet sides of the assembly and properly located test cocks.
         (g)    REDUCED-PRESSURE PRINCIPLE ASSEMBLY (RP). A device containing
within its structure a minimum of two independently acting approved check
valves, together with an automatically operating pressure differential relief
valve located between the two check valves. The first check valve reduces the
supply pressure a predetermined amount so that during normal flow and at
cessation of normal flow the pressure between the checks shall be less than the
supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential
relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the
pressure between the checks less than the supply pressure. The unit shall
include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and
each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. The entire
assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a
recognized and city-approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies.
To be approved, these assemblies must be readily accessible for in-line
maintenance and testing and be installed in a location where no part of the
assembly will be submerged.
         (h)    REDUCED-PRESSURE DETECTOR ASSEMBLY (RPDA). A RPDA shall consist
of a main-line RP with a bypass (detector) arrangement around the main-line RP
that shall contain a bypass water meter and a bypass RP. The  RPDA shall be
installed as an assembly as designed and constructed by the manufacturer. This
assembly shall be used on fire lines to protect against health hazards.
      BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY. A mechanical backflow preventer (i.e., DC,
PVB, DCVA, RP), used to prevent the backward flow of contaminants or pollutants
into a potable water distribution system. An assembly has a resilient seated,
full-flow shut-off valve before and after the backflow preventer making it
testable in-line. The assembly is shipped with the shut-off valves attached to
the backflow preventer. An assembly is labeled with the manufacture's symbol,
size, serial number, model number, the working pressure, and the direction of
flow. The Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research at the
University of Southern California tests and approves backflow prevention
assemblies.
      BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A means of backflow protection, usually
mechanical, that does not require shut-off valves and test cocks. Any backflow
prevention assembly without the shut-off valves is called a device. The
American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE) approves backflow prevention
devices.
      BACKPRESSURE. A pressure, higher than the supply pressure, caused by a
pump, elevated tank, boiler, or any other means that may cause backflow.
      BACKSIPHONAGE. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply system from any other
source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of
pressure in the potable water supply system.
      CERTIFIED TESTER or REPAIRER. A person who has proven his or her
competency to test, repair, overhaul and make reports on backflow prevention
assemblies as evidenced by certification of successful completion of American
Water Works Association (AWWA), American Backflow Prevention Association
(ABPA), American Society of Sanitary Engineering (ASSE), or International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), sanctioned training.
      CONSUMER (CUSTOMER). Any person, firm, or corporation responsible for any
property at which water from the city public water supply is  received; without
regard to whether the city is aware of the existence of such customer. In the
absence of other parties or the failure of other parties to accept the
responsibilities herein set forth, the owner of record shall be ultimately
responsible.
      CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system commencing at the point of
delivery and continuing throughout the consumer's plumbing system, located on
the consumer's premises, whether supplied by public potable water or an
auxiliary water supply. The system or systems may be either a potable water
system or an industrial piping system.
      CONTAMINATION. Means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by
sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a
degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or
through the spread of disease.
      CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or
fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems one of which contains
potable water and the other non-potable water or industrial fluids of
questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow by
backpressure or backsiphonage may occur into the potable water system. A water
service connection between a public potable water distribution system and a
customer's water distribution system which is cross-connection to a
contaminated fixture, industrial fluid system or with a potentially
contaminated supply or auxiliary water system, constitutes one type of cross-
connection. Other types of cross-connections include connectors such as swing
connections, removable sections, four-way valves, spools, dummy sections of
pipe, swivel or change-over devices, sliding multi-port tube, solid
connections, etc.
      CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL INSPECTOR. A person designated by the Director
to administer, to implement and enforce the provisions of this Program.
      CROSS-CONNECTIONS - CONTROLLED. A connection between a potable water
system and a non-potable water system with an approved backflow prevention
assembly properly installed that will continuously afford the protection
commensurate with the degree of hazard.
      CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL BY CONTAINMENT. The installation of an approved
backflow prevention assembly at the water service connection to any customer's
premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and
permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections
within the customer's water system; or, it shall mean the installation of an
approved backflow prevention assembly on the service line leading to and
supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or
potential cross-connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or
controlled at the point of cross-connection.
      DIRECTOR OF UTILITIES. The Director of the Utilities System, or his
designee in charge of the Water Department with the authority and
responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control
program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this Program.
      DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. Includes the network of conduits used for the
delivery of water from the source to the customer's system.
      HAZARD, DEGREE OF. The term is derived from an evaluation of the
potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the
potable water system.
         (a)   HAZARD–HEAL TH. Any condition, device or practice in the water
supply system and its operation which could create, or in the judgment of the
Director, or his designee may create a danger to the health and well-being of
the water consumer. An example of a health hazard is a structural defect,
including cross-connection, in a water supply system.
         (b)   HAZARD–PLUM BING. A plumbing type cross-connection in a
consumer's potable water system or to the potability of the public or the
consumer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be
aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its
appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health.
         (c)   HAZARD–POLL UTION. An actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the
consumer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be
aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its
appurtenances.
      HAZARD–SYSTEM. An actual or potential threat of severe damage to the
physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's
potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a
protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
      INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS SYSTEM. Any system containing a fluid or solution which
may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form
or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or
plumbing hazard is introduced into an approved water supply. This may include,
but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process
waters and "used waters" originating from the public potable water system which
may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating
acids and alkalis, circulated cooling water connected to an open cooling tower
and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized
with toxic substances; contaminated natural water such as from wells, springs,
streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils,
gases, glycerin, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquids and
gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for fire-fighting
purposes.
      ISOLATION. Isolation consists of two types, fixture isolation and area or
zone isolation. Isolation at a fixture means installing an approved backflow
preventer at the source of the potential contamination. Isolation at an area or
zone is confining the potential source of contamination within a specific area.
Isolation may be appropriate with or without containment depending on whether
the conditions create a health or non-health hazard.
      POINT OF DELIVERY. The point of delivery shall generally be at the
property line of the customer, adjacent to the public street where the city's
water mains are located; or at a point on the customer's property where the
meter is located. The point of delivery for all fire line connections shall be
considered as the point where the isolation valve is located, generally
adjacent to the public water mains. The customer shall be responsible for all
water piping, control devices and other appurtenances located on the customer's
side of the point of delivery.
      POLLUTION. Means the presence of any foreign substance (organic,
inorganic or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a
degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which
does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.
      PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM. Any pipe, system of pipes and other associated
facilities that are not part of the public water and are used in whole or in
part to convey, move or receive water, regardless of the source(s) of water in
such system.
      PROGRAM. This Cross Connection Control Program.
      PUBLIC POTABLE WATER SYSTEM. The potable water system owned, maintained
and operated by the city. This system includes all transmission and
distribution mains, lines, pipes, connections, storage tanks and other
facilities used to produce, treat, convey or store potable water for public
consumption or use.
      RESIDENTIAL SERVICE CONNECTION. Any service connection, including any
dedicated irrigation or fire service connection, that is two inches or less in
diameter and that supplies water to a building, or premises, containing only
dwelling units AND non-residential service connection (any other service
connection).
      SOURCE. Includes all components of the facilities utilized in the
production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the distribution
system.
      UTILITY SYSTEM. Consists of the source facilities and the distribution
system, and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the
complete control of the utility, up to the point where the customer's system
begins.
      WATER–NON POTABLE. Water which is not safe for human consumption or which
is of questionable potability.
      WATER–POTABLE. Any water which, according to recognized standards, is
safe for human consumption.
      WATER PURVEYOR. The term water purveyor shall mean the owner or operator
of the public potable water system supplying an approved water supply to the
public. As used herein, the terms water purveyor and City of Pembroke Pines may
be used synonymously.
      WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS. The terminal end of a service connection from
the public potable water system, i.e., where the water purveyor loses
jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to
the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service
connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the
meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of
any meter or backflow prevention assembly located at the point of delivery to
the customer's water system. Service connection shall also include water
service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency
water service connections from the public water system.
      WATER–USED. Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable
water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point
of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor.
   (D)   Policy.
      (1)   All new water service connections shall cause the service line to
be fitted by the customer with the following minimum backflow prevention
devices or those prescribed by FAC Table 62-555.360-2, whichever is more
stringent:
         (a)   Residential Service Connection - DuC Minimum (owned and
installed by city personnel when setting the meter) (refurbished or replaced
every ten years by city).
         (b)   Non-residential Service Connection - RP Minimum (tested annually
by customer)
      (2)   Meters which are replaced or changed by the water purveyor for
residential service connections two inch or less shall be fitted by the water
purveyor with a DuC backflow prevention device.
      (3)   Whenever the customer's premises is altered under a building permit
in a manner that could change the backflow protection required, a backflow
prevention device shall be installed by the customer.
      (4)   No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as
required by Chapter 62-555.360 of the Florida Administrative Code (FAC) and
this Program. Service of water to any premises may be discontinued by the water
purveyor if a backflow prevention assembly required by this Program is not
installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention
device or any water assembly has been removed, by-passed, or if an unprotected
cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until
such conditions or defects are corrected.
      (5)   The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all
reasonable times to authorized representatives of the City of Pembroke Pines to
determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards,
including violations of these regulations, exist. Water service may be
discontinued after reasonable notice to the consumer if a violation of this
Program exists on the premises, and such other precautionary measures may be
taken as are deemed necessary to eliminate any danger to the potable water.
Water service shall not be restored until the danger had been eliminated in
compliance with the provisions of this Program. If inspection access is not
granted, the connection shall be fitted with an RP assembly by the customer.
      (6)   An approved backflow-prevention assembly shall be installed by the
customer on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the
property line or immediately inside the building being served; but in all
cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the
following conditions exist:
         (a)   In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which
is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is
not acceptable as an additional source by the Director, or his designee, the
public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by
installing a backflow prevention assembly or device in the service line
appropriate to the degree of hazard.
         (b)   In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any
other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall
be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow
prevention assembly in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard.
This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from
the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality.
         (c)   In the case of premises having (1) internal cross-connections
that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or (2) intricate plumbing
and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not
readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or
impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the
public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by
installing a backflow prevention device assembly in the service line.
      (7)   The type of protection assemblies in division (C)(8) of this
section shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
         (a)   In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water
supply as stated in division (C)(2) of this section and it is not subject to
any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an
approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly.
         (b)   In the case of any premises where there is water or substance
that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the
public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved
dual or double check valve assembly as determined by the Director.
         (c)   In the case of any premises where there is any material
dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual
or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall
be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly. Example of premises where these
conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping station,
chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants.
         (d)   In the case of any problems where there are "un-controlled"
cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be
protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection.
         (e)   In case of any premises where, because of security requirements
or other prohibitions or restrictions it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be
protected against backflow by backpressure or backsiphonage from the premises
device in the service line. In this case, maximum protection will be required;
that is, an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed in each service to
the premises.
      (8)   The minimum backflow protection to be provided and the different
categories of facilities that require backflow preventers, as required by the
city, are listed in Table 62-555.360-2 of the Florida Administrative Code, as
may be amended from time to time.
      (9)   Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be of a
model and size approved by the Director of Utilities or his or her designee.
The term “Approved Backflow Prevention Assembly" shall mean a device that has
been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the
American Water Works Association entitled: 1.) AWWA C510-97 - Double Check
Valve Backflow Prevention Assembly and 2.) AWWA C511-97 Reduced Pressure
Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assembly, as may be
amended from time to time, as well as the standards set forth by the Foundation
for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of
Southern California for all devices, as may be amended from time to time.
      (10)   All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do
not meet the requirements of this section but were approved assemblies for the
purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been
properly maintained and tested yearly, may be excluded from the requirements of
these rules so long as the Director of Utilities is assured that they will
satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing assembly is
moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or
when the Director, or his designee, finds that the maintenance constitutes a
hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention assembly
meeting the requirements of this section.
      (11)   The Public Services Department shall evaluate the customer's
premises at an existing, i.e., previously constructed, service connection
whenever the customer connects to a reclaimed water distribution system,
whenever an auxiliary water system is discovered on the customer's premises,
whenever a prohibited or inappropriately protected cross-connection is
discovered on the customer's premises, or whenever the customer's premises is
altered in a manner that could change the backflow protection required at or
for a service connection to the customer.
         (a)   The owner/consumer or authorized representative shall accompany
the utilities representative during the inspection of the premise(s).
         (b)   A letter of notification shall be sent to the owner/consumer or
authorized representative indicating what corrective measures must be taken,
type of device or assembly that needs to be installed and time limit for the
installation to be completed.
         (c)   A questionnaire may be used to evaluate customers' premises.
Also, reviews of construction plans or pertinent records, on-site inspections,
or any combination thereof may be used for evaluations.
      (12)   A consumer must immediately notify the Public Services Department
if the consumer's potable water system is or has potentially been contaminated
or if there is a reason to believe that backflow has occurred from the
consumer's private water system to the public potable water system.
      (13)   No water will be supplied to any newly constructed service
connection with a backflow preventer that requires testing before the Public
Services Department receives a satisfactory test report.
   (E)   Testing and repair.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premises where
backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and
operational tests made at the required intervals. However, the Utilities
Director may provide testing and repair services to relieve the burden of the
consumer's responsibility and charge back to the consumer all fees associated
with the testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies. In those
instances where the Director of Utilities, or his designee, deems the hazard to
be great enough, he may require testing and inspections at more frequent
intervals. These inspections and tests shall be performed by a certified
individual approved by the Director of Utilities, or his designee. It shall be
the duty of the Director, or his designee, to see that these timely tests are
made. The customer-user shall notify the Director, or his designee, in advance
when the tests are to be undertaken by the customer user so that the Director
or the Director’s designee may witness the tests if it is so desired. These
assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the
customer-user whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Records of
such tests, repairs, and overhaul conducted by the consumer shall be kept by
the consumer for five years and copies of such tests, repairs, and overhaul
shall be sent to the Public Service Department Environmental Services Division
within ten business days after the completion of any testing and/or repair
work. This testing is not required on city installed dual check devices on
single family residential service connections.
      (2)   Any time that repairs to backflow prevention assemblies are deemed
necessary, whether through annual or required testing or routine inspection by
the owner or by the Department of Public Utilities, these repairs must be
completed within a specified time in accordance with the degree of hazard. In
no case shall this time period exceed: 15 days for Hazard– Health and 30 days
for Hazard–Plumbing/Pollution degrees of hazard.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall relieve the consumer of the responsibility for
conducting, or causing to be conducted, periodic surveys of water use practices
on his premises to determine where there are actual or potential cross-
connections in the consumer's water system through which contaminants or
pollutants could flow back into a public water system or potable consumer's
water system.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any customer or certified tester/repairer
to submit any record to the Public Services Department that is false or
incomplete in any material respect. It shall be unlawful for any customer or
certified tester to fail to submit to the Public Services Department any record
which is required by this Program. Such violations may result in any of the
enforcement actions outlined in “Penalty for Non-compliance” section (division
(G) of this section).
      (5)   A courtesy notice will be sent to the owner/consumer of record
prior to the testing or replacement due date as an advance notice of backflow
testing requirements. Lack of notice by the city does not relieve the owner/
consumer of the testing requirement. A subsequent notice will be sent if the
consumer fails to test the assembly by the required test due date. In the event
that the assembly is not tested or replaced after the second notice a final
notice will be sent and will require compliance within 30 days. Failure to
comply with the final notice shall be a violation of this Program and deemed to
be in non-compliance.
   (F)   Designated facilities.
      (1)   Facilities that have been identified where backflow preventers are
required are listed in Table 62-555.360-2 of the Florida Administrative Code,
as may be amended from time to time. All commercial or business enterprises
that are not residential are required to install an RP assembly.
      (2)   Backflow preventers may be required by the Director of Utilities,
or his designee, for other facilities not listed if deemed necessary to protect
the water system from possible contamination.
   (G)   Penalty for non-compliance.
      (1)   Water service may be discontinued after reasonable notice to the
customer if a violation of this Program exists on the premises, and such other
precautionary measures may be taken as are deemed necessary to eliminate any
danger to the potable water. Water service will be discontinued if the proper
backflow prevention assembly is not installed or not tested as required or not
repaired when the assembly fails to meet minimum design standards. Water
service shall not be restored until the danger had been eliminated in
compliance with the provisions of this Program.
      (2)   All field visits are subject to a charge and shall be paid by the
consumer as determined by City Fee Schedule.
      (3)   Failure of a customer to submit any record by a certified tester
required by this Program, or the submission of falsified reports/records may
result in a charge as enumerated in the City Fee Schedule.
   (H)   Records.
      (1)   An inventory of backflow prevention assemblies devices or air gaps
on non-fire flow lines will be maintained by the Public Services Department. An
inventory of backflow prevention assemblies on fire flow lines will be
maintained by the Fire Department Fire Prevention Division. This inventory
should include, at a minimum, the following:
         (a)   Location of the backflow preventer or air gap (adequate details
to locate the backflow preventer).
         (b)   Description of hazard isolated.
         (c)   Type, size, make, model, static line pressure, and serial number
of backflow prevention assembly or air-gap details.
         (d)   All field test reports should include at a minimum, the
following:
            1.   Name and certification number of the backflow prevention
assembly tester.
            2.   Field-test results.
            3.   Repairs performed to obtain acceptable test results.
            4.   Repair history.
            5.   Tester's signature.
            6.   Type, size, make, model, and serial number of backflow
prevention assembly or field tagging.
            7.   Test equipment calibration information.
            8.   Date and time of the test.
      (2)   The Public Services Department shall maintain all correspondence
with its customers for a minimum of seven years. (Ord. 1849, passed 8-17-16;
Am. Ord. 2008, passed 9-20-23)
SEWER
§ 50.51 GENERAL.
   Sections
50.01 through
50.14 of this Code of Ordinances apply equally to the city’s water and sewer
systems. This subchapter contains only those provisions which apply uniquely to
the sewer system.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.52 CHARGES AT INITIAL CONNECTION TO CITY SEWER SYSTEM.
   The following one-time sewer charges shall be paid by a developer at the
time of issuance of his certificate of occupancy, or by an existing property
owner at the time sewer service first is made available to his or her property.
   (A)   Sewer Connection Charge. The water connection charge shall be equal
to; 1,090.00 per ERC for all property located west of Flamingo Road and $90 per
ERC for all property located east of Flamingo Road effective January 1, 1992;
$1,706.00 per ERC for all property located west of Flamingo Road and $1,336 for
all property located east of Flamingo Road effective January 1, 1992;
subsequent years will be adjusted using the change in the Consumer Price Index
for all urban consumers in the United States - Water and Sewerage Maintenance
Series published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the 12 months ending
April of each year. These adjustments will be effective on the following
October 1.
   (B)   Sewer Construction Charge. As established by one or more prior
developer’s agreements related to sub-portions of the sewer system to serve the
current development.
   (C)   Reimbursement of City Costs. If the city constructs any facilities
specifically to serve the development. See §§
50.03 and
50.04.
   (D)   Sewer Reserved Capacity Charge. As defined in §
50.01.
   (E)   Sewer Tapping Charge. Each customer shall be charged a sewer service
tapping charge in accordance with §
50.08(B) for each sewer service lateral constructed by the city to serve the
property.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 723, passed 2-6-85; Am. Ord. 1852, passed
9-7-16; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.53 SEWER SECURITY DEPOSITS.
   Each customer shall pay a water and sewer security deposit in accordance
with §
50.08(B).
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.54 MONTHLY SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
   Monthly sewer service charges shall include a minimum charge per month for
each dwelling unit and/or business unit served, to cover administrative costs
and the thousands of gallons of service received up to a specified minimum per
month per dwelling unit and/or business unit, plus a charge per 1,000 gallons
above the stated minimum per unit. Monthly sewer service charges shall be based
upon readings of the water meter or an authorized sewer meter, and shall be as
indicated in the following table. In the table, the term “per unit” means per
each dwelling unit and/or business unit served by a customer.
 
Customer Type*              Gallons Minimum Per Unit  Gallons Over Minimum 1/1/
                                    1/1/2018          2018
Single Family / Multi-Unit  3,000   $22.50            $6.83
Commercial and C.B. Smith   3,000   $22.50            $6.83
Holly Lakes                 3,000   $22.50            $6.83
South Florida State         1,000   $6.83             $6.83
Hospital
Everglades Holiday Park and 0       $22.50            $6.83
Broward Correctional
 
*Rates not shown shall be as determined by the City Utilities Division on a
case-by-case basis, based upon factors that include comparable uses in other
jurisdictions, industry standards and other reliable sources of information.
Adjustments.
   (A)   Pool Credit - In accordance with §
50.55(B), water required to fill a completely drained swimming pool shall not
be discharged into the city sewer system. Therefore, water used in filling a
completely drained swimming pool shall not be included as the basis for a
monthly sewer service charge. The city shall calculate the volume of water used
for filling the pool. The sewer service charge for that month shall be based
upon the volume of the pool minus the average of the previous six-month water
consumption.
   (B)   Partial Sewer Credit - Metered water which is leaked to the ground may
be eligible for a sewer credit. The customer shall supply a copy of a plumbers
repair bill within 60 days of the discovery of the leak. The city may issue a
credit based on the difference between the previous six-month water consumption
and the consumption during the month of the leak.
   (C)   In addition to the above, monthly billings shall include any of the
following charges which are applicable.
      (1)   Penalty Charges. See §
50.08.
      (2)   Excess Pollutants Surcharge. An excess pollutants surcharge shall
be added to a residential or commercial customer’s monthly service charge if
that customer’s sewage contains either more than 300 ppm of BOD or more than
300 ppm of SS. A surcharge will be added in any month during which any analysis
of the user’s sewage, either scheduled or unscheduled, indicates a
concentration of greater than 300 ppm for either pollutant. Once established, a
surcharge will be added for each succeeding month, and shall continue until
analysis of samples of the user’s sewage taken in each of three consecutive
months indicate average concentrations of less than 300 ppm for each pollutant.
(See Note, following.)
The surcharge shall be computed for each month by the following formulas:
XPS =      (MTG) x (XPR) x (XBD + XSS)
XPS =      Excess Pollutants Surcharge
MTG =   User’s Metered Thousand Gallons for the month = Same as for base
monthly service charge
XPR =      Excess Pollutants Rate = (Total O & M costs of city sewer system for
preceding fiscal year) divided by (Total Thousands of Gallons of sewage billed
to customers by the city during the preceding fiscal year) divided by (300 ppm,
maximum concentration in sanitary sewage).
XBD =      Excess BOD Concentration = (ppm of BOD in Customer’s Sewage) minus
300. See Note, below.
XSS =      Excess SS Concentration = (ppm of SS in Customer’s Sewage) minus
300. See Note, below.
NOTE:   For the first month that an XPS is added, the ppm of pollutants used in
computing XBD and XSS shall be the largest concentration determined in any
analysis conducted during that month. The same values shall be continued in
succeeding months, unless any subsequent analysis is higher, or analyses taken
in each of three consecutive months indicate an average concentration that is
more than 5% below the current value. Nothing in these provisions shall be
construed as a requirement that analyses must be conducted monthly. A three-
month series of analyses shall be initiated only if specifically desired by
either the city or the customer.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1414, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord.1888, passed
10-4-17; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.55 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES INTO CITY SEWER SYSTEM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to discharge into the city
sewer system any of the following substances, under any circumstances.
   (A)   Cooling water or condensate from air-conditioning or refrigeration
equipment.
   (B)   Overflow or drain water from a swimming pool or water storage tank.
   (C)   Discharge from roof drains or any other storm drainage system.
   (D)   Gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive
liquid, gas or solid.
   (E)   Petroleum products used in vehicles, industrial processes, or paving
of surfaces.
   (F)   Mineral or vegetable distillates, synthetic compounds, vehicles, or
pigments from the manufacture or use of paints.
   (G)   Any improperly shredded wastes from the preparation, cooking or
dispensing of food. Such wastes are properly shredded only if all particles can
be freely transported under flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle having any one dimension greater than one-half inch.
   (H)   Any wastes containing at any one time more than 100 ppm of any grease,
oil, or oily substance; or a daily average concentration of said substances at
over 25 ppm.
   (I)   Any waters or wastes containing any toxic or poisonous or corrosive
substance in sufficient quantities as either to constitute a hazard to humans
or animals, either during transportation or treatment of the sewage or in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant discharge, or to interfere with
proper operation and maintenance of the sewage transportation and treatment
facilities. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, prohibiting any
of the following substances in concentrations greater than the maximums shown:
Substances           Maximum Concentration (ppm)
Cyanides             0.01
Copper, total        0.5
Chromium, hexavalent 0.5
Chromium, total      1.0
Cadmium              0.5
Zinc, total          1.0
Phenols              0.005
 
   (J)   Wastes generated from the cleaning or emptying of any grease trap,
pretreatment process, or septic tank.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.56 REQUIRED USE OF GREASE TRAPS.
   Any facility engaged in operations producing greasy wastes, including but
not limited to preparation or serving of food for consumption by more than one
family, shall install and operate grease traps sufficient to ensure compliance
with §
50.55(H). Grease traps shall be inspected and cleaned on a schedule that
assures continued proper functioning in accordance with the requirements of the
city's Fats Oils and Grease (FOG) program, as promulgated by the City Utility
Director.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.57 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR SOME COMMERCIAL SEWER CUSTOMERS AND ALL INDUSTRIAL
SEWER CUSTOMERS.
   The city sewer system is designed and constructed primarily for collection
and transmission of sanitary sewage. Therefore, it is the policy of the city
that any customer engaged in any business that generates liquid wastes which
can be expected to have, prior to any pretreatment, one or more characteristics
exceeding the limits listed in the §
50.01 definition of sanitary sewage shall:
   (A)   Include pretreatment process and/or facilities into the design and
operation of his business. Unless issued a specific permit to do otherwise, the
pretreatment shall ensure that sewage discharged into the city sewer system
meets or exceeds the criteria defined in this section for sanitary sewage.
   (B)   At the time of application for connection to the sewer system, also
apply for a permit to operate the pretreatment processes. The application shall
include a description of the waste characteristics prior to pretreatment, a
description of the proposed pretreatment to be applied, and a description of
the sewage characteristics proposed for discharge into the sewer system. The
permit will be issued only if:
      (1)   The discharge will meet or exceed the criteria for sanitary sewage.
      (2)   Or, meeting those criteria is not economically feasible, the
proposed characteristics are as close to sanitary sewage as is economically
feasible, and the proposed characteristics will not produce an unacceptable
potential hazard to public health and safety, or potential adverse impact upon
the sewer system or treatment processes.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the permit, pay a permit fee in accordance with §
50.08(B).
   (D)   The permit shall stipulate the specific conditions which the operation
shall satisfy, and the period for which the permit shall be effective. In
general, if the permit allows discharges exceeding the sanitary sewage
criteria, then the permit shall stipulate a one year period of effectiveness,
and require that the property owner construct and maintain facilities suitable
for monitoring and metering the sewage prior to discharge into the sewer
system. Prior to the end of the effective period, the property owner shall
apply for a new permit. That application shall include analyses of actual
characteristics of the wastes before and after pretreatment, performed within
ten days of the date of application. Each new permit shall require payment of a
new permit fee in accordance with §
50.08(B).
   (E)   If the permit is for discharges meeting the sanitary sewage criteria,
then no special monitoring facilities shall be required. However, the owner
shall submit annual analyses of his sewage before and after pretreatment, and
the city shall randomly require submittal of unscheduled analyses. The permit
shall have an indefinite effective period. However, it shall be canceled at any
time that the owner fails to take timely action to correct any violations of
the terms of the permit.
   (F)   If, at any time in the future, the City Commission authorizes
connection to the city’s sewer system by an “EPA Contributing Industry”, as
defined herein, then a permit issued to that customer shall require compliance
with “Pretreatment Standards for Incompatible Pollutants” as described in
Federal Regulations 40 CFR 128.133, and any other regulations as shall be
established from time to time by appropriate governmental regulating agencies.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.58 CONTROL OF INFILTRATION AND INFLOW INTO SEWER SYSTEM.
   The intentional introduction into the sewer system of groundwater
infiltration or surface inflow of storm waters shall not be allowed. However,
it is realized that it cannot be totally prevented. Plumbing to connect to the
city sewer system shall be designed, constructed and maintained in such a
manner as to minimize such occurrences. If analysis by the city indicates that
excessive infiltration or inflow is entering the system through privately owned
plumbing, the customer shall be requested to repair or modify his plumbing so
as to reduce the infiltration/inflow to acceptable limits. Failure to comply
shall result in a surcharge being added to the customer’s monthly service
charge. The surcharge shall be equal to the then existing rate per thousand
gallons times the city’s estimate of thousands of gallons of infiltration/
inflow entering the system through the customer’s plumbing.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.59 CLOSE OUT OF SEPTIC TANKS.
   Whenever a property being served by a septic tank is connected to the city
sewer system, the septic tank shall be abandoned in accordance with the laws of
the State of Florida including, but not limited to, completely emptied, pumped
out and disposed of by a contractor licensed for such disposal. In particular,
the contents shall not be drained into the adjoining ground, nor discharged
into the sewer system. After the tank has been emptied, a hole shall be punched
in the bottom of the tank, and the tank shall be filled with sand.
(Ord. 641, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
§ 50.60 MAINTENANCE OF WATER METER BOXES.
   Maintenance of water meter boxes which are provided by the city as part of
the water service connection shall be the responsibility of the customer. Water
meter boxes must be maintained plumb, level and free of landscaping, plant
roots, dirt and debris.
(Ord. 1978, passed 11-17-21)
CHAPTER 51: PUBLIC WATERWAYS
Section
   
51.01   Swimming, fishing, trespassing, and the like prohibited
   
51.02   Motorboats on city waterways
§ 51.01 SWIMMING, FISHING, TRESPASSING, AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   PRIVATE WATERWAY. Any body of water surrounded by private property
whereby adjacent and surrounding property owners own and exercise control over
the waterway. This shall include, but not be limited to lakes, ponds, and
canals.
      (2)   PUBLIC WATERWAY. Those bodies of water to which the general public
has a right of access and which are usually accessible to the neighboring
public.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than adjacent and
surrounding property owners, their families, and guests, to swim, fish, boat,
or otherwise trespass in, on, or upon any privately or publicly owned waterway,
pond, lake, canal, or other body of water when such activity is within 100 feet
of a private residence and is so posted. Any person in violation of this
section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (C)   Upon the joint recommendation of the Recreation Department and the
Chief of Police, with area maps provided, the City Commission, upon a majority
vote, may from time to time designate public fishing areas which shall be
exempt from this section.
(`69 Code, § 12-17) (Ord. 262, passed 8-4-71; Am. Ord. 484, passed 1-8-79)
Penalty, see S
10.99
§ 51.02 MOTORBOATS ON CITY WATERWAYS.
   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any motorboats on any
waterways within the territorial limits of the city. However, boats powered by
electric motors shall be permitted.
(`69 Code, § 12-19.6) (Ord. 374, passed 9-16-74) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 52: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Note: Parts of this Chapter are currently being revised as part of the new Land
Development Code. To view: https://www.ppines.com/1357/Land-Development-Code
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Sidewalk maintenance by abutting property owner
   
52.02   Tree maintenance by property owner
   
52.03   Ownership
   
52.04   Violation notice
   
52.05   Lien
Numbering Buildings, City Streets
   
52.10   System of numbering business and residential buildings
   
52.11   City streets to have both name and number
Swales
   
52.20   Definitions
   
52.21   Application of regulations
   
52.22   Purpose of swales
   
52.23   Alteration, paving of swale; permit required
   
52.24   Construction, maintenance requirements
   
52.25   Maintenance by abutting property owners
   
52.26   Driveways across swale areas
   
52.27   (Reserved)
   
52.28   Violation; notice, abatement
Newsracks on Public Rights-of-Way
   
52.30   Purpose and scope
   
52.31   Definitions
   
52.32   Applicability
   
52.33   Newsrack placement
   
52.34   Newsrack design guidelines
   
52.35   Newsrack maintenance requirements
   
52.36   Newsrack sign requirements
   
52.37   Emergency removal of newsracks
   
52.38   Abandonment
   
52.39   Penalty
Bus Bench/Shelter Guidelines
   
52.50   Bus bench/shelter placement
   
52.51   Bus bench/shelter design guidelines
   
52.52   Bus bench/shelter maintenance requirements
   
52.53   Bus bench/shelter sign requirements
Streetscape Design
   
52.60   Streetscape Design Guidelines
 
   
52.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Vehicles not to damage paved roads, see §
71.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE BY ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow the sidewalks, driveways, or
alleys abutting or lying adjacent or contiguous to a privately owned lot, plot,
tract, or parcel of land, whether vacant, occupied, or built upon and used for
business purposes or as a private residence, to remain in a condition which
renders them unsafe or inconvenient to use for the purpose for which they were
intended by the general public.
(`69 Code, § 13-2) (Ord. 495, passed 1-29-79)
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.02 TREE MAINTENANCE BY PROPERTY OWNER.
   It shall be the responsibility of private property owners to maintain trees
located upon their property or within swale areas immediately adjacent thereto
so that trees located upon such areas do not interfere with or diminish street
light illumination.
(Ord. 880, passed 1-25-89) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 OWNERSHIP.
   The records in the office of the Tax Assessor of the county showing that the
abutting property owner is the owner of the land on the day the owner is
charged with a violation of this subchapter shall be prima facie proof of
ownership and if the sidewalk, driveway, or alley is found to be maintained in
violation of the provisions of this subchapter, such owner shall be subject to
fine or imprisonment.
(Ord. 765, passed 12-4-85) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 VIOLATION NOTICE.
   Whenever any sidewalk, driveway, or alley is maintained or operated in
violation of the provisions of this subchapter, the Code Enforcement Department
shall issue to the abutting property owner a notice of violation setting forth
the nature of the violation and ordering its correction or removal within 15
days from the date of the servicing of the notice on the abutting property
owner. Such notice shall further state that if the property owner does correct
or remove the conditions which violate this subchapter within 15 days, the city
shall do so and the cost shall be charged to the abutting property owner.
(Ord. 765, passed 12-4-85)
§ 52.05 LIEN.
   A lien may be imposed on such abutting property of this owner and enforced
and collected in accordance with the ordinances and Charter of the city and the
laws of the state.
(Ord. 765, passed 12-4-85)
NUMBERING BUILDINGS, CITY STREETS
§ 52.10 SYSTEM OF NUMBERING BUSINESS AND RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Single-family homes and duplexes. The owner of any single-family home
or duplex facing, abutting, opening upon, or having its main entrance onto any
public or private street, avenue, terrace, lane, or road located within the
city shall have affixed thereto numbers not less than three inches in height,
indicating the street address of the home or duplex. In addition, numbers may
also be placed on a mailbox or lamppost.
   (B)   Apartment buildings and the like.
      (1)   All apartment buildings, commercial buildings, industrial
buildings, and multi-story
buildings within the city shall be numbered with the street address, with the
numbers being not less than six, nor more than nine inches in height.
      (2)   In addition to the provisions of subdivision (1), all commercial,
industrial, and non-residential multi-story buildings having a rear and/or side
door shall be numbered with the street address on the front and rear and/or
side door, with the numbers being not less than six, nor more than nine inches
in height.
      (3)   Apartments and multistory buildings, which abut a street or road
and are not guarded or enclosed, having a rear/or side door shall be numbered
with the street address on the front and rear or side door, with the numbers
being not less than six, nor more than nine inches in height.
      (4)   Street addresses shall be included in all signs authorized in §
155.324(c)(5) of the Code of Ordinances and all outparcel monument signs.
   (C)   Offices and the like. All multifamily units, suites, rooms, and
offices shall be numbered on the doors thereof, with all units on the first
floor commencing with number 101 and all units on subsequent floors commencing
with the number of the floor, as 201, 301, and the like. All numbers shall not
be less than two inches in height. A directional sign indicating the numbering
sequence shall be prominently displayed in all elevator lobbies.
   (D)   Numbers to be kept in good condition. The owner shall maintain numbers
on his building provided herein in good condition and in a conspicuous place
where they can be seen and read from the street. For the purpose of this
section, the word OWNER shall include a lessee or agent in charge of the
building.
   (E)   Required for issuance certificate of occupancy. All numbering required
pursuant to this section shall be completed prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for the building.
   (F)   Numbering done by city. In the event any owner fails to number or
renumber any building as required by this section, the city may cause this to
be done and bill the owner for the cost, which cost shall constitute a lien
against the property until paid in full.
   (G)   Conformance required. All structures erected in the city, whether for
single-family occupancy or for multi-family occupancy, or for commercial or
industrial usage, or any structure for any purpose whatsoever shall conform to
a uniform numbering system. All streets, whether named or numbered in any
proposed development, shall be approved by the city’s building official. At the
time of approval, all structures shall be designated with a numerical series of
identification for the purpose of addresses and numbers, to be located on these
structures in conformity with this section.
(`69 Code, § 13-1) (Ord. 407, passed 8-16-76; Am. Ord. 554, passed 12-11-80;
Am. Ord. 1201, passed 1-8-97) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.11 CITY STREETS TO HAVE BOTH NAME AND NUMBER.
   (A)   All streets that have solely a name shall be given a numerical
designation and all street signs shall bear both the name and the numerical
designation.
   (B)   The requirements of this section shall apply to all existing and
future street name and designation activities within the city.
(Ord. 658, passed 6-1-83)
SWALES
§ 52.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SWALES or SWALE AREA. The land area immediately adjacent to the paved road
surface and lying between the edge of the road pavement and the lot line of the
paved sidewalk or the property line.
(`69 Code, § 13-26) (Ord. 61, passed 10-1-62; Am. Ord. 466, passed 5-15-78; Am.
Ord. 1476, passed 12-17-03)
§ 52.21 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   The terms and provisions of this subchapter shall apply and be enforced
against all swales and swale conditions existing in the city. Median strips
shall not be included in the effect of this subchapter.
(`69 Code, § 13-27) (Ord. 61, passed 10-1-62; Am. Ord. 156, passed 3-6-67; Am.
Ord. 466, passed 5-15-78)
§ 52.22 PURPOSE OF SWALES.
   The swale area is intended to be utilized for draining surface waters from
adjacent roadways and private property by percolation of the water through the
soil. The swales lying within the city’s boundaries, when properly constructed
and maintained, effectively control the drainage of surface waters where there
is an absence of other methods of drainage. The interference with the
prescribed contours, the planting of trees or plants, and the use of materials
which hinder the percolation of water through the swales seriously affect the
drainage function of the swale areas, are a traffic hazard and health hazard,
and cause damage to the road adjacent to the swales.
(`69 Code, 13-28) (Ord. 62, passed 10-1-63; Am. Ord. 466, passed 5-15-78)
§ 52.23 ALTERATION, PAVING OF SWALE; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter the existing contours of the
swales, or pave the same as provided in §
52.24, without first obtaining a permit from the Building and Zoning
Department. The person or firm seeking such a permit shall first submit plans
and specifications to the Building and Zoning Department and shall comply with
the conditions prescribed by the Department.
(`69 Code, § 13-29) (Ord. 61, passed 10-1-62; Am. Ord. 466, passed 5-15-78)
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.24 CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   The following shall be minimum standards for construction and maintenance of
swale areas:
   (A)   Paved swales are prohibited except in commercially or industrially
zoned areas wherein the property owner may pave the swale area, provided that
prior to paving, he obtains a permit from the Building and Zoning Department
and provided for subsurface drainage or other facilities to drain the adjacent
land without runoff onto the lands of other property owners or onto the public
right-of-way.
   (B)   The use and installation of any type of impervious paving, lime rock,
or stabilizing material to the swale area is prohibited.
   (C)   Grass sodding or grass seeding of the swale area is permitted and
encouraged. The planting of single-trunk trees shall be permitted in swale
areas, with the exception of any causuarina trees (Australian pine trees),
melaleuca trees, brazilian pepper, rubber trees, black olive, avocado,
chinaberry, jambolin, mango, schefflera, tropical almond, bishop trees, citrus,
java plum, or ficus tree, so long as the following conditions are complied
with:
      (1)   Trees shall be planted not closer to the street pavement than one-
half the distance between the sidewalk and the street paving, or in the event
that a sidewalk does not exist, not closer than one-half the distance between
the property line and the street pavement.
      (2)   Trees shall not be planted closer together than 25 feet and on
corner lots shall be planted not less than 20 feet from the intersection of any
street lines or street lines produced.
      (3)   No trees shall be permitted which are less than six feet in height
at the time of planting.
      (4)   All trees shall be kept trimmed by the owner and shall have a
clearance of at least eight feet and six inches (8.5 feet) above the sidewalk
and 14 feet and six inches (14.5 feet) above the street level so as to permit
pedestrian and vehicular traffic beneath them without interference. In areas
with a guardrail, trees or tree limbs over the roadway and shoulder shall have
a vertical clearance of 14 feet and six inches (14.5 feet) from the face of the
guardrail.
      (5)   If any trees, hedges, or other plant growth shall cause damage or
destruction to any sidewalk, curb, gutter, street pavement, utility line, or
other city-owned or publicly-owned property, the Director of Public Works shall
notify the owner of the trees by notice in writing to cut down, destroy, or
remove such trees within ten days from the date of receipt of the notice. In
the event the owner shall fail or refuse to cut down, destroy, or remove the
trees, within ten days, the Director of Public Works shall cause the trees to
be removed or destroyed and shall charge the cost thereof against the owner.
The amount of the cost to the city shall be constituted as a lien upon the
property.
      (6)   Property owners shall be responsible for the trimming of any tree
which is located on the property owner’ s front yard or in the swale area
immediately adjacent thereto. The property owner shall
be responsible for maintaining the trees such that they do not interfere with
or diminish street light illumination.
      (7)   If any trees, hedges, or other plant growth shall interfere with or
diminish street light illumination, the Director of Public Works shall notify
the abutting property owner in writing to trim such trees within ten days from
the date of receipt of the notice. In the event the abutting property owner
fails or refuses to trim trees, the Director of Public Works shall cause the
trees to be trimmed and shall charge the cost thereof against the abutting
property owner. The amount of the cost to the city shall be constituted as a
lien upon the abutting property owner’s property.
      (8)   Trees shall not be planted closer than 20 feet from a street light
pole, street number sign, traffic sign, traffic signal pole, or fire hydrant.
   (D)   Swales shall be constructed and maintained as shown in the sketch on
file in the Building and Zoning Department.
   (E)   Paved areas on private property shall not be permitted to drain on the
public right-of-way.
   (F)   Dome-shaped decorative blocks or markers shall not constitute items
which interfere with the drainage of the swale areas and shall specifically be
permitted along street rights-of-way, drives, and public walks in the city.
These dome- shaped decorative blocks or markers shall have rounded surface
areas and no corners which make a right angle projection corner interface. In
the event that dome-shaped decorative blocks or markers are placed in the swale
area, which shall be expressly permitted, then they shall be painted white or
with a white reflective material.
   (G)   Concrete catch basin aprons may be installed in the area surrounding
the catch basin where, in the judgment of the City Engineer, such installation
will not adversely affect the drainage or percolation of the swale in the
vicinity. An authorization permit shall be issued by the City Engineer for each
instance where a concrete catch basin apron has been requested by the property
owner.
   (H)   Concrete valley gutters or curb, and gutters shall be required in the
roadway swale areas where the longitudinal slopes for the roadway pavement is
less than the 0.5% or where the clear width of the roadway swale between the
edge of roadway pavement and the sidewalk is less than eight feet. (`69 Code, §
13-30)
(Ord. 61, passed 10-1-62; Am. Ord. 263, passed 8-16-71; Am. Ord. 466, passed 5-
15-78; Am. Ord. 880, passed 1-25-89; Am. Ord. 977, passed 11-20-91; Am. Ord.
2019, passed 4-17-24) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.25 MAINTENANCE BY ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   The abutting property owners are required to maintain the swales which
abuts their property in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The records in the office of the Tax Assessor of the county showing
that the abutting property owner is the owner of the land on the day the owner
is charged with a violation of this chapter shall be prima facie proof of
ownership and on the finding of a court of competent jurisdiction or other
governmental body authorized by the City Code or Charter that the swale
abutting the owner’s property is maintained in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, such owner shall be subject to fine or imprisonment.  
(`69 Code, § 13-32) (Ord. 61, passed 10-1-62; Am. Ord. 466, passed 5-15-78; Am.
Ord. 1278, passed 9-2-98; Am. Ord. 1476, passed 12-17-03) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.26 DRIVEWAYS ACROSS SWALE AREAS.
   (A)   Upon proper application, the Building and Zoning Department shall
issue permits for the paving or repaving of driveway entrances over and across
swale areas in accordance with the following dimensions, provided a 2-1/2 foot
radius is utilized for the flange portion where the paved area joins the paved
portion of the road right-of-way:
Lot size Double Drive Single Drive
                      (Circular Drive Incl.)
         Minimum      Maximum Minimum
Lot size  Double Drive Single Drive
                       (Circular Drive Incl.)
          Minimum      Maximum Minimum
50 - 60   16           None    None
61 - 70   16           10      10
71 - 75   16           11      10
76 - 80   16           12      10
81 - 85   16           13      10
86 - 90   16           14      10
91 - 95   16           15      10
96 - 100  16           16      10
101 - 105 16           17      10
106 - 110 16           18      10
 
   (B)   Lot size shall be determined by adding the length of the rear lot line
to the length of the front lot line and dividing such sum by two.
   (C)   Driveways constructed in the public right-of-way may be constructed of
nonasphalt materials provided, however, the city shall not be responsible for
replacing or repairing nonasphalt driveways unless the property owner pays the
cost thereof to the city within 90 days after work by the city has commenced in
the road right-of-way.
   (D)   Driveways in the swale area must be graded flat from the sidewalk
straight to the roadway pavement without any dip.
(`69 Code, § 13-31) (Ord. 61, passed 10-1-62; Am. Ord. 466, passed § 5-15-78;
Am. Ord. 480, passed 12.18-78; Am. Ord. 973, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 977,
passed 11-20-91; Am. Ord. 1859, passed 10-19-16; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-
17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.27 (RESERVED).
§ 52.28 VIOLATION; NOTICE, ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever any swale area is maintained, constructed, or operated in
violation of the provisions of this subchapter, the Public Works Department
shall issue to the abutting property owner a notice of violation setting forth
the nature of the violation and ordering its correction or removal within 15
days from the date of the serving of the notice on the abutting property owner.
Such notice shall further state that if the property owner does not correct or
remove the conditions which violate this subchapter within fifteen days, the
city shall do so and the cost shall be charged to the abutting property owner.
   (B)   A lien may be imposed on such abutting property of this owner and
enforced and collected in accordance with the ordinances and charter of the
city and the laws of the state.
(`69 Code, § 13-34) (Ord. 61, passed 10-1-62; Am. Ord. 466, passed 5-15-78)
NEWSRACKS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 52.30 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   In order to promote public health, safety and welfare, as well as a positive
aesthetic character in and around the city, this section shall:
   (A)   Provide for pedestrian and vehicular safety and convenience.
   (B)   Restrict unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, including ingress or egress, from any residence or place of
business, or by persons attempting to exit or enter, parked or standing
vehicles, from the street to the sidewalk.
   (C)   Provide for public and property safety during inclement weather.
   (D)   Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of poles, posts,
traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, and any location used for public
transportation purposes.
   (E)   Require removal or relocation of newsracks which have created visual
blight on the rights-of-way or unreasonably detracted from the aesthetics of
adjacent businesses, landscaping or other improvements.
   (F)   Ensure a diversity of view points, consistent with the First Amendment
to the United States Constitution, and treat all newspapers and other lawful
publications equal, regardless of their content.
(Ord. 1659, passed 3-17-10)
§ 52.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   CITY. The City of Pembroke Pines, a Florida municipal corporation, as
geographically described in the City Charter.
   CITY MANAGER. The Pembroke Pines City Manager or a designated representative
thereof.
   COMPARTMENT. A space or set of divided spaces, built into a newsrack, with
such space or set of divided spaces being secured by a single door which
provides access to the publication or publications, contained therein.
   LICENSEE. Any person, individual, partnership, corporation, association,
firm, company, organization, or any other legal entity which owns, places, or
maintains a newsrack in the city.
   MODULAR NEWSRACK. A newsrack that is designed with multiple, separate,
enclosed compartments to accommodate, at any one time, the display, sale or
distribution of more than one separate and distinct publication.
   NEWSRACKS. Modular newsracks approved through a license agreement with the
city.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any public street, highway, sidewalk, parkway, swale or
alley.
(Ord. 1659, passed 3-17-10)
§ 52.32 APPLICABILITY.
   The installation of newsracks shall only be permitted as part of a license
agreement with the city. It shall be unlawful for any newsrack provider to
install, erect, place, maintain, use, or operate any newsrack or base that does
not conform to the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1659, passed 3-17-10)
§ 52.33 NEWSRACK PLACEMENT.
   (A)   Newsracks shall be located along commercial corridors subject to
approval by the City Manager or his or her designee. Placement priority shall
be given adjacent to bus stops.
   (B)   There shall be a limit of one newsrack at each qualifying location.
   (C)   Each newsrack shall be anchored properly on a concrete slab/
foundation.
   (D)   All newsrack installations shall conform to applicable federal, state,
and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including, but not limited
to, the Americans with Disabilities Act and all Florida Department of
Transportation requirements.
(Ord. 1659, passed 3-17-10)
§ 52.34 NEWSRACK DESIGN GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Design of newsracks shall be compatible with community character.
   (B)   Newsracks shall be uniform in design and color throughout the city.
   (C)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall review and have final
approval of all design proposals/design modifications for newsracks.
(Ord. 1659, passed 3-17-10)
§ 52.35 NEWSRACK MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Licensee shall replace or recondition, to the satisfaction of the
city, newsracks which the city determines are no longer good or in serviceable
condition.
   (B)   Licensee shall be responsible for maintenance of litter/trash adjacent
to newsrack location.
(Ord. 1659, passed 3-17-10)
§ 52.36 NEWSRACK SIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   One sign panel may be permitted on the rear of the newsrack units.
Sign panels shall have a standard advertising panel size which shall not exceed
36 square feet. Panels which deviate from the standard advertising panel design
and construction shall require approval from the City Manager or his or her
designee. In addition, the city shall be permitted to display public community
service signs on any newsrack location as approved by the city and licensee.
   (B)   Advertising for such panels shall not contain adult material as
defined in the Code of Ordinances of the city.
   (C)   Each newsrack shall display a name, address and telephone number of
the licensee, or legal entity who is responsible for the newsrack and who may
be contacted, at any time concerning the newsrack, in such a manner as to be
readily visible and readable to all prospective customers.
   (D)   Each coin-operated compartment within a newsrack shall display,
directly on the coin box itself and in such a manner as to be readily visible
and readable to all prospective customers, the name, address and telephone
number of the individual, or legal entity who is responsible for the
publication in that compartment and who may be contacted, at any time,
concerning reimbursement in case of coin mechanism failure.
(Ord. 1659, passed 3-17-10)
§ 52.37 EMERGENCY REMOVAL OF NEWSRACKS.
   Emergency removal: Where the installation, use, or maintenance of a newsrack
poses an imminent danger to pedestrians or vehicles, becomes a health or safety
hazard for pedestrians or vehicles, or otherwise unreasonably interferes with
the safe use of any right-of-way or other public property, the City Manager, or
his or her designee, may remove the newsrack and/or base immediately. Within
five days of removal, the city shall notify the newsrack provider, in writing.
The newsrack provider may reclaim the offending newsrack upon repayment of the
reasonable costs associated with the removal and storage of same. The city is
not responsible for any damage caused to a newsrack which it removes for being
in violation of this subchapter. If the newsrack provider fails to reclaim the
subject newsrack within 45 days after notice of removal, the newsrack may be
disposed of by the city, in any manner which it deems appropriate.
(Ord. 1659, passed 3-17-10)
§ 52.38 ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   In the event an individual newsrack remains empty, of publications,
for a period of 45 days, the city shall notify the licensee of the newsrack
status in writing. Upon notice of abandonment, the newsrack provider shall
remove the abandoned newsrack from the site at their own cost. If the newsrack
provider fails to reclaim the subject newsrack within 45 days after notice of
removal, the newsrack may be disposed of by the city, in any manner which it
deems appropriate. The city is not responsible for any damage caused to a
newsrack which it removes for being in violation of this subchapter.
   (B)   At least 50% of the compartments contained in a modular newsrack shall
be occupied at all times. Any modular newsrack failing to maintain the 50%
occupancy requirement for over 45 days, shall be deemed abandoned by the city.
If the modular newsrack is placed by a modular newsrack provider and the 50%
occupancy requirement is not maintained for over 45 days, said modular newsrack
provider may be considered in breach of its agreement with the city, thereby
enabling the city to seek any and all remedies available under said agreement.
(Ord. 1659, passed 3-17-10)
§ 52.39 PENALTY.
   Any person, including agents, servants, and employees, found guilty of
violating the provisions of this subchapter shall be punished as provided in §
10.99. Each day that a violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense. The imposition of any fine or penalty shall not be construed
as excusing or permitting the continuance of any violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1659, passed 3-17-10)
BUS BENCH/SHELTER GUIDELINES
§ 52.50 BUS BENCH/SHELTER PLACEMENT.
   (A)   Bus benches and shelters shall only be permitted as part of a license
agreement with the city.
   (B)   Bus benches/shelters shall be located at a designated bus stop along
commercial corridors subject to approval by the City Manager, or his or her
designee. Bus benches and shelters located within residential area corridors or
locations not designated as bus stops shall require Planning and Zoning Board
approval for location and placement.
   (C)   There shall be a limit of one bus bench and bus shelter at each
qualifying bus stop location. Additional shelters and benches may be allowed by
the Planning and Zoning Board upon satisfactory evidence of demand.
   (D)   Each bus bench/shelter shall be anchored properly on a concrete slab/
foundation.
   (E)   All bench and shelter installations shall conform to applicable
federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including,
but not limited to, the Americans with Disabilities Act and all Florida
Department of Transportation requirements.
   (F)   Each bus bench and shelter installation shall be located to provide
for access around any guardrails to allow for convenient access into buses.
(Ord. 1625, passed 12-3-08) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.51 BUS BENCH/SHELTER DESIGN GUIDELINES.
   (A)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall review and have final
approval of all design proposals/design modifications to bus benches and
shelters.
   (B)   Design of bus benches/shelters shall be compatible with community
character.
   (C)   The licensee of each bus bench/shelter shall provide a trash
receptacle at each location. Each receptacle shall be located on a concrete
slab/ foundation directly adjacent to a bus shelter/bench. The design of such
receptacle must be approved by the city as part of the bench/shelter license
contract.
   (D)   Shelters shall be illuminated utilizing solar energy as the sole
source of power.
(Ord. 1625, passed 12-3-08) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.52 BUS BENCH/SHELTER MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Licensee shall replace or recondition, to the satisfaction of the
city, bus benches/shelters which the city determines are no longer good or in
serviceable condition.
   (B)   Licensee shall be responsible for maintenance of trash associated with
location including trash receptacle.
(Ord. 1625, passed 12-3-08) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.53 BUS BENCH/SHELTER SIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   One sign panel may be permitted on bus benches and two sign panels may be
permitted on bus shelters authorized for placement by the city. Each sign panel
shall comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   Sign panel on bus shelters shall have a standard advertising panel
size of 48.5" x 68.5". Panels which deviate from the standard advertising panel
design and construction shall require approval from the City Manager, or his or
designee. In addition, the city shall be permitted to display public community
service signs on any bus bench/shelter location as approved by the city and
vendor.
   (B)   A sign panel shall be permitted along the back rest of each bus bench.
This panel shall not exceed 12 square feet in size.
   (C)   Advertising for such panels shall not contain adult material as
defined in the Code of Ordinances of the city.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the City Code, paid political
advertisements shall be permitted on bus benches and bus shelters in accordance
with this chapter.
(Ord. 1625, passed 12-3-08) Penalty, see §
52.99
STREETSCAPE DESIGN
§ 52.60 STREETSCAPE DESIGN GUIDELINES.
   The City of Pembroke Pines Streetscape Design Guidelines adopted pursuant to
Ordinance No. 1730 shall be placed on file in the City Clerk's office and made
available for public inspection.
(Ord. 1730, passed 8-1-12)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, including agents, servants, and employees, found guilty of
violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in §
10.99. Each day that a violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense. The imposition of any fine or penalty shall not be construed
as excusing or permitting the continuance of any violation of this chapter.
(`69 Code, § 13-35) (Ord. 61, passed 10-1-62; Am. Ord. 466, passed 5-15-78)
CHAPTER 53: UTILITY TAXATION
Section
   
53.01   Utility tax
§ 53.01 UTILITY TAX.
   (A)   Imposed. There is levied a tax of 10% on the purchase of electricity,
metered or bottled gas, and water service within the city limits.
   (B)   Fuel adjustment charge. As used in this section, FUEL ADJUSTMENT
CHARGE shall mean all increases in the cost of utility services to the ultimate
consumer resulting from an increase in the cost of fuel to the utility
subsequent to October 1, 1973. This section shall apply to the purchase by the
utility, as fuel, of any matter utilized to produce heat by burning or
combustion. Fuel adjustment charges shall be separately stated on all billing
statements to consumers. The tax provided for herein shall not be applied
against any fuel adjustment charge as defined herein.
   (C)   Nonapplicability. The purchase of natural gas by a public or private
utility either for resale or for use as fuel in the generation of electricity;
or the purchase of kerosene for use as an aircraft engine fuel or propellant,
or for use in internal-combustion engines shall be exempt from taxation
hereunder as shall also be the United States Government, the state, or any
public body as defined in F.S. §
1.01, and any recognized church for use exclusively for church purposes.
   (D)   Similar services. Services competitive with those enumerated in
subsection (A) shall be taxed at the same rates.
   (E)   Collection. The tax authorized hereunder shall be collected by the
seller of the taxable item from the purchasers at the time of payment of the
service and shall be remitted to the city by the seller monthly.
   (F)   Electricity for crime preventative lighting.
      (1)   For the purpose of this subsection, CRIME PREVENTATIVE LIGHTING
shall mean any exterior, artificial illumination provided for the lighting of
the streets, sidewalks, public places, parks, parkways, and city buildings
within and without the city, or other property reserved for the use, benefit,
or enjoyment of the general public. This subsection shall not include any light
mounted on a vehicle or other mobile device, any light designed for the purpose
of decoration or sign illumination, or where the primary purpose is commercial,
rather than crime prevention, as defined herein.
      (2)   The purchase of electricity for crime preventative lighting shall
be exempt from taxation imposed by virtue of subsection (A).
      (3)   Application for exemption under this subsection shall be made to
the City Commission. In each instance where an application is made, the
Commission shall determine whether the lighting described in the application is
crime preventative lighting. No determination shall be made until the
Commission has first consulted with the City Manager, the City Engineer, and
the City Attorney. Upon affirmative vote of four members of the Commission, an
application for exemption under this subsection shall be approved.  
(`69 Code, 15-1) (Ord. 434, passed 9-27-76; Am. Ord. 440, passed 2-7-77; Am.
Ord. 5-26, passed 9-29-79; Am. Ord. 704, passed 8-1-84; Am. Ord. 813, passed
11-5-86; Am. Ord. 1296, passed 3-3-99; Am. Ord. 1481, passed 5-5-04)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
72.   STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
      
73.   DANGEROUS INTERSECTION SAFETY ACT
      
74.   PROHIBITION OF SHARED MOBILITY DEVICES WITHOUT CITY APPROVAL
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Administration and Enforcement of Traffic Code
   
70.01   Florida Uniform Disposition of Traffic Infractions Act; adoption by
reference
   
70.02   Citation appeal process; failure to pay parking violation citation
Reimbursement of Costs and Expenses Incurred by the City
in Responding to Accidents Involving Drivers Under the Influence
   
70.15   Definitions
   
70.16   Incorporation of state law by reference
   
70.17   Recovery of costs and expenses
   
70.18   Standard of impairment; testing methods
   
70.19   Presumption with respect to causal connection
   
70.20   Additional presumption of impairment
   
70.21   Rebuttal of presumption
   
70.22   Administration
   
70.23   Attorney's fees, court costs and expenses; recovery
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Powers of local authorities, see F.S. § 316.008
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC CODE
§ 70.01 FLORIDA UNIFORM DISPOSITION OF TRAFFIC INFRACTIONS ACT; ADOPTION BY
REFERENCE.
   (A)   Adoption of state law. Florida Statutes, Chapter 318, the "Florida
Uniform Disposition of Traffic Infractions Act," and Chapter 316, the “Florida
Uniform Traffic Control Law,” as they presently exist, or may be amended from
time to time, are adopted by reference as though fully set out herein and shall
be effective within the municipal limits of the city.
   (B)   Amount of civil penalties. In addition to any penalties imposed by
State law or this code, the Clerk of the Court is authorized to assess a
surcharge of $5 per violation for the sole purpose of funding the City's
Crossing Guard Program (the "Program") described below:
      (1)   The city's program includes the school crossing guard training
program which complies with the guidelines set forth by the Florida Department
of Transportation, as amended from time to time, attached hereto and made a
part hereof;
      (2)   The city hereby establishes the city's School Crossing Guard
Program Trust Fund wherein all funds collected from the surcharge shall be
deposited and monies therein shall be used and distributed as allowed by law.
('69 Code, § 16-9) (Ord. 398, passed 7-8-75; Am. Ord. 766, passed 12-4-85; Am.
Ord. 1031, passed 5-19-83; Am. Ord. 1398, passed 2-20-02)
§ 70.02 CITATION APPEAL PROCESS; FAILURE TO PAY PARKING VIOLATION CITATION.
   (A)   It shall be a separate violation of this section to fail to pay any
citation issued for the violation of an ordinance contained in this title
relating to the parking of vehicles within the city.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who receives a parking citation issued pursuant to
any city parking ordinance may contest such citation by giving written request
for an administrative hearing to the Clerk of Courts within ten days of the
date the citation was issued. All citations not paid within ten days of the
date the citation was issued or a request for an administrative hearing filed
with the Clerk of Courts within said ten days shall result in a $12 late fee
being charged and collected by the Clerk of the Court. The Clerk shall set the
hearing within 30 days of the date the citation was issued, giving the person
issued the citation at least seven days notice excluding Saturdays, Sundays,
and legal holidays.
      (2)   Said notice shall be sent to the address of the registered owner of
the vehicle as per issued citation or, in the event that the driver of the
vehicle is not the owner, to the driver’s address if he or she requests a
hearing.
   (C)   (1)   The person issued the citation may:
         (a)   Be represented by counsel;
         (b)   Call and examine witnesses;
         (c)   Introduce exhibits;
         (d)   Examine opposing witnesses on any relevant matter, even though
the matter was not covered under direct examination;
         (e)   Impeach any witness, regardless of which party first called him
or her to testify.
      (2)   All hearings shall be conducted insofar as practical in accordance
with the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure and the Florida Evidence Code.
However, the general nature of the hearing shall be conducted in an informal
manner.
      (3)   All irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence shall be
excluded; but all other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonable
prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs shall be admissible whether or
not such evidence would be admissible in a trial in the courts of Florida. Any
part of the evidence may be received in written form and all testimony of
parties and witnesses shall be made under oath. Hearsay evidence may be used
for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence but it shall not
be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over
objection in civil actions.
      (4)   Any interested party or person may make application and upon good
cause shown may be allowed by the hearing officer in his or her discretion to
intervene and appear in a proceeding pending before the hearing officer.
   (D)   (1)   Those persons who receive a parking citation but who reside in
Palm Beach, Broward, or Dade County may contest the citation in writing, thus
avoiding the necessity of appearing for a hearing.
      (2)   Such person must submit his or her written request to contest the
citation by mail, along with all evidence within ten days of the date the
citation was issued.
      (3)   The written request to contest the citation by mail and evidence
must be sent to the Clerk of Courts. The Clerk shall present the evidence to
the hearing officer within 30 days of the date the citation was issued.
      (4)   The evidence presented must include a sworn statement by the person
cited. The statement must identify the citation at issue by its number and date
of issuance. It must set forth the name and current address of the person
cited. The statement may contain argument in defense against the citation. The
hearing officer will not consider unsworn statements.
      (5)   The evidence submitted may include sworn statements of witnesses.
Such statements must include the name and address of the witness as well as the
basis of the witness's knowledge about the facts asserted in the statement. The
evidence submitted may also include such documents as are relevant and material
to the disposition of the citation. All evidence submitted is subject to the
evidentiary rules set forth above.
   (E)   (1)   Pursuant to F.S. § 316.1967, any person who elects to appear
before the hearing officer or to contest a citation by mail shall be deemed to
have waived his or her right to pay the civil penalty amount set forth on the
citation.
      (2)   After a hearing or consideration of mailed-in admissible evidence,
the hearing officer shall make a determination based on the greater weight of
the evidence as to whether a parking violation has been committed and shall
issue an order imposing a civil penalty not to exceed $250 for violations of
disabled parking ordinances and $100 for violations of all other county parking
ordinances. The hearing officer may, in his or her discretion, grant additional
time to pay the civil penalty amount. All orders shall be in writing, signed
and dated by the hearing officer, and shall contain findings of fact supporting
the order and conclusions of law.
      (3)   If, at the conclusion of a hearing or consideration of mailed-in
admissible evidence, the hearing officer orders a dismissal of the citation and
finds no violation, the hearing officer shall so state and issue his or her
order of dismissal in writing, signed and dated by the hearing officer and
containing findings of fact supporting the order. Hearings shall be scheduled
within 30 days of request and decided within 30 days thereafter. An order,
decision or opinion of the hearing officer may be appealed by the filing of a
petition for Writ of Certiorari in the Circuit Court of the Seventh Judicial
Circuit in and for Broward County, Florida, by any party receiving an adverse
ruling.
('69 Code, § 16-10) (Ord. 444, passed 5-16-77; Am. Ord. 1398, passed 2-20-02)
Cross-reference:
   Stopping, standing, and parking regulations, see
Ch. 72
Statutory reference:
   Authority of municipalities to regulate stopping, standing, or parking, see
F.S. § 316.008
REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS AND EXPENSES INCURRED BY THE CITY IN RESPONDING TO
ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DRIVERS UNDER THE INFLUENCE
§ 70.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES. Any substance named or described in Schedule I
through V of F.S. § 893.03, as such schedules may be amended, from time to
time, pursuant to Chapter 893.
   COSTS AND EXPENSES OF EMERGENCY RESPONSES. Shall mean and include, but not
be limited to, all costs of labor, medical materials, medical equipment, police
equipment, fire equipment, and administrative expenses associated therewith,
which shall be expended, used or associated with, occasioned by or connected
with any emergency medical, fire or police response and, for the purposes
hereof, the costs of emergency medical, fire and police manpower services shall
be as set forth on such schedules as the City Council may adopt, from time to
time, by resolution.
(Ord. 890, passed 5-3-89)
§ 70.16 INCORPORATION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   The standards and schedules set forth at F.S. § 893.03, as the same may be
amended from time to time pursuant to F.S. Chapter 893, are hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference, as if the same are set forth verbatim herein.
(Ord. 890, passed 5-3-89)
§ 70.17 RECOVERY OF COSTS AND EXPENSES.
   If any person shall operate a motor vehicle or have actual physical control
of the motor vehicle within the city while under the influence of alcoholic
beverages or controlled substances or a combination of alcoholic beverages and
controlled substances, to the extent that his or her normal faculties are
impaired or to the extent that he or she is deprived of full possession of his
or her normal faculties, and if such person shall proximately cause an accident
or is a substantial causative factor of an accident resulting in the need for
the city to provide emergency medical, fire or police responses or services,
such person shall be liable to the city for all costs and expenses of such
emergency responses and services.
(Ord. 890, passed 5-3-89)
§ 70.18 STANDARD OF IMPAIRMENT; TESTING METHODS.
   (A)   In any trial of any civil action or proceeding with respect to the
enforcement hereof alleging that any person is liable hereunder because such
person was the cause of or was a substantial causative factor of an accident
requiring emergency medical, fire or police responses while such person
was driving or in actual physical control of a vehicle while under the
influence of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances, or a combination of
alcoholic beverages and controlled substances, to the extent that his or her
normal faculties were impaired, or to the extent that he or she was deprived of
full possession of his or her normal faculties the results of any test
administered in accordance with F.S. § 316.1932 or 316.1933 or 316.1934, shall
be admissible into evidence when otherwise admissible, and the amount of
alcohol or controlled substance in the person's blood at the time alleged, as
shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood or breath or urine, shall give
rise to the following presumptions:
      (1)   If there was, at the time, 0.05% or less by weight of alcohol in
the person's blood, and if there was no evidence of a controlled substance in
such person's blood, it shall be presumed that the person was not under the
influence of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances or any combination
thereof, to the extent that his or her normal faculties were impaired.
      (2)   If there was, at the time, in excess of 0.05% but less than 0.10%
by weight or alcohol in the person's blood such facts shall not give rise to
any presumption that the person was or was not under the influence of alcoholic
beverages or controlled substances or a combination thereof, to the extent that
his or her normal faculties were impaired, but such fact may be considered with
other competent evidence in determining whether the person was under the
influence of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances or any combination
thereof to the extent that his or her normal faculties were impaired.
      (3)   If there was, at the time, 0.10% or more by weight of alcohol in
the person's blood, even if there was no evidence of a controlled substance in
such person's blood, that fact shall be prima facie evidence that the person
was under the influence of alcoholic beverages to the extent that his or her
normal faculties were impaired.
      (4)   If there was, at the time, in excess of 0.05% by weight of alcohol
in the person's blood and if there was evidence of a controlled substance in
the person's blood, those facts shall be prima facie evidence that the person
was under the influence of a combination of alcoholic beverages and controlled
substances, to the extent that his or her normal faculties were impaired.
   (B)   The percent by either of alcohol in the blood shall be based upon
grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood.
   (C)   The foregoing provisions of this section shall not be construed as
limiting the introduction of other competent evidence bearing upon the question
of whether the person was under the influence of alcoholic beverages or
controlled substances, or a combination of alcoholic beverages and controlled
substances, to the extent that his or her normal faculties were impaired or to
the extent that he or she was deprived of full possession of his or her normal
faculties, or that such impairment was the proximate cause or substantially
causative of the accident giving rise to the need for emergency medical, police
or fire services.
   (D)   A chemical analysis of a person's blood to determine alcoholic content
or a chemical analysis of a person's breath, or a chemical analysis of a
person's urine, in order to be considered valid under the provisions of this
section, must have been performed substantially in accordance with the method
approved by the Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services of the State
of Florida and by an individual possessing a valid permit issued by the
Department for this purpose. Any insubstantial differences between approved
techniques and actual testing procedures in any individual case shall not
render the test or test results invalid. Any technique or method approved by
the Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services of the State of Florida
with respect to such analysis shall be deemed acceptable. Any person who shall
be deemed qualified and competent to conduct such analysis by the Department of
Health and Rehabilitative Services of the state of Florida, as indicated by the
possession of a valid permit therefor shall be deemed competent to conduct such
analysis.
(Ord. 890, passed 5-3-89)
§ 70.19 PRESUMPTION WITH RESPECT TO CAUSAL CONNECTION.
   In any trial of any civil action or proceeding with respect to the
enforcement hereof alleging that any person is liable hereunder because such
person was the cause of or was a substantial causative factor of an accident
requiring emergency medical, fire or police responses while such person was
driving or in actual physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of
alcoholic beverages or controlled substances, to the extent that his or her
normal faculties were impaired, or to the extent that he or she was deprived of
full possession of his or her normal faculties, it shall be presumed that a
person under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances
to the extent that his or her normal faculties were impaired, or to the extent
that he or she was deprived of full possession of his or her normal faculties
was the proximate cause or was a substantial causative factor of the accident
giving rise to the need for emergency medical, police and fire services.
(Ord. 890, passed 5-3-89)
§ 70.20 ADDITIONAL PRESUMPTION OF IMPAIRMENT.
   In any trial of any civil action or proceeding with respect to the
enforcement hereof alleging that any person is liable hereunder because such
person was the cause of or was a substantial causative factor of an accident
requiring emergency medical, fire or police responses while such person was
driving or in actual physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of
alcoholic beverages or controlled substances, or a combination of alcoholic
beverages and controlled substances, to the extent that his or her normal
faculties were impaired, or to the extent that he or she was deprived of full
possession of his or her normal faculties, it shall be presumed that such
person's normal faculties were impaired or that such person was deprived of
full possession of his or her normal faculties, if such person shall plead
nolle contendere or guilty to or shall have been found guilty in trial of a
violation of F.S. § 316.193 or 316.1934, or if such person refuses an officer's
request to submit to any breath, blood or urine test provided in F.S. §
316.1932, and such officer shall have submitted a sworn statement that he had
reasonable cause to believe the person had been driving or had been in actual
physical control of a motor vehicle within the city while under the influence
of alcoholic or controlled substances or a combination of alcoholic beverages
and controlled substances, and that such person had refused to submit to the
test or tests after being requested to do so by the officer.
(Ord. 890, passed 5-3-89)
§ 70.21 REBUTTAL OF PRESUMPTION.
   Any person against whom any presumption set forth in this subchapter shall
be asserted shall be entitled to rebut such presumption by clear and convincing
evidence by filing an action pursuant to F.S. Chapter 86, seeking a declaratory
judgment with respect to such person's rights and obligations under this
subchapter with respect to such presumption, as a court of competent
jurisdiction in Broward County, Florida, or shall be entitled to produce such
evidence as a court of competent jurisdiction shall admit in any action
regarding the enforcement hereof.
(Ord. 890, passed 5-3-89)
§ 70.22 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   With respect to any claim made hereunder by the city, such claim shall
be made on such forms as the City Administrator shall determine appropriate,
provided that such forms shall show the following:
      (1)   Date of accident;
      (2)   Location of accident;
      (3)   Owner of vehicle;
      (4)   Person operating applicable vehicle or having actual physical
control thereof;
      (5)   Violation alleged, if any;
      (6)   Disposition of violations; if any;
      (7)   Nature and extent of any emergency services rendered and the costs
thereof;
      (8)   Reference to any presumption upon which the city relies;
      (9)   The total reimbursement demanded; and
      (10)   Due date for payment.
   (B)   Such notice shall bear the signature of the City Administrator or City
Clerk and shall be mailed, U.S. mail, first class, postage prepaid, to the
person against whom such costs are demanded, at the address shown on the
accident report for such person. Such notice shall bear a legend in upper case
letters, which shall be substantially in the following form:
THE LAWS OF THE CITY OF PEMBROKE PINES REQUIRE THAT YOU REIMBURSE THE CITY FOR
COSTS AND EXPENSES SUFFERED BY THE CITY IN CONNECTION WITH THE ABOVE-DESCRIBED
ACCIDENT. THE CITY'S RIGHT TO RECOVER AGAINST YOU MAY BE BASED UPON CERTAIN
PRESUMPTIONS, WHICH PRESUMPTIONS MAY BE REBUTTED BY YOU IN AN ACTION INITIATED
BY YOU IN THE CIRCUIT COURTS OF BROWARD COUNTY, FLORIDA, PURSUANT TO CHAPTER
86, FLORIDA STATUTES, OR IN ANY MOTION PERTAINING HERETO.
ALL COSTS ARE PAYABLE WITHIN TEN (10) CALENDAR DAYS FROM THE DATE OF THIS
NOTICE AND YOUR FAILURE TO PAY SUCH COSTS WITHIN SAID PERIOD IS UNLAWFUL AND
MAY GIVE RISE TO THE PENALTIES SET FORTH IN THE APPLICABLE LAWS OF THE CITY.
(Ord. 890, passed 5-3-89)
§ 70.23 ATTORNEY'S FEES, COURT COSTS AND EXPENSES; RECOVERY.
   Should any dispute arise hereunder, the city shall be entitled to recover
all court costs, expenses and attorney's fees incurred by the city in such
dispute, whether or not suit be brought, and such right shall include all of
such costs, expenses and attorney's fees through all appeals or other actions.
(Ord. 890, passed 5-3-89)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided herein, every person who violates or fails
to comply with any provision of this title shall be fined not in excess of $500
for each offense.
('69 Code, § 16-3) (Ord. 48, passed 12-7-61; Am. Ord. 272, passed 2-22-72)
   (B)   Any person who shall fail to pay the costs reflected in a notice
issued pursuant to §
70.22 and who shall fail to file an action for declaratory judgment pursuant to
§
70.22 within ten days from the date of such notice shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and punished upon conviction by a fine of $500, which fine shall be
in addition to any monies due pursuant to the terms hereof. Any person who
shall file an action for declaratory judgment pursuant to §
70.21 and who shall receive a judgment to such person's disfavor or who shall
dismiss such action without conclusion and who shall then fail to pay such fine
within ten calendar days shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished, upon
conviction, by a fine of $500, which fine shall be in addition to any monies
due pursuant to the terms hereof.
   (C)   Unless otherwise specified by the City Code, all citations, fines, or
tickets issued for traffic- or parking- related offenses under the City Code
shall be in the amount of $50 for each offense. All surcharges, court costs,
fees, or other amounts assessed, charged, or otherwise collected by the Clerk
of Courts or applicable law, are in addition to the fines set by the city.
(Ord. 890, passed 5-3-89; Am. Ord. 1930, passed 8-7-19; Am. Ord. 2045, passed
5-7-25)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
   
71.01   Adoption of Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law by reference;
amendments
   
71.02   Vehicles not to damage hard- surfaced or paved roads
   
71.03   Bicycle or pedestrian violations
   
71.04   Off-road vehicles
   
71.05   Restrictions on truck use of streets
   
71.06   Restrictions on ready-mix concrete trucks
Statutory reference:
   Powers of local authorities, see F.S. § 316.008
§ 71.01 ADOPTION OF FLORIDA UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL LAW BY REFERENCE;
AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Florida Statutes, Chapter 316, the "Florida Uniform Traffic Control
Law," as it presently exists, or as it may be amended from time to time, is
adopted by reference as though fully set out herein and shall be effective
within the municipal limits of the city.
('69 Code, § 16-1) (Ord. 48, passed 12-7-61; Am. Ord. 272, passed 2-22-72; Am.
Ord. 397, passed 7-8-75)
   (B)   The model traffic ordinance hereinbefore adopted is amended as
follows:
      (1)   Subsection (54) of F.S. § 316.003, definitions, is amended to read:
         (54) Street or highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
      (2)   Reserved.
      (3)   Prohibiting emission or discharge of visible smoke or noxious fumes
by motor vehicles.
The operation of a motor vehicle which emits visible smoke while moving for a
distance of more than one hundred yards along the streets, roads or highways of
the City of Pembroke Pines and the operation of a gasoline or diesel engine of
a motor vehicle discharging visible or noxious fumes for more than a period of
three continuous minutes while the vehicle is stationary within the City of
Pembroke Pines is prohibited and shall constitute a municipal offense. For the
purpose of interpreting this subsection, smoke shall be defined as small
gasborn particles resulting from incomplete combustion consisting
predominantly, but not exclusively, of carbon ash and other combustible
material, blue-gray or black in color, but not including uncombined water
vapor.
('69 Code, § 16-2) (Ord. 95, passed 7-15-63; Am. Ord. 164, passed 6-19-67; Am.
Ord. 228, passed 6-1-70; Am. Ord. 281, passed 5-15-72)
§ 71.02 VEHICLES NOT TO DAMAGE HARD- SURFACED OR PAVED ROADS.
   It is unlawful to operate on any hard-surfaced or paved roads in the city
any bulldozer, log cart, tractor, or well machine, unless equipped with
pneumatic rubber tires; any steel-tired vehicle; or any other vehicle or
machine that is likely to damage a hard-surfaced or paved road except ordinary
wear and tear on the same.
('69 Code, § 16-2.2) (Ord. 251, passed 4-5-71) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 BICYCLE OR PEDESTRIAN VIOLATIONS.
   Any individual or individuals observed by any member of the City Police
Department violating F.S. § 316.2065 pertaining to bicycles or F.S. § 316.130
pertaining to pedestrian violations, shall be punished in accordance with §
70.99 of this code.
(Ord. 701, passed 7-18-84) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.04 OFF-ROAD VEHICLES.
   (A)   This section is not to be read in conflict with pertinent state
statutes or city or county ordinances pertaining to the use or operation of
off- road vehicles, and shall not apply to the operation on public
thoroughfares of motorcycles designed for on-road (street) use or to the
commercial operation of motorcycles utilized for nationally organized and
sanctioned racing events held at the Hollywood Sportatorium.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL TERRAIN VEHICLES. (ATV's) A self- propelled vehicle with at least three
wheels with solid or pneumatic tires, having a steering bar or wheel and
designed primarily for off-road use.
   MOTORCYCLES. Self-propelled vehicles having two tandem wheels with solid or
pneumatic tires, having a steering bar or wheel and a saddle seat. This shall
include, but not be limited to vehicles designed for off-road and on-road use.
   OFF-ROAD. Any public or privately-owned unpaved area.
   OFF-ROAD VEHICLES. Self-propelled vehicles designed primarily for use in
off-road areas and shall include, but not be limited to motorcyles, all-terrain
vehicles, and swamp buggies.
   OWNER. Shall include, but not be limited to the title holder to real
property, tenants thereon, and members of their immediate families.
   SWAMP BUGGY. A four-wheeled self- propelled vehicle designed primarily for
operation in the wetland areas located throughout the South Florida area.
   TRAILER. A mechanism designed to transport motorcycles and/or ATV's and
which is hitched to and propelled by a motor vehicle.
   (C)   Manner of operation.
      (1)   Motorcycles, ATV's, and swamp buggies shall not be operated on
private property not owned by the operator of that property and without the
express and prior consent of the owner.
      (2)   ATV's shall not be operated on the public thoroughfares, but shall
be transported therefrom and thereto by a vehicle designed to accommodate same
or by trailer.
      (3)   The operation of motorcycles, ATV's, or swamp buggies in off-road
areas shall be prohibited during the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekdays and 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays.
(Ord. 698, passed 7-11-84) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.05 RESTRICTIONS ON TRUCK USE OF STREETS.
   (A)   Authority and purpose. This section is ordained pursuant to authority
granted under the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law. The purpose of this
section is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by prohibiting
thru-truck traffic on streets and roads which are unsuitable for such traffic
by reason of their construction or by reason of the character and nature of
abutting property, where reasonably adeguate alternative truck routes exist.
   (B)   Definitions.
   NO-THRU-TRUCK ZONE. A street or road, or segment thereof, on which trucks
are prohibited, except trucks traveling to or from a place abutting the zone,
which place would otherwise be inaccessible by truck.
   TRUCK. A truck as defined in the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law.
   (C)   Establishment of zones. No-thru-truck zones shall be established by
the City Commission, through the adoption of a resolution designating the
specific right-of-way on which thru-truck traffic shall be prohibited, and
where signs shall be posted as provided for in subsection (E) of this section.
   (D)   Considerations and guidelines. The City Commission may establish a no-
thru-truck zone if one or more of the following conditions exists; however, a
no-thru-truck zone shall not be established unless truck traffic that would
otherwise travel through the zone has an alternate route available:
      (1)   Traffic lanes are less than 12 feet wide.
      (2)   The street or road cannot adequately carry truck traffic because of
damage to the surface or to abutting structures.
      (3)   Land use on both sides of the street or road is predominantly
residential.
   (E)   Signing. No-thru truck zones shall be signed at the beginning and end
thereof, and at other places as the city may determine to be necessary, in
accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration.
   (F)   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to drive a truck in a no-
thru-truck zone, unless the driving of such truck is within the exception
specified in the definition of “no-thru-truck” zone in subsection (B) of this
section.
   (G)   Penalty. Violation of this article shall be prosecuted in the same
manner as misdemeanors are prosecuted. Such violations shall be prosecuted in
the name of the state in a court having jurisdiction of misdemeanors by the
prosecuting attorney thereof, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed that allowed by law or by imprisonment in the county jail not to
exceed that allowed by law or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 821, passed 2-4-87) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.06 RESTRICTIONS ON READY-MIX CONCRETE TRUCKS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   TRUCK. Any vehicle with two or more axles used primarily for the
purpose of transporting materials and products.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate any ready-mix concrete truck along the
public roads within the city unless such truck is equipped with a chute
enclosure, or some other mechanism which precludes the leakage of concrete and
other debris from leaking or escaping from the trucks while travelling through
or within the city. The chute enclosure must meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The device must be 100% effective in keeping debris from coming out
of the chute when the device is engaged;
      (2)   The device must open and close and lock and unlock automatically
when the flop chute is lowered or raised;
      (3)   The device shall have no parts which may become clogged with
concrete;
      (4)   The device must close the chute at the end and seal it completely.
No debris shall be able to escape and fall from the chute while the truck is
travelling;
      (5)   The device shall be coated with a reflective paint so that it is
clearly visible at night;
      (6)   The device shall be permanently attached to the chute of each
truck;
      (7)   The device shall be equivalent to a Shute Shutter from Forfam, Inc.
   (C)   Violations of this section shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99 of the City Code of Ordinances, as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 1291, passed 11-18-98)
CHAPTER 72: STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
Section
   
72.01   Vehicles for sale not to be parked on public property
   
72.02   Loading, unloading commercial vehicles prohibited during certain hours
   
72.03   Handicapped parking; definitions, prohibitions
   
72.04   Stopping, standing, parking of vehicles shall not obstruct traffic
   
72.05   Encoded computer tape reel or cartridge of parking tickets to be
forwarded on a monthly basis
   
72.06   No parking when posted
   
72.07   Appeal of citations
   
72.08   Veterans Parking Preference Program
   
72.09   Towing services administrative charge
 
   
72.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Failure to pay parking violation citation, see §
70.02
   Parking within fire lane or fire zone prohibited, see §§
93.14, 93.15
Statutory reference:
   Authority of municipalities to regulate stopping, standing, and parking, see
F.S. § 316.008
§ 72.01 VEHICLES FOR SALE NOT TO BE PARKED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. A MOTOR
VEHICLE shall be defined as an automobile, motorcycle, motor truck, trailer,
semi-trailer, tractor-trailer combination, travel trailer, camping trailer,
truck camper, motor home, or any other vehicle as generally defined within F.S.
Chapter 320.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to offer for sale motor vehicles as defined in
division (A), except on private property such as homes, automobile dealerships,
or used car lots within the city. It is specifically prohibited to offer for
sale motor vehicles as defined in division (A) within rights-of-way, easements,
swales, or other public or non-exclusively private areas within the city.
   (C)   Pursuant to F.S. §§ 316.006(2), 316.007, and 316.008(1)(a), (b), (g),
any vehicle found to be in violation of this section for a period exceeding 48
hours shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall be towed, at the owner's
expense, to the Police Department.
('69 Code, § 16-11) (Ord. 603, passed 7-7-82; Am. Ord. 630, passed 10-20-82)
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 LOADING, UNLOADING COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS.
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (C) below, it shall be unlawful to
load or unload commercial vehicles between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:30
a.m.
   (B)   A vehicle which has been cited under this section may be towed by the
City Police Department if the owner refuses to move the vehicle or if the owner
cannot be located or if the vehicle is incapable of being moved under its own
power.
   (C)   Subject to Chapter 96, the loading and unloading of commercial
vehicles is permitted at any time of the day or night in M-1, M-1B, M-2, M-3,
M-4, or M-5 Industrial Districts, provided:
      (1)   The loading/unloading dock or area or any portion thereof is a
minimum of 150 lineal feet from any residential property, regardless of zoning
category; or
      (2)   If the distance from the loading/unloading dock or area or any
portion thereof is less than 150 lineal feet from any residential property, the
applicant may seek Planning and Zoning Board approval, as follows:
         (a)   Site plan. Pursuant to §
155.395, the applicant shall submit to the Planning and Zoning Board a site
plan or site plan amendment specifying the hours of loading and unloading, and
the vehicle routes to and from the site.
         (b)   The site plan or site plan amendment shall specify the location
and type of sound-muting wall, which shall be constructed in accordance with
the requirements of this code.
         (c)   The Planning and Zoning Board shall review the site plan or site
plan amendment and determine that activities occurring on site will not
negatively affect surrounding residential properties.
         (d)   In determining that the additional hours and vehicle activity
will not negatively affect residential areas, the Planning and Zoning Board may
condition approval of expanded loading and unloading hours at its discretion,
including but not limited to restricting traffic routes used by the applicant
or business or by requiring additional buffering, landscaping, walls, or berms.
('69 Code, § 12-18) (Ord. 318, passed 3-5-73; Am. Ord. 956, passed 5-15-91; Am.
Ord. 1440, passed 5-7-03) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 HANDICAPPED PARKING; DEFINITIONS, PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Restrictions. No person with the exception of those persons who have
been issued a disabled parking permit pursuant to F.S. § 320.0848 or 316.1958
shall park any vehicle in parking spaces reserved for handicapped or disabled
persons, pursuant to F.S. Chapter 316 and the Florida Building Code as amended
by Broward County. Parking access aisles, which are designated as no-parking
zones, are similarly reserved for the use of persons who have disabled parking
permits. Parking in such parking access aisles is subject to the same penalties
that are imposed for illegally parking in parking spaces that are designated
for persons who have disabilities.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle
within any parking space designated or marked for the disabled, unless the
vehicle displays a disabled parking permit issued under F.S. § 316.1958 or
320.0848, and the vehicle is transporting the person to whom the displayed
permit is issued.
      (2)   A vehicle that is transporting a person who has a disability and
who has been granted a permit under F.S. § 320.0848(1)(d) may be parked for a
maximum of 30 minutes in any parking space reserved for persons who have
disabilities.
   (B)   Ticketing procedure. Vehicles parked in violation of this section will
be ticketed by the Pembroke Pines Police Department or a parking enforcement
specialist, said ticket to be affixed to the windshield of the offending
vehicle.
   (C)   Towing of vehicles.
      (1)   Vehicles parked in violation of this section may be towed to any
lawful parking space or facility or the operator or other person in charge of
the vehicle must immediately remove the unauthorized vehicle from the parking
space.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer or a parking enforcement specialist has
the right to demand to be shown the person’s disabled permit and driver’s
license or state identification card when a disabled parking placard is being
utilized. If such a request is refused, the person in charge of the vehicle may
be issued a citation for a violation of this section.
   (D)   The violation may not be dismissed for failure of the markings on the
parking space to comply with the requirements of F.S. § 316.1955, if the space
is in general compliance and is clearly distinguishable as a designated space.
(Ord. 1612, passed 8-6-08; Am. Ord. 1715, passed 5-2-12) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING OF VEHICLES SHALL NOT OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.
   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic
control device, it shall be unlawful to stop, stand, or park a vehicle on any
street or highway within the city in such a way that the free flow of traffic
is impeded, hindered, retarded or restrained.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to stop a vehicle in the roadway to load or
unload a passenger on any street or highway within the city in such a way that
the free flow of traffic is impeded, hindered, retarded or restrained.
(Ord. 939, passed 11-28-90; Am. Ord. 1995, passed 8-17-22) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 ENCODED COMPUTER TAPE REEL OR CARTRIDGE OF PARKING TICKETS TO BE
FORWARDED ON A MONTHLY BASIS.
   In accordance with F.S. § 316.1967(6), the city hereby directs the Clerk of
the Court and/or the Traffic Bureau Clerk to supply on a monthly basis to the
Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles Department a magnetically
encoded computer tape reel or cartridge which is machine readable by the
installed computer system at the Department, listing persons who have three or
more outstanding parking tickets or one or more tickets for violations of F.S.
§§ 316.1955 and 316.1956 or §
72.05 concerning parking in spaces designated for use by disabled persons.
(Ord. 1062, passed 1-5-94)
§ 72.06 NO PARKING WHEN POSTED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle
in violation of any posted “No Parking” sign.
      (1)   “No Parking” signs may designate a time period when standing,
stopping, or parking a vehicle is prohibited.
      (2)   Standing, stopping, or parking a vehicle shall be prohibited in any
parking lot, field, swale, or other parking areas provided by the city when the
adjoining building or park is closed.
   (B)   “No Parking” signs may be placed on any municipal property which
includes, but is not limited to, city center, swales, and municipal parks, at
the discretion of the City Manager.
   (C)   All “No Parking” signs shall comply with the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, as amended.
      (1)   All no parking signs must be prominently placed at each driveway
access or curb cut allowing vehicular access to the property, within five feet
from the public right-of-way line.
      (2)   If there are no curbs or access barriers, the signs must be posted
not less than one sign for each 25 feet of lot frontage.
   (D)   Law enforcement officers, police service aides, code compliance
officers, and parking enforcement volunteers, are hereby authorized to issue
parking citations to any vehicle illegally parked in violation of the section.
      (1)   Whenever any vehicle is found parked, stopped or standing in
violation of any of the restrictions imposed by any ordinance of this city, or
state statute, an authorized city representative shall issue a parking citation
on a form to be approved by the Chief of Police.
      (2)   All parking citations shall be conspicuously affixed to the vehicle
in violation.
      (3)   The citation shall notify the owner of the vehicle to pay the fine
indicated on the citation within ten business days from the date of issuance at
the place specified on the citation, and of the violator’s right to appeal.
      (4)   The owner of a vehicle shall be responsible for payment of any
citations issued under this chapter and other parking violations to the extent
imposed by F.S. § 316.1967, as amended.
(Ord. 1416, passed 9-4-02; Am. Ord. 1627, passed 12-17-08; Am. Ord. 1930,
passed 8-7-19)
§ 72.07 APPEAL OF CITATIONS.
   Appeals of citations given for violation of parking regulations pertaining
to designated handicapped spaces shall be as provided for in §
70.02.
(Ord. 1398, passed 2-20-02)
§ 72.08 VETERANS PARKING PREFERENCE PROGRAM.
   The City of Pembroke Pines Veterans Parking Preference Program, as adopted
by the City Commission pursuant to the City of Pembroke Pines Ordinance No.
           , shall be implemented at the direction of the City Manager or his/
her designee. A copy of the Veterans Parking Preference ordinance shall be
maintained in the City Clerk's office. The Veterans Parking Preference Program
may be amended from time to time at the direction of the City Manager or his/
her designee.
(Ord. 1940, passed 2-5-20)
§ 72.09 TOWING SERVICES ADMINISTRATIVE CHARGE.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly otherwise
requires:
      ADMINISTRATIVE CHARGE. A financial charge imposed on the registered owner
or other legally authorized person or entity of a motor vehicle or vessel to
cover the cost of enforcement, including parking enforcement, by the
municipality when the vehicle or vessel is towed from public property.
      MAXIMUM TOWING RATE. The maximum towing rate(s) established by Broward
County from time to time.
      TOWING BUSINESS. A business entity that provides towing and/or wrecker
services for monetary gain within the city pursuant to a Towing Services
Agreement who may impose and collect the administrative charge on behalf of the
city and remit such charge to the city after it is collected.
      TOWING SERVICES AGREEMENT. An agreement between the City of Pembroke
Pines and a towing business that authorizes the towing business to provide
services for private vehicles or vessels ordered towed by the city within the
limits of the city and during designated periods of time.
   (B)   Towing services administrative charge. The City Commission hereby
authorizes the imposition of an administrative charge upon the registered owner
or other legally authorized person or entity in control of a vehicle or vessel
when a vehicle or vessel is towed from public property.
      (1)   The administrative charge shall be equal to 25% of the maximum
towing rate.
      (2)   As directed by the City Manager, or his or her designee, a towing
business pursuant to a Towing Services Agreement may impose and collect the
administrative charge on behalf of the City of Pembroke Pines and shall remit
such fee or charge to the city upon collection but in no event later than five
days from the date of collection.
(Ord 1969, passed 6-16-21)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The violation of disabled parking regulations shall be subject to a
fine of $250 for each occurrence: however, persons who were issued a valid
disabled parking permit effective on the date of the violation shall be subject
to a fine of $25.
   (B)   Refusal to pay civil penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to
refuse or fail to pay any civil penalty assessed for a violation of §
72.03, and that person shall be guilty of a separate violation. A civil penalty
of not more than $500 will be assessed against any person who refuses or fails
to pay a civil penalty assessed for violation of this §
72.03.
(Ord. 1612, passed 8-6-08)
CHAPTER 73: DANGEROUS INTERSECTION SAFETY ACT
Section
   
73.01   Intent
   
73.02   Authorization for enforcement program
   
73.03   Definitions
   
73.04   Traffic Infraction Enforcement Officer
   
73.05   Transition from city's ordinance-based enforcement program
   
73.06   Appointment of Special Magistrate
   
73.07   Notice of violation hearings
§ 73.01 INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the use of traffic infraction
detectors to promote compliance with red light signal directives as defined in
and prescribed by the Mark Wandall Traffic Safety Act (the “State Act”), F.S. §
316.0083 and all other applicable statutes, as amended from time to time, and
to provide for the transition from the city's ordinance-based program, which
had existed prior to the state's decision to preempt the area of unmanned
cameras/monitoring systems to enforce compliance with red light signal
directives. Consistent with State law, this chapter will also supplement law
enforcement personnel in the enforcement of red light signal violations and
shall not prohibit law enforcement officers from issuing a citation for a red
light signal violation in accordance with other statutory traffic enforcement
techniques. (Ord. 1665, passed 6-16-10; Am. Ord. 1866, passed 1-11-17)
§ 73.02 AUTHORIZATION FOR ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM.
   Effective July 1, 2010, the city shall enforce compliance with red light
signal directives pursuant to the State Act, to utilize image capture
technologies. The city shall comply with the requirements of the State Act,
including, without limitation, the enforcement of violations of the State Act.
This chapter shall not supersede, infringe, curtail or impinge upon state laws
related to red light signal violations or conflict with such laws. (Ord. 1665,
passed 6-16-10; Am. Ord. 1866, passed 1-11-17)
§ 73.03 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions set forth in the State Act, as may be amended, shall apply
to the city's implementation and application of the State Act. In addition, the
following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Initial notification from the city to the registered
owner of a motor vehicle involved in a violation, notifying the registered
owner of the violation, and containing information required by the State Act.
   RECORDED IMAGES. Images recorded by a traffic infraction detector, which
includes but is not limited to photographic or electronic images or streaming
video.
   SPECIAL MAGISTRATE. The city’s Local Hearing Officer appointed by the City
Commission to conduct hearings pursuant to the State Act.
   TRAFFIC CITATION. Notification to the registered owner of a motor vehicle
involved in a violation who failed to take action on a Notice of Violation, and
containing all information required by the State Act.
   TRAFFIC INFRACTION ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Police Department employee
designated pursuant to §
73.04 herein, who meets the requirements of the State Act and who shall review
the recorded images and issue Notices of Violation and Traffic Citations
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and the State Act.
   VIOLATION. Violation of F.S. §§ 316.074(1), 316.075(1)(c)1, or 316.0083.
(Ord. 1665, passed 6-16-10; Am. Ord. 1866, passed 1-11-17)
§ 73.04 TRAFFIC INFRACTION ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   In addition to sworn police officers and police service aides, the city’s
Police Chief may designate Traffic Infraction Enforcement Officers, who shall
meet the qualifications set forth in the State Act.
   (A)   A Reviewing Officer shall review the recorded images that comply with
the requirements of the State Act, prior to the issuance of a Notice of
Violation pursuant to the State Act. Once the Reviewing Officer has verified
the accuracy of the recorded images he or she shall note the violation and a
Notice of Violation shall be sent to the registered owner of the involved
vehicle pursuant to the State Act no later than 30 days after the violation.
The Notice of Violation shall be sent by first- class mail or as specified in
the State Act.
   (B)   The State Act provides that in the event of no action is taken on a
Notice of Violation, the city shall issue a uniform traffic citation to the
vehicle owner, pursuant to the State Act. In the event no action is taken on a
Notice of Violation within 60 days of notification, the recorded images will be
reviewed again by a Reviewing Officer, who, after determining that a violation
of law has occurred, will take all necessary action required by the State Act
to issue a uniform traffic citation to the registered owner of the involved
vehicle pursuant to the State Act. The traffic Citation shall be sent by
certified mail or as specified in the State Act. (Ord. 1665, passed 6-16-10;
Am. Ord. 1866, passed 1-11-17)
§ 73.05 TRANSITION FROM CITY'S ORDINANCE-BASED ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM.
   Prior to the express preemption of the subject matter by the state through
the adoption of the State Act, the city had been enforcing compliance with red
light signal directives through Ordinance 1527. Effective July 1, 2010, the
city shall no longer enforce violations using its ordinance.
   (A)   No Notices of Infraction, as defined in Ordinance 1527, shall be
issued by the city pursuant to Ordinance 1527 after June 30, 2010,
notwithstanding the date of the observed violation.
   (B)   All Notices of Infractions issued by the city pursuant to Ordinance
1527 shall be processed and enforced pursuant to Ordinance 1527 until payment
is received by the city.
   (C)   All appeals of Notices of Infractions received by the CITY for notices
issued on or before June 30, 2010. shall be in accordance with the requirements
of Ordinance 1527. All appeals for Notices of Infractions issued on or before
June 30, 2010 shall be scheduled for hearing at the next available hearing
date.
   (D)   The penalty provisions, administrative charges, appeals and collection
procedures for Noticesof Infractions established by Ordinance 1527 shall
continue in full force and affect solely as to Notices of Infractions issued by
the city on or before June 30, 2010.
   (E)   The city shall continue to use the unmanned camera/monitoring devices
installed pursuant to Ordinance 1527 in conformance with the State Act. (Ord.
1665, passed 6-16-10)
§ 73.06 APPOINTMENT OF SPECIAL MAGISTRATE.
   (A)   The City Commission shall appoint at least one Special Magistrate to
conduct hearings under this chapter and pursuant to the State Act.
   (B)   The qualifications and appointment of the Special Magistrate shall be
as follows:
      (1)   The Special Magistrate shall be appointed by the City Commission
and shall serve with compensation as established by the City Commission by
resolution.
      (2)   The Special Magistrate must be both an attorney and a member of the
Florida Bar for a minimum of five years.
      (3)   The Special Magistrate will be bound by the code of ethics of the
Florida Bar as currently proscribed or as amended from time to time.
   (C)   Rules and regulations, consistent with the provisions of Florida Law,
necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter may be adopted by
resolution of the City Commission. (Ord. 1866, passed 1-11-17)
§ 73.07 NOTICE OF VIOLATION HEARINGS.
   The city authorizes its Special Magistrates, as may be appointed from time
to time by the City Commission, to serve as the city’s Local Hearing Officer,
as defined by F.S. § 316.003(91), as amended from time to time. The Local
Hearing Officer shall conduct hearings in accordance with the requirements of
F.S. 316.0083, as amended from time to time. Administrative Costs shall be
assessed in those cases in which the violation is upheld, in an amount to be
established by resolution of the City Commission. (Ord. 1866, passed 1-11-17)
CHAPTER 74: PROHIBITION OF SHARED MOBILITY DEVICES WITHOUT CITY APPROVAL
Section
   74.01   Applicability
   74.02   Definitions
   74.03   Operation of a shared mobility device
   74.04   Operation of a shared mobility device program subject to city
approval
§ 74.01 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the use and parking of shared
mobility devices. For the purposes of this chapter, an operator or his/her/its
designated agent shall be liable for complying with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1925, passed 6-5-19)
§ 74.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning
indicated:
   CITY MANAGER. Shall have the same definition as provided in §
52.31.
   OPERATOR. Any person or entity that owns, operates, distributes,
redistributes, services or rebalances any shared mobility device which is part
of a shared mobility device program.
   SHARED MOBILITY DEVICE. Any vehicle, including but not limited to: golf
carts, mopeds, electric bicycles, segways, electric skateboards, and motorized
scooters, not registered with the State of Florida, designed to transport
persons, and which are propelled by power other than muscular power, which are
part of a shared mobility device program.
   SHARED MOBILITY DEVICE PROGRAM. A program, generally, in which a shared
mobility device is made available for use to individuals on a short term basis
for a fee.
   SIDEWALK. Shall have the same meaning as provided in F.S. § 316.003(74).
   USER. Any individual operating or riding upon a shared mobility device.
(Ord. 1925, passed 6-5-19)
§ 74.03 OPERATION OF A SHARED MOBILITY DEVICE.
   Unless authorized under the Americans with Disabilities Act, operation and
use of any shared mobility device by a user on the sidewalk or sidewalk areas
within the city shall be a violation of this section. (Ord. 1925, passed 6-5-
19)
§ 74.04 OPERATION OF A SHARED MOBILITY DEVICE PROGRAM SUBJECT TO CITY APPROVAL.
   (A)   No operator shall display, offer or make available for rent any shared
mobility device within the city unless the person or company has a valid, fully
executed memorandum of understanding with the city or has obtained approval
from the city through an established process.
   (B)   A violation of this section shall be considered a code enforcement
violation and is punishable with a fine, to be established by resolution. Each
day the operator of the shared mobility device has the shared mobility device
in the city in violation of this section shall be considered a separate
instance and a separate violation of this section.
   (C)   A shared mobility device that is displayed, offered, or made available
for rent by an operator without a valid memorandum of understanding with the
city or a shared mobility device that is abandoned on a city right-of-way or
private property, without permission from the owner of such private property,
shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the city. In order to retrieve an
impounded shared mobility device, an operator must demonstrate proper proof of
ownership and pay an impoundment fee, to be established by resolution, per
shared mobility device reflecting the city's enforcement, investigation,
storage and impound costs.
(Ord. 1925, passed 6-5-19)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ABANDONED PROPERTY AND VEHICLES
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   CIVIL DEFENSE
      
93.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
94.   GARBAGE, RUBBISH, LITTER, AND WEEDS
      
95.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
      
96.   NOISE
      
97.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
98.   (RESERVED)
      
99.   VEHICLE REPAIRS
      
99.5.   CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY; BASKETBALL POLES, BACKBOARDS AND HOOPS
      
100.   NAMING AND RECOGNITION PROCEDURES
      
101.   NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURES
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED PROPERTY AND VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Abandonment of property prohibited; notice and removal
   
90.02   Inoperable motor vehicles prohibited
Disposal
   
90.10   Chief of Police to be custodian; records to be kept
   
90.11   Disposal by public sale
   
90.12   Disposal of worthless property
   
90.13   Reclaiming of property by owner
Real Property
   
90.20   Abandoned real property
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 ABANDONMENT OF PROPERTY PROHIBITED; NOTICE AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided for herein, for the purpose of this chapter
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning. Definitions and regulations pertaining to
abandoned real property are as set forth in §
90.20.
      (1)   ABANDONED PROPERTY. All tangible personal property (including motor
vehicles) which does not have an identifiable owner and which has been disposed
of on public or quasi-public property, in a wrecked, inoperative, or partially
dismantled condition or which has no apparent intrinsic value to the rightful
owner.
      (2)   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any person who is elected, appointed, or
employed full- time by the city who is vested with authority to bear arms and
make arrests, and whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection
of crime or the enforcement of the penal, criminal, traffic, or highway laws of
the state. This definition  includes all certified supervisory and command
personnel whose duties include, in whole or in part, the supervision, training,
guidance, and management responsibilities of full-time law enforcement officers
or auxiliary law enforcement officers but does not include support personnel
employed by the city.
      (3)   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Lands and improvements owned by the federal
government, the State of Florida, the county, or municipalities lying within
the county, and sovereignty submerged lands located adjacent to the county or
municipality, and includes buildings, grounds, parks, playgrounds, streets,
sidewalks, parkways, rights-of-way, and other similar property.
      (4) QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY. The portion of the following lands and
improvements which are open to and frequented by the general public for
pedestrian and vehicular traffic and access and used for the stopping,
standing, or parking of motor vehicles, trucks, or trailers:
         (a)   Structures built and intended to be used for retail shops,
department stores, restaurants, travel services, and other allied business and
service establishments under one ownership or management, which shall include
shopping centers and shopping malls;
         (b)   A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by two or
more families or individuals living independently of each other, which shall
include duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, and condominium developments and
associations; or
         (c)   An easement granting the city, a person or persons, or a
corporation, the right to use a portion of the property for the construction,
operation, maintenance, transmission, or distribution of gas, electrical
energy, cable television services, or water or sewer distribution systems.
   (B)   Whenever the law enforcement officer shall ascertain that an article
of abandoned property is present on public or quasi-public property within the
limits of the city, he shall cause a notice to be placed upon the article in
substantially the following form:
NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY.
This property, to wit: (setting forth brief description) is unlawfully upon
public or quasi-public property known as (setting forth brief description of
location) and must be removed within five days or, if the property is a boat,
ten days from date of this notice; otherwise it shall be presumed to be
abandoned property and will be removed and destroyed by order of (setting forth
name of local government). If the property is a motor vehicle or boat, the
owner will be liable for the costs of removal and destruction. The person to
whom this notice is directed or their duly authorized agents may file a written
request for a hearing before the city’s Code Enforcement Board within five days
after service of this notice for the purpose of showing that the violation does
not exist, or why such violation should not be remedied by the city at the
expense of such persons. Dated this: (setting forth the date of posting of
notice). Signed: (setting forth name, title, address, and telephone number of
law enforcement officer).
      (1)   This notice shall be not less than eight inches by ten inches and
shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the
elements.
      (2)   In addition to posting, the law enforcement officer shall make a
reasonable effort to ascertain the name and address of the owner; and, if such
is reasonably available to the law enforcement officer, he shall mail a copy of
the notice to the owner on or before the date of posting.
   (C)   If, at the end of five days or (if the property is a boat) ten days
after posting the notice, the owner or any person interested in the abandoned
article or articles described in the notice has not removed the article or
articles from public or quasi-public property or requested a hearing before the
city’s Code Enforcement Board as provided in division (D), the law enforcement
officer may cause the article or articles of abandoned property to be removed
and destroyed. The salvage value, if any, of the article or articles shall be
retained by the city to be applied against the cost of removal and destruction,
unless the costs of removal and destruction are paid by the owner as provided
in division (F), in which case the salvage value may be deposited in the city’s
General Fund.
   (D)   Hearing after notice to remove.
      (1)   Within five days after the mailing or other service of the notice
provided for in divisions (B) and (D) herein, the persons to whom the notice is
directed or their duly authorized agents may file a written request for a
hearing before the City Code Enforcement Board for the purpose of showing if
the violation complained of by the city law enforcement officer does not, in
fact, exist, or why such violation should not be remedied by the city at the
expense of such persons.
      (2)   The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing
of the request therefor and the persons to whom the notices were directed shall
be advised of the time and place of such hearing at least five days in advance
thereof. At any such hearing, the city and the persons to whom the notice was
directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as is deemed necessary and
proper by the city Code Enforcement Board.
   (E)   Whenever a law enforcement officer of the city shall ascertain that an
article of abandoned property is present on quasi-public property within the
limits of the city, the towing or removal of any abandoned property is subject
to strict compliance with the following conditions and restrictions:
      (1)   Authorization by way of consent from the owner or lessor of real
property, or any person authorized in writing by the owner or lessor, which
persons may be the designated representative of the condominium association, if
the real property is a condominium;
      (2)   Except for those properties deemed easements, the property must
post a notice meeting the following requirements:
         (a)   The notice must be prominently placed at each driveway access or
curb cut allowing vehicular access to the property, within five feet from the
public right-of-way line. If there are no curbs or access barriers, the signs
must be posted not less than one sign for each 25 feet of lot frontage.
         (b)   The notice must clearly indicate, in not less than two-inch
high, light reflective letters on a contrasting background, that unauthorized
vehicles will be towed away at the owner’s expense. The words “tow-away zone”
must be included on the sign in not less than four-inch high letters.
         (c)   The notice must also provide the name and current telephone
number of the person or firm towing or removing the vehicles, if the property
owner, lessor, or person in control of the property has a written contract with
the towing company.
         (d)   The sign structure containing the required notices must be
permanently installed with the bottom of the sign not less than four feet above
ground level and must be continuously maintained on the property for not less
than 24 hours prior to the towing or removal of any vehicles;
      (3)   The owner or lessor of real property shall indemnify and hold any
city law enforcement officer, any person authorized by the city’s law
enforcement officer, or any other agent or employee of the city, harmless and
immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, while in the discharge of duties
and actions imposed by this section; and
      (4)   Any towing business which tows or removes any motor vehicle within
the limits of the city in accordance with the provisions of this section shall
indemnify and hold any city law enforcement officer, any person authorized by
the city’s law enforcement officer, or any other agent or employee of the city
harmless and immune from prosecution, civil or criminal.
   (F)   The owner of any abandoned motor vehicle or boat who, after notice as
provided in this section, does not remove the vehicle or boat within the
specified period shall be liable to the city for all costs of removal and
destruction of the property, less any salvage value received by the city. Upon
removal and destruction, the law enforcement officer shall notify the owner of
the amount owed and of the penalty provision of this division (F).
      (1)   In the case of an abandoned boat, any person who neglects or
refuses to pay such amount shall not be entitled to be issued a certificate of
registration for any other boat until such costs have been paid. The law
enforcement officer shall supply the Department of Natural Resources with a
list of persons whose boat registration privileges have been revoked under this
division (F); and neither the Department, the Tax Collector, or other person
acting as agent thereof shall issue a certificate of registration to a person
whose boat registration privilege has been revoked, as provided by this
division (F), until such costs have been paid.
      (2)   In the case of an abandoned motor vehicle, any person who neglects
or refuses to pay such amount shall be subject to a fine of $100.
   (G)   Whoever opposes, obstructs, or resists the law enforcement officer or
any person authorized by the law enforcement officer in the discharge of his
duties as provided in this section upon conviction shall be punished as set
forth in §
90.99.
   (H)   The law enforcement officer or any person authorized by the law
enforcement officer shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for
reasonable, good faith trespass upon real property while in the discharge of
duties imposed by this section.
(‘69 Code, § 2-73) (Ord. 553, passed 12-11-80; Am. Ord. 84-45, passed 11-7-84;
Am. Ord. 776, passed 2-5-86; Am. Ord. 864, passed 4-20-88; Am. Ord. 1660,
passed 3-17-10) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      (1)   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is in a wrecked or partially
wrecked condition, or a dismantled or partially dismantled condition, or has a
flat tire or tire(s), or is made inoperative by means of a hoist, common bumper
jack, or any other method of elevating a vehicle.
   (B)   Prohibited; exception. It shall be unlawful to place, keep, or permit
to be kept or placed, any inoperable motor vehicles; or any motor vehicle not
duly and currently licensed for operation under state motor license laws; or
any motor vehicle not having affixed a valid safety inspection certificate, on
any of the public streets, highways, parks, parkways, or alleys; on any other
public property; on any vacant land; or on any occupied or built-upon lot or
tracts of land within the municipal limits of the city. Nonetheless, it shall
not be unlawful for a lot, tract, or parcel of land properly zoned for such use
to contain any inoperable vehicles as herein described, if the lot, tract, or
parcel of land is securely enclosed by a tightfitting board fence at least six
feet in height that shall obscure entirely any view into the property from
adjacent surroundings.
(‘69 Code, § 12-2) (Ord. 166, passed 9-5-67; Am. Ord. 449, passed 8-15-76; Am.
Ord. 1504, passed 12-15-04) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Duty of city to report removal of abandoned vehicles to state, see F.S. §
715.05
DISPOSAL
§ 90.10 CHIEF OF POLICE TO BE CUSTODIAN; RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   The Chief of Police is designated as the custodian of all lost, confiscated,
impounded, captured, or abandoned property coming into the possession of
officers or employees of the city. He shall keep proper, adequate, and complete
records of the acquisition, how acquired, and the final disposition made of the
same, or of the proceeds of the sale of the same.
(‘69 Code, § 2-68) (Ord. 28, passed 7-24-60)
§ 90.11 DISPOSAL BY PUBLIC SALE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police or the City Clerk shall call to the attention of
the Commission at periodic intervals the extent and value of property in the
categories described in this chapter that has accumulated, in order that a
determination can be made by the City Commission as to whether or not there
exists enough property with a sufficient value to justify the expense of a
public sale. A public sale shall be held at such periods of time as the
Commission shall determine is warranted. Upon a determination being made by the
Commission that a sale is warranted, the Commission may, by motion, provide the
extent to which the sale shall be advertised, including whether the property is
of sufficient value to justify the cost of advertisement in a newspaper or
whether merely a posting of notice of the public sale on the City Hall bulletin
board is warranted.
   (B)   Prior to the sale being held, the City Clerk shall attempt to notify
as many persons as possible who might be interested in purchasing the articles
to be sold in order to secure the best available bids.
   (C)   All sales shall be for cash and the proceeds thereof shall be disposed
of in accordance with the procedure established by the City Commission. The
city shall have a right to participate as a bidder at the sale. In the event
there are no bidders, the property shall be retained by the Chief of Police as
custodian until a similar sale is next held, and attempts are made again to
secure bids on the property.
(‘69 Code, § 2-69) (Ord. 28, passed 7-24-60)
§ 90.12 DISPOSAL OF WORTHLESS PROPERTY.
   In the event any property designated in this chapter is, in the opinion of
the Commission worthless, it can be disposed of in any manner the Commission
might direct.
(‘69 Code, § 2-70) (Ord. 28, passed 7-24-60)
§ 90.13 RECLAIMING OF PROPERTY BY OWNER.
   (A)   Nothing provided in this chapter shall prevent a lawful owner of the
property from reclaiming it on proof of ownership and the reimbursement to the
city of any costs it may have incurred relative to its having the custody of
the property, unless the property is confiscated property.
   (B)   In each case where the city reissues a check for an amount exceeding
$25 for “property presumed abandoned”, as defined in F.S. Chapter 717, as may
be amended from time to time, the payee shall pay the city an administrative
fee of $25. The city shall deduct the $25 administrative fee from the total
amount reissued to the payee. The administrative fee shall be increased
annually each October 1 (commencing October 1, 1996) based on the change in the
Consumer Price Index for “All Items” for all urban consumers in the United
States as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the previous 12 month
period ending April 1st.
(‘69 Code, § 2-71) (Ord. 28, passed 7-24-60; Am. Ord. 1154, passed 5-1-96)
REAL PROPERTY
§ 90.20 ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section to
establish a process to address the amount of abandoned real property located
within the city. This section is further intended to specifically establish an
abandoned residential property program as a mechanism to protect residential
neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance
and security of abandoned properties.
   (B)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY. Any property that is vacant, under a current
notice of default and/or notice of mortgagee's sale by the lender or a pending
tax assessor's lien sale, and/or properties that have been the subject of a
foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a mortgage
involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu
of foreclosure or sale.
      ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY.  A property that is accessible through a
compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, and the like.
      ACCESSIBLE STRUCTURE. A structure/building that is unsecured and/or
breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized
persons.
      ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any full-time law enforcement officer, building
official, code enforcement officer, fire inspector or building inspector
employed within the city.
      EVIDENCE OF VACANCY. Any condition that, on its own, or combined with
other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the
property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to
overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of abandoned personal property,
statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents,
among other evidence that the property is vacant.
      FORECLOSURE. The process by which a property, placed as security for a
real estate loan, is sold at public sale to satisfy the debt if the borrower
defaults.
      NOMINAL SALVAGE VALUE. The value of an article of abandoned or derelict
property which a reasonably prudent person would believe is the fair market
value of the property, taking into consideration its useful life, earning
capacity or replacement cost, less depreciation and items of general or special
depreciation, would be nominally greater than the costs of salvage including
the removal, transportation, storage and sale of same.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. All lands and improvements other than public lands and
improvements.
      PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY. A local property manager, property
maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the maintenance of
abandoned real property.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Canals, all waterways, lands and improvements owned by a
governmental body or any governmental agency, including but not limited to
easements andrights-of-way, but excluding the campus of any institution of the
state university system.
      RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. Any improved real property, or portion thereof,
situated in the city, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes,
and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real
property.
      VACANT. Any building/structure that is not legally occupied.
   (C)   Applicability. This section shall be considered cumulative and not
superseding or subject to any other law or provision for same, but shall rather
be an additional remedy available to the city above and beyond any other state,
county and/or local provisions for same.
   (D)   Penalties. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in §
90.99 as applicable.
   (E)   Public nuisance.  All abandoned real property is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance, the abatement of which, pursuant to the police power, is
hereby declared to be necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the
residents of the city.
   (F)   For the purpose of this section, real estate brokers and agents,
solely marketing and/or selling real property on behalf of a mortgagee, shall
not be considered an agent, servant, or employee of the mortgagee.
   (G)   Registration of abandoned real property.
      (1)   Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within
the city shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for
the mortgage, upon default by the mortgagor, prior to the issuance of a notice
of default. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy,
it shall be deemed abandoned and the mortgagee shall, within ten days of the
inspection, register the property with the City Manager, or his or her
designee, on forms provided by the city. A registration is required for each
vacant property.
      (2)   If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be
inspected by the mortgagee or his designee monthly until: (1) the mortgagor or
other party remedies the default; or (2) it is found to be vacant or shows
evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the mortgagee
shall, within ten days of that inspection, register the property with the City
Clerk, or his or her designee, on forms provided by the city.
      (3)   Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the
mortgagee, the direct mailing address of the mortgagee, a direct contact name
and telephone number of mortgagee facsimile number and e-mail address and, in
the case of a corporation or out-of-area mortgagee, the local property
management company or realtor responsible for the security and maintenance of
the property.
      (4)   An annual registration fee in the amount of $150 per property shall
accompany the registration form(s).
      (5)   This section shall also apply to properties that have been the
subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the
beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties
transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
      (6)   Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual
registration requirement, security and maintenance standards of this section as
long as they remain vacant.
      (7)   Any person or corporation that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the registration
within ten days of the change.
   (H)   Maintenance requirements.
      (1)   Properties subject to this section shall be kept free of weeds,
overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any
accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required
by federal, state, or local law, discarded personal items included, but not
limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material
or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned.
      (2)   The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar
markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches
the color of the exterior structure.
      (3)   Front, side, and rear yard landscaping shall be maintained in
accordance with the city's standard at the time registration was required.
      (4)   Landscape shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground
covers, bushes, trees, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or
bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residentialinstallation.
Landscape shall not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar
material.
      (5)   Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering,
irrigation, cutting, and mowing of required landscape and removal of all
trimmings.
      (6)   Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains free and
clear of pollutants and debris. Pools and spas shall comply with the enclosure
requirements of the City Code of Ordinances and Florida Building Code, as
amended from time to time.
      (7)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to
properly maintain the property may result in a violation of the City Code and
issuance of a citation or notice of violation/notice of hearing by a city code
enforcement officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the city's
Special Magistrate or Code Enforcement Board, the city may take the necessary
action to ensure compliance with this section.
   (I)   Security requirements.
      (1)   Properties subject to this section shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
      (2)   A SECURE MANNER shall include, but not be limited to, the closure
and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may
allow a child to access the interior of the property and/or structure. Broken
windows shall be secured by reglazing, shuttering or boarding of the windows so
as to meet all applicable laws, codes and regulations.
      (3)   If the property is owned by a corporation and/or out-of-area
mortgagee, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform
bi-weekly inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this
section, and any other applicable laws.
      (4)   (a)   The property shall be posted with the name and 24-hour
contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting
shall be no less than an eight-inch by ten-inch sign. The posting shall contain
the following language:
THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY:
(Name of property management company)
TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL:
(Telephone number of property management company)
         (b)   The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing
the street to the front of the property so it is visible, or secured to the
exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the
property so it is visible or, if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient
size to support the posting in a location as close as possible to the main door
entrance of the property. Exterior posting shall be constructed of and printed
with weather-resistant materials.
      (5)   The local property management company shall inspect the property on
a bi-weekly basis to ensure that the property is in compliance with this
section. The local property management company shall provide a copy of the
inspection reports to the code enforcement division. Inspection reports
rendered pursuant to this section may be transmitted electronically.
      (6)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to
properly maintain the property may result in a violation of the city Code and
issuance of a citation or notice of violation/notice of hearing by a city code
enforcement officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the city's
special magistrate or Code Enforcement Board, the city may take the necessary
action to ensure compliance with this section.
   (J)   Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty. Whoever opposes,
obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the
enforcement office in the discharge of duties as provided in this section, upon
conviction, shall be punished as provided herein.
   (K)   Immunity of enforcement officer. Any enforcement officer or any person
authorized by the enforcement officer shall be immune from prosecution, civil
or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon real property while in
the discharge of duties imposed by this section.
   (L)   Additional authority. The Director of Code Compliance, or his or her
designee, shall have authority to require the mortgagee and/or owner of record
of any property affected by this section to implement additional maintenance
and/or security measures, including but not limited to securing any and all
doors, windows or other openings, employment of an on-site security guard, or
other measures as may be reasonably required to help prevent further decline of
the property.
   (M)   Adoption of rules; expenditure of funds; declaration of city purpose.
The City Manager, consistent with his or her duties and authorities under the
City Charter, including those duties and authorities relating to emergency
situations, is authorized andempowered to adopt rules and regulations and
expend city funds as may be reasonably necessary and available to carry out the
terms of this section, the expenditure of such funds being declared a proper
city purpose.
(Ord. 1660, passed 3-17-10)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not already provided shall, upon conviction, be fined not
more than $500, or imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both.
(‘69 Code, §§ 1-8, 2-74)
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §
90.01 shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500, or imprisoned not
more than 60 days, or both.
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Walking dog or cat; defecation on property of others prohibited
   
91.02   Bird sanctuary
   
91.03   Feeding wild ducks prohibited
   
91.04   Wild and exotic animals
   
91.05   Animal displays or exhibits
Dogs
   
91.10   Licensing, vaccination regulations of county to apply
   
91.11   Barking, noisy dogs prohibited
   
91.12   [Reserved]
   
91.13   Straying onto, damaging property of another prohibited
   
91.14   Impoundment of strays; payment of costs for release
   
91.15   Nuisance and dangerous dogs
   
91.16   When warning signs required
   
91.17   Tethering of dogs
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Inability to read utility meter due to presence of vicious or barking dog,
see §
50.03
Statutory reference:
   Dogs and cats to be sterilized prior to release from animal shelters, see
F.S. § 823.15
   Livestock running at large prohibited, see F.S. Ch. 588
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 WALKING DOG OR CAT; DEFECATION ON PROPERTY OF OTHERS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person walking dogs or cats to allow the
dogs or cats to defecate on the private property of others, or on city
property.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person walking dogs or cats to allow the
dogs or cats to defecate on the swales of the city unless the defecation is
removed by the person.
   (C)   In the case of tenants of rental units owning dogs or cats, the land
owned by the landlord on which the rental unit is located shall not be
considered as private property for the purpose of this section.
(‘69 Code, § 4-1) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 BIRD SANCTUARY.
   (A)   The city is hereby declared a bird sanctuary.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to hunt, wound, molest, injure, or kill any birds
or related wildlife in the lands embracing the city.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to capture except for the preservation of the
health and welfare of the public, for resale or private use, any birds or
related wildlife in the city.
(Ord. 852, passed 11-18-87) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 FEEDING WILD DUCKS PROHIBITED.
     It shall be unlawful for any person to feed or cause to be fed or leave
food for consumption by any wild duck within the city.
(Ord. 1608, passed 6-4-08) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      DISPLAY. Any exhibition, public showing, presentation, display
exposition, fair, act, circus, ride, trade show, petting zoo, carnival, parade,
race, or similar undertaking in which animals are required to
perform tricks, give rides or participate as accompaniments for entertainment,
amusement, or benefit of a live audience, whether or not a fee is charged.
      MOBILE or TRAVELING HOUSING FACILITY. A transporting vehicle such as a
truck, trailer or railway car, used to transport or house animals while
traveling for exhibition or other performance.
      OFFICER. Any law or code enforcement officer of the city.
      WILD or EXOTIC ANIMAL. Any live animal from any of the following
scientific classifications:
         (a)   Artiodactyla (including hippopotamuses, giraffes, camels, and
llamas, but excepting cattle, swine, sheep, and goats);
         (b)   Crocodilia (including alligators and crocodiles);
         (c)   Elephantidae (elephants);
         (d)   Felidae (including tigers, lions, jaguars, leopards, cheetahs,
and cougars, or any hybrid thereof, but excluding domestic cats);
         (e)   Marsupialia (including kangaroos and koalas);
         (f)   Non-human primates (including apes, monkeys, and lemurs);
         (g)    Perissodactyla (including rhinoceroses, tapirs, and zebras);
         (h)   Pinnipedia (including seals, sea lions, and walruses); and
         (i)   Ursidae (bears).
   (B)   Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a
bullhook, ankus, whip, electrical prod or other implement or tool that causes
unjustifiable pain or suffering to a wild or exotic animal within the municipal
limits of the city. For purposes of this section, the term USE shall include
brandishing, exhibiting or displaying a bullhook, ankus, whip, electric prod or
an implement designed to look like a bullhook, ankus, whip, or electric prod in
the presence of a wild or exotic animal for the purpose of training or
controlling the behavior of the animal.
   (C)   Administration and enforcement. This section may be enforced by any
law or code enforcement officer of the city.
   (D)   Violations of this section.
      (1)   The city may prosecute any person for violation of this section by
issuance of a city ordinance citation.
      (2)   An officer who has probable cause to believe that a person has
committed an act in violation of this section may issue a citation to the
person who has committed the civil infraction.
      (3)   Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished as
provided in §
10.99 of this Code. (Ord. 1941, passed 2-19-20)
§ 91.05 ANIMAL DISPLAYS OR EXHIBITS.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      DISPLAY. Any exhibition, public showing, presentation, display
exposition, fair, act, circus, ride, trade show, petting zoo, carnival, parade,
race, or similar undertaking in which animals are required to perform tricks,
give rides or participate as accompaniments for entertainment, amusement, or
benefit of a live audience, whether or not a fee is charged.
      OFFICER. As defined in §
91.15 of this chapter.
      CRUELTY. As defined in §
91.15 of this chapter.
      USE. Includes but shall not be limited to: brandishing, exhibiting or
displaying a bullhook, ankus, whip, electric prod or an implement designed to
look like a bullhook, ankus, whip, or electric prod in the presence of an
animal.
   (B)   Prohibitions. No person or entity shall exhibit or display to the
public for entertainment, amusement or promotion, whether gratuitously or for a
fee, any live animal on property within the city's geographical boundaries
unless they have first secured all federal and state licenses and permits
authorizing such exhibit or display and all applicable city permits and
business tax receipts.
   (C)   In addition to complying with all federal and state regulations
regarding the proper treatment of animals on exhibit or display, any person or
entity that exhibits or displays to the public for entertainment, amusement or
promotion any live animal on property within the city must comply with the
following:
      (1)   There shall be no exhibition or display of any sick, injured or
crippled animal.
      (2)   The provisions set forth in §
91.04 of this chapter and the use of any techniques and devices that cause
physical injury, torment or pain and suffering to animals are prohibited.
      (3)   The animals shall not be kept on hard surfaces such as concrete,
asphalt, or gravel. Animals shall only be permitted on unimproved, natural
surfaces and shall not be kept or displayed in an environment that endangers
the health or safety of the animal.
      (4)   The animals must be kept in appropriate housing and husbandry
conditions including regular access to food, water, shade from direct sunlight,
shelter from inclement weather, nest boxes or dens, relief from human
interaction, and veterinary care.
      (5)   The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl whereby frequent or
habitual howling, yelping, barking , crowing or making of other noises shall
annoy or disturb a reasonable person of normal sensitivities across real
property boundaries is prohibited.
      (6)   Animal display/exhibit permit. Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, no vertebrate animals shall be displayed by any person or entity for
entertainment or amusement purposes on private property unless the person or
entity obtains an animal display/exhibit permit from the city according to the
requirements of this section. An application for an animal display/exhibit
permit shall be submitted to the city no later than 45 days before the date of
the planned animal display. Payment of a fee, which amount shall be established
by resolution of the City Commission, shall be required prior to issuance of
the permit. Each such permit shall be valid for only a specific 24-hour, one
calendar day period covering the date of the permitted animal display unless
the circumstances of the proposed exhibit otherwise dictate, in which case the
permit shall be extended for a reasonable time to cover the event: provided,
however, that no extended license shall be granted to other than a USDA-
licensed animal exhibitor. The permit shall be displayed prominently at the
site of the animal display. No applicant may obtain more than six permits
within a one-year period. The applicant must provide the following information
on the permit application:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   The address of the property upon which the animal(s) will be
displayed;
         (c)   A description of the purpose for which the animal(s) will be
displayed;
         (d)   The type or species of each animal to be displayed;
         (e)   A disclosure of any and all investigations conducted by a law or
code enforcement entity relating to animal cruelty, abuse or neglect, including
a summary of the issues being investigated and the outcome of the
investigation;
         (f)   Each permit application must also be accompanied by a
certificate (on a form provided by the city) from a veterinarian licensed to
practice in Florida, and such certificate shall state the following:
            1.   The veterinarian is in good standing with the Florida
Department of Professional Regulation;
            2.   Identify the specific animal to which the certificate applies
by description, and not merely an assigned name;
            3.   Each animal to be displayed has been examined within the past
30 days and is in good health and fit and suitable for the purposes of its
display;
            4.   Each animal to be displayed is not of an exotic, threatened or
endangered species as defined by the United States Department of the Interior.
   (D)   Any officer shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this
section.
   (E)   The city, through its officers may terminate any exhibition or display
of live animals if, in their sole discretion, said display or exhibition poses
a danger to an animal(s) or to humans, or is cruel and inhumane. Prior to
termination of the exhibition or display, the animal exhibitor or his
representative or employee, if available at the site of display, shall be
informed of the danger posed by or objection to said exhibition or display and
shall be given an opportunity to correct or remedy same if the danger or
condition is immediately remediable. Failure to take immediate action by the
exhibitor to correct the condition or danger as required. shall result in the
termination of the exhibition or display by the officer.
   (F)   Any party aggrieved by termination of an exhibition or display
pursuant to division (E) of this section may request an appeal in writing to
the City Manager within three calendar days of said decision. The City Manager
or his or her designee shall schedule a meeting within ten business days of
receipt of the written request and may overrule, affirm or modify the decision
of the officer.
   (G)   The requirements of this section are supplemental in nature, in
addition to all other permits, licenses. laws and other regulations governing
animals. business, or land use. This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Educational exhibits or workshops featuring Florida wildlife
through a licensed and permitted non-profit wildlife sanctuary or wildlife
hospital; or
      (2)   Any retail use; or
      (3)   Police Department K-9 performances; or
      (4)   Licensed emotional support or service animals and domesticated
animals and pets including, without limitation, reptiles.
   (H)   Administration and enforcement.  This section may be enforced by any
officer of the city.
   (I)   Violations of this section.
      (1)   The city may prosecute any person for violation this section by
issuance of a city ordinance citation.
      (2)   An officer who has probable cause to believe that a person has
committed an act in violation of this section may issue a citation to the
person who has committed the civil infraction.
      (3)    Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished
as provided in §
10.99 of this Code. (Ord. 1942, passed 2-19-20)
DOGS
§ 91.10 LICENSING, VACCINATION REGULATIONS OF COUNTY TO APPLY.
All persons owning or in the possession or control of dogs within the city
shall be required to comply with the dog licensing requirements, vaccination,
and other rules and regulations of the county pertaining to the keeping,
maintaining, and ownership of dogs. Violation of the county rules and
regulations shall constitute a violation of this code.
(‘69 Code, § 4-12) (Ord. 37, passed 5-4-61; Am. Ord. 649, passed 4-6-83)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.11 BARKING, NOISY DOGS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any dog within the city which
violates the provisions of this code.
(‘69 Code, § 4-11) (Ord. 37, passed 5-4-61; Am. Ord. 649, passed 4-6-83)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.12 [RESERVED].
§ 91.13 STRAYING ONTO, DAMAGING PROPERTY OF ANOTHER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or is in control of or in
charge of any dog, to allow or permit the dog to wander or stray on the
property of another or damage the property.
   (B)   Proof of the ownership of, and the identity of the dog shall be
sufficient to convict the person owning or having charge of or control of the
dog of the violation of this section.
(‘69 Code, § 4-14) (Ord. 37, passed 5-4-61; Am. Ord. 649, passed 4-6-83)
Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Dog owners responsible for harm done to another, see F.S. § 767.01
§ 91.14 IMPOUNDMENT OF STRAYS; PAYMENT OF COST FOR RELEASE.
   Any police officer of the city, the Public Health Officer of the county, or
any representative of the Humane Society may take into immediate custody and
impound any dog that is wandering the streets, straying on public or private
property of another, or is being maintained in violation of this subchapter.
The owner or party demanding possession of the dog shall pay all the costs of
keeping the dog before the dog is released.
(‘69 Code, § 4-15) (Ord. 37, passed 5-4-61; Am. Ord. 649, passed 4-6-83)
§ 91.15 NUISANCE AND DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AT LARGE. Not on the owner's property, and not under restraint or the
direct control, custody, charge or possession of the owner, or other
responsible person.
      CONTROL. The regulation of the possession, ownership, care and custody.
      CRUELTY. As defined in F.S. § 828.02, as may be amended from time to
time.
      DANGEROUS DOG. As defined in F.S. § 767.11, as may be amended from time
to time.
      ENCLOSURE or PROPER ENCLOSURE OF A DANGEROUS DOG. As defined in F.S. §
767.11, as may be amended from time to time.
      HARBORING. The act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing
premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter, or care for a period of
at least 48 hours. HARBORING shall not include circumstances where an
individual captures, locates and attempts to find the animal's owner in good
faith.
      OFFICER. Any law enforcement officer as defined in F.S. § 943.10, code
enforcement officer, or any animal control officer.
      OWNER or KEEPER. Any person, firm or association or corporation who owns,
keeps, harbors or controls an animal. If the owner is a minor, as defined by
statute, the minor's parent(s) or legal guardian shall be the owner for
purposes of this section.
      SEVERE INJURY. As defined in F.S. § 767.11, as may be amended from time
to time.
      UNPROVOKED. As defined in F.S. § 767.11, as may be amended from time to
time.
   (B)   Dogs at large prohibited.
      (1)   Dogs at large are found to be a public nuisance, and it shall be a
violation of this section for any person to permit any dog to be at large as
defined herein.
      (2)   No dog shall be allowed to stray, run or go at large, upon any
public property or street, sidewalk, park, or on the private property of
another without the consent of the property owner.
      (3)   Any person confining or leashing a dog must do so in a manner that
is not injurious to the dog's health, or a violation of §
91.17.
      (4)   In order for a dog to be allowed on a public street, the dog shall
be under the direct control of the owner or keeper. In order for a dog to be
allowed in a park or other public property, it must be permitted by the city
for a specific event and the dog shall be under the direct control of the owner
or keeper. Sufficient precautions must be taken by the owner of the dog and/or
sponsor of the event to ensure the safety and protection of both the public and
other animals. Notwithstanding this section, dogs shall be permitted at the
city's dog parks in accordance with the rules of such parks.
      (5)   Any dog at large that has attacked or bitten any person or animal
in an unprovoked attack shall be a violation of this section.
      (6)   Any dog found by an officer to be at large may be seized and
impounded and, as an alternative or in addition to impoundment, the city's Code
Enforcement Officer may issue a notice of violation to the owner of the dog, as
provided in §
10.99.
   (C)   Dangerous dogs.
      (1)   The Police Department shall designate at least one law enforcement
officer to serve as a liaison to work with the city's Code Enforcement
Department on all dangerous dog-related matters.
      (2)   The process and procedures for classifying a dog as a dangerous dog
shall be as set forth in F.S. § 767.12, as may be amended from time to time.
Once a dog has been classified as dangerous, any person so seeks to own or keep
a dangerous dog in the city shall comply with the provisions of F.S. § 767.12.
      (3)   In addition to the requirements set forth in F.S. § 767.12, no
person shall own or keep a dangerous dog without registering the dangerous dog
with the city and obtaining a dangerous dog license tag from the city within 14
calendar days of either the classification of dangerousness by the city; or, in
the event an appeal of such classification is taken, the upholding of the
classification by a hearing officer or a court of competent jurisdiction. The
procedures and requirements for registering the dangerous dog are as follows:
         (a)   The owner or keeper shall complete a dangerous dog registration
form for the dog so classified and pay an initial dangerous dog registration
fee in the amount of $500.
         (b)   A dangerous dog license tag shall be obtained from the city. The
dangerous dog license tag must be renewed annually. Failure to renew the
dangerous dog license tag within 30 calendar days from the expiration of the
previous tag will result in the issuance of a notice of violation and will
subject the owner or keeper, and/or property owner to fines for noncompliance
with this section. In the event a current dangerous dog license tag is lost,
destroyed, or misplaced or otherwise missing, a replacement dangerous dog
license tag must be obtained at the fee set forth in this section.
         (c)   Any additional fees and costs incurred by the owner as a result
of registering the dog with the county as required herein shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
         (d)   The owner or keeper shall display a sign on his or her premises
warning that there is a dangerous dog on the premises. The sign shall be
visible and capable of being read from the public highway or street.
         (e)   1.   Every owner of a dangerous dog shall, at all times that he
or she owns the dog, maintain and provide a copy of an insurance policy to the
city, specifically identifying the dog as covered by the policy, in the amount
of no less than $300,000 issued by an insurer authorized to do business within
the State of Florida, payable to any person injured in malice by the dangerous
dog. Proof of financial responsibility shall be a condition precedent to the
city approving the dog's registration. Financial responsibility shall be
evidenced by filing with the City Clerk a certificate of insurance from an
insurance company authorized to do business in the state, valid for the one-
year registration period. The city will be a certificate holder such that the
city will be notified if the insurance coverages expire or terminate.
            2.   As an alternative to maintaining the insurance otherwise
required, proof of financial responsibility may also be evidenced by
establishing a security escrow where the city holds securities (and stock or
other powers appropriate to liquidate such securities) as an escrow agent. The
value of the escrow of cash and securities shall at all times be maintained in
the minimum amount of $300,000. In the event at any time the escrow is reduced,
as provided herein, it shall be a requirement that the value of the escrow be
restored to its required minimum amount. In the event there is no violation of
this division (C) and there is no police report during the registration period
for which the escrow is maintained that the dog bit or injured a human or
animal, then the escrow shall be continued to be maintained. In the event of a
police report that a dog for which the escrow is maintained bit a human or
injured an animal, the city shall notify the victim (or parent, guardian, or
owner of the victim if the victim is a minor or animal) and may use the cash or
liquidate the securities and use the net proceeds thereof to reimburse the
human (or parents or legal guardian of the human if the injured human is a
minor) for any unpaid hospital or medical or rehabilitation treatment, or for
any veterinary care or treatment provided to the animal. In the event of a
violation of this division (C), the city may use the amount in escrow to pay
for any enforcement action the city may take, including but not limited to,
seeking an order requiring the dog involved to be placed by the city in a
location outside the city and prohibited from the city at anytime in the
future. This subsection shall be supplemental to other methods of enforcing the
city's laws that are available to the city. The registrant shall reimburse the
city for any legal costs incurred by the city in establishing, monitoring, or
performing the escrow. Finally, in the event of a cash escrow, the city may
commingle the funds with other city funds, may keep any investment return
thereon, will only be required to account for the principal thereof, and only
the principal thereof will be used to determine the minimum amount of such
escrow for maintenance purposes.
         (f)   A dangerous dog is required to wear a dangerous dog license tag.
         (g)   The owner or keeper shall, on or before the effective date of
such registration for which application is being made, have an enclosure for
the dangerous dog on the property where the dangerous dog will be kept or
maintained.
      (4)   The owner or keeper of a dangerous dog shall:
         (a)   At all times ensure that the dog is securely confined indoors,
or confined in an enclosure as defined herein. At any time that a dangerous dog
is not so confined, the dog shall be muzzled with a "basket"-type muzzle and in
such a manner as to prevent it from biting or injuring any person or animal,
and kept on a leash with the owner or custodian in attendance except for while
the dog is being transported within the cab or passenger portion of any motor
vehicle, provided the vehicle has a roof, and the dog cannot escape through an
open window.
         (b)   Notify the city's Code Enforcement Manager immediately if a
dangerous dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked another animal or
has attacked a human being, or has died or has been sold or given away. If the
dangerous dog has been sold or given away, the owner or keeper shall also
provide to the city the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of
the dangerous dog.
         (c)   At all times ensure that the dog's vaccinations, including, but
not limited to, rabies vaccines, are current.
      (5)   Any dangerous dog without a valid dangerous dog license tag as
required in this division (C), or which is not maintained on property with an
enclosure, or which shall be outside of the dwelling of the owner or keeper, or
outside of an enclosure except as provided in division (C)(4)(a), may be
impounded at the city's direction by animal control or through some other
means, placed in quarantine, if necessary, for the proper length of time, or
placed by animal control in a location outside the city and prohibited from the
city at anytime in the future, after the expiration of 14 calendar days from
the date written notice is provided to the owner that such dog has been
confiscated. Notice shall be effected by registered mail, certified hand
delivery, or service of process in conformance with F.S. Ch. 48. The 14-day
time period shall allow the owner or keeper to request a hearing under this
division (C). In the event a dangerous dog is impounded, the owner shall pay a
dangerous dog impound fee, as set forth in this section.
      (6)   In the event that the owner or keeper of a dangerous dog is a
minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible for complying
with the provisions of this section. No dangerous dog license shall be issued
to any person under the age of 18 years.
   (D)   Fees.
 
Description                                Amount
Dangerous dog registration fee             $500
Dangerous dog tag replacement fee          $50
Annual dangerous dog registration fee      $250
Annual dangerous dog registration late fee $100/day
 
Changes to these fees may be amended by resolution of the City Commission.
(‘69 Code, § 4-16(a)-(e)) (Ord. 37, passed 5-4-61; Am. Ord. 649, passed 4-6-83;
Am. Ord. 758, passed 10-2-85; Am. Ord. 1245, passed 1-7-98; Am. Ord. 1503,
passed 12-15-04; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 9-17-08; Am. Ord. 1746, passed 2-20-13;
Am. Ord. 1805, passed 1-7-15) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Owner liable for acts of vicious dog, see F.S. § 767.04
§ 91.16 WHEN WARNING SIGNS REQUIRED.
   All persons owning or keeping a dog on their property who require the
performance of services by city employees or agents on their property shall be
required to post a sign on the property of a size no greater than four square
feet, warning of the presence or existence of the dog.
(‘69 Code, § 4-17) (Ord. 649, passed 4-6-83) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 TETHERING OF DOGS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
      OWNER.  Any natural person, firm, association or corporation who owns,
keeps, harbors, controls or is the responsible party for an animal. If the
owner is a minor as defined by statute, the minor's parent(s) or legal guardian
(s) shall be the owner for purposes of this section.
      TETHERING. The restraining of a dog by the tying to any object or
structure, including, without limitation, a house, tree, fence, post, garage,
weight or shed, by any means, including, without limitation, a chain, rope,
cord, leash or running line, but shall not include the use of a leash used to
walk the dog or to forms of restraint used in the transportation of a dog.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a dog's owner to tether a dog except when all
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The dog is outside and in visual range of the owner, and the owner
is located outdoors with the dog and within physical reach of the tether.
      (2)   The tether is connected to the dog by a properly fitted buckle-type
collar or a body harness made of nylon or leather, not less than one inch
width.
      (3)   That tether terminates at both ends with a swivel and is free of
tangles.
      (4)   The tether has the following properties: it is at least five times
the length of the dog's body, as measured from the tip of the nose to the base
of the tail, but shall never be less than ten feet long.
      (5)   The tether does not weigh more than 1/8 of the dog's total body
weight.
      (6)   Pulley, running line or trolley systems are at least 15 feet in
length and are less than seven feet above the ground.
      (7)   The dog is tethered in such a manner as to prevent injury,
strangulation or entanglement.
      (8)   The dog is not outside during a period of extreme weather,
including, without limitation, extreme heat or near freezing temperatures,
thunderstorms, lightning, tornadoes, tropical storms or hurricanes.
      (9)   The dog has access to clean drinking water, shade, dry ground, and,
if inclement weather conditions exist, shelter.
      (10)   The dog is not sick or injured.
      (11)   If there are multiple dogs, each dog is tethered separately and in
such a manner that the tethers shall not become entangled with each other.
      (12)   The dog is at least six months of age. Puppies shall not be
tethered.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the arrest and
criminal prosecution of an owner for acts of animal cruelty within the scope of
and punishable by the provisions of F.S. Chapter 828.
(Ord. 1667, passed 8-4-10) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating §
91.01 shall on the first offense be given a warning, and on the second and
subsequent offenses, be punished by a fine of $20 for each offense.
(‘69 Code, § 4-1(d)) (Ord. 329, passed 6-4-73)
   (B)   The penalty for each of the offenses in §
91.15 shall be $100 for each occurrence.
(Ord. 852, passed 11-18-87)
   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation found in violation of any section of
this chapter for which another penalty is not already otherwise provided, shall
be punished in accordance with §
10.99.
(‘69 Code, § 4-16(f)) (Ord. 37, passed 5-4-61; Am. Ord. 612, passed 8-4-82)
CHAPTER 92: CIVIL DEFENSE
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Definition of civil defense
   
92.02   Mutual-aid agreements
   
92.03   Contracts for use of state personnel, property
   
92.04   Enforcement of state law provisions
Administration
   
92.10   Department of Civil Defense
   
92.11   Civil Defense Coordinator
   
92.12   Civil Defense Advisory Council
   
92.13   Jurisdiction of Civil Defense Department
   
92.14   Powers, authority of State, City Commission
   
92.15   Allegiance of employees and associates required; oath
   
92.16   Political activity of Civil Defense Department prohibited
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Civil defense, see F.S. § 252.31 et seq.
   Civil emergencies, see F.S. § 870.041 et seq.
   Establishment of the Division of Public Safety
   Planning and Assistance, see F.S. § 252.32
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 DEFINITION OF CIVIL DEFENSE.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIVIL DEFENSE. The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
responsibilities and functions, other than those for which military forces or
other federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and
repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by enemy attack,
sabotage, or other hostile action, or by fire, flood, or other natural causes
as provided herein. These responsibilities and functions include, without
limitation, fire-fighting services, police services, medical and health
services, rescue, engineering, warning, communications, radiological,
biological, chemical, and other special weapons of defense, evacuation of
persons from stricken areas, movement of persons to shelter, welfare services,
emergency transportation, industrial plant protection, restoration of
utilities, resources management and control, economic stabilization, continuity
of civil government, and other functions related to civilian protection,
together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation
for and carrying out the foregoing functions.
(‘69 Code, § 7-1) (Ord. 172, passed 12-21-67)
§ 92.02 MUTUAL-AID AGREEMENTS.
   The City Commission is authorized to develop and enter into, through the
State Division of Emergency Management, mutual-aid agreements with other public
entities and private agencies within this state for reciprocal civil defense
aid and assistance in case of disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted.
Such agreements shall be consistent with the state civil defense plan and
program, and in time of emergency it shall be the duty of each local
organization for civil defense to render assistance in accordance with the
provisions of the mutual-aid agreements to the fullest possible extent.
(‘69 Code, § 7-7) (Ord. 172, passed 12-21-67; Am. Ord. 775, passed 2-5-86)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to enter into mutual-aid agreements, see F.S. § 252.32(1)(c)
§ 92.03 CONTRACTS FOR USE OF STATE PERSONNEL, PROPERTY.
   (A)   Whenever the City Commission deems it to be in the public interest, it
may enter into a contract with the state for the lease or loan of any real or
personal property of the state government, accept any such loan, or temporarily
employ personnel of the state government.
   (B)   The City Commission may equip, maintain, utilize, and operate any such
property and employ necessary personnel therefor in accordance with the
purposes for which the contract was entered into.
(‘69 Code, § 7-8) (Ord. 172, passed 12-31-67)
§ 92.04 ENFORCEMENT OF STATE LAW PROVISIONS.
   The law-enforcing authorities of the city shall enforce the orders, rules,
and regulations issued pursuant to this chapter and F.S. Chapter 252.
(‘69 Code, § 7-11) (Ord. 172, passed 12-21-67)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 92.10 DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL DEFENSE.
   There is established a department of city government to be known as the
Department of Civil Defense, to assist and support the civil defense
organization, plans, and programs of the county and the state.
(‘69 Code, § 7-2) (Ord. 172, passed 12-21-67)
§ 92.11 CIVIL DEFENSE COORDINATOR.
   (A)   The Department of Civil Defense shall have a Director who shall be
called the Civil Defense Coordinator.
   (B)   The Director shall meet the minimum qualifications for that position
as established by the State Division of Public Safety Planning and Assistance.
He shall be appointed by the City Commission.
   (C)   The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, and operation of the Department of Civil Defense, subject only
to the direction and control of the City Commission.
(‘69 Code, § 7-4) (Ord. 172, passed 12-21-67)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment of Coordinator, see F.S. § 252.38(4)
§ 92.12 CIVIL DEFENSE ADVISORY COUNCIL.
   The City Commission is authorized, pursuant to F.S. Chapter 252, to create
and establish a Civil Defense Advisory Council for advice and counsel on
matters pertaining to civil defense.
(‘69 Code, § 7-5) (Ord. 172, passed 12-21-67)
§ 92.13 JURISDICTION OF CIVIL DEFENSE DEPARTMENT.
   The Department of Civil Defense shall perform civil defense functions within
the territorial limits of the city. In addition, it shall conduct such
functions outside its territorial limits as may be required pursuant to the
provisions of F.S. Chapter 252 and in accordance with state and county civil
defense plans.
(‘69 Code, § 7-3) (Ord. 172, passed 12-21-67)
§ 92.14 POWERS, AUTHORITY OF STATE, CITY COMMISSION.
   In carrying out the provisions of F.S. Chapter 252, the City Commission
shall have the authority and powers enumerated in F.S. § 252.38.
   (A)   The City Commission shall have the power to make, amend, and rescind
such orders, rules and regulations as may be necessary for civil defense
purposes and to supplement the carrying out of the provisions of this chapter
and F.S. Chapter 252, when not inconsistent with any orders, rules, or
regulations promulgated by the State Division of Public Safety Planning and
Assistance or by any state agency exercising a power delegated to it by the
Governor or the State Division of Public Safety Planning and Assistance.
   (B)   The Mayor or the City Manager shall have the authority, pursuant to
F.S. § 252.38(6)(e), to declare that a state of emergency exists within the
boundaries of the city for a period not to exceed seven days, unless extended
by the Governor, and thereafter may for such period as the emergency exists or
continues, exercise such emergency powers and take such actions as are
determined necessary and appropriate for the protection of life, health, and
property, the alleviation of suffering, and the rapid restoration of public
facilities and services. As soon as practicable after the state of emergency
has been abated, the City Commission shall consider a resolution to formally
ratify the declaration of a state of emergency.
(‘69 Code, § 7-6) (Ord. 172, passed 12-21-67; Am. Ord. 1621, passed 10-1-08)
§ 92.15 ALLEGIANCE OF EMPLOYEES AND ASSOCIATES REQUIRED; OATH.
   (A)   No person shall be employed or associated in any capacity in the
Department of Civil Defense who advocates a change by force or violence in the
constitutional form of the government of the United States or this state or the
overthrow of any government in the United States by force or violence, or who
has been convicted of or is under indictment or information charging any
subversive act against the United States.
   (B)   Each person who is appointed to serve in the Department of Civil
Defense shall, before entering on his duties, take an oath in writing, before a
person authorized to administer oaths in this state, or for the purposes of
this chapter only, before a state, county, or municipal civil defense officer,
which oath shall be substantially as follows:
      “I,                     , do solemnly swear that I will support and
defend the Constitution of the United States and the constitution of the State
of Florida, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true
faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without
any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter.
      And I do further swear that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of a
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this state by force or violence; and that during
such time as I am a member of the Pembroke Pines Department of Civil Defense I
will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization
that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this
state by force or violence.”
(‘69 Code, § 7-9) (Ord. 172, passed 12-21-67) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.16 POLITICAL ACTIVITY OF CIVIL DEFENSE DEPARTMENT PROHIBITED.
   The Department of Civil Defense shall not participate in any form of
political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes.
(‘69 Code, § 7-10) (Ord. 172, passed 12-21-67) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(‘69 Code, § 7-12) (Ord. 172, passed 12-21-67)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Burning Debris and Rubbish
   
93.01   Open burning prohibited
Fire Lanes
   
93.10   Short title
   
93.11   When required; placement and width
   
93.12   Approval of Fire Chief required
   
93.13   Maintenance
   
93.14   Parking within fire lane or zone prohibited
   
93.15   Issuance of citation for violation
   
93.16   Appeals of parking citations
Hazardous Substances
   
93.20   Hazardous substances; recovery of costs
Fire Protection
   
93.25   Responsibility for fire protection
   
93.26   Additional fire protection; fees
   
93.27   Maintenance
Fire Suppression
   
93.35   Short title
   
93.36   Liability for payment of cost of fire suppression
   
93.37   Liability extended to person causing or directing fire
   
93.38   Determination of costs and expenses of suppressing fire
   
93.39   Bill prepared by city, payable to city
   
93.40   Late payment to result in legal action by city
 
   
93.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fire Department, see §§ 32.080 through 32.082
   Fire safety regulations for buildings, see §§
150.30 through 150.32
Statutory reference:
   Fire prevention and control, see F.S. § 633.065 et seq.
   Municipal Fire Chiefs authorized to enforce laws of State Fire Marshall, see
F.S. § 633.121
BURNING DEBRIS AND RUBBISH
§ 93.01 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall ignite, burn, cause to be ignited or burned, or allow
any burning of any substance, material or matter upon any public or private
property lying within the city unless otherwise permitted or allowed pursuant
to applicable state law and regulation. Nothing in this section shall be deemed
to prohibit burning wood, tinder, or similar materials in a stove, oven,
barbecue pit, grill, or fireplace for the purpose of cooking or fuel in One-
and-Two Family Dwellings.
   (B)   Permanent barbecues, portable barbecues, outdoor fireplaces or grills
shall not be used for the disposal of rubbish, trash, mulch, landscaping debris
or other combustible waste material.
   (C)   In residential use, openings of outdoor fireplaces, permanent
barbecues and grills shall be provided with an approved spark arrester, screen
or door.
(Ord. 1906, passed 8-1-18) Penalty, see §
93.99
FIRE LANES
§ 93.10 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the City Fire Lane Regulations.
(‘69 Code, § 8-16) (Ord. 503, passed 3-19-79)
§ 93.11 WHEN REQUIRED; PLACEMENT AND WIDTH.
   (A)   All premises which the Fire Department may be called on to protect in
case of fire and which are not readily accessible from public roads shall be
provided with suitable gates, access roads, and fire lanes so that all
buildings on the premises are accessible to fire apparatus.
(‘69 Code, § 8-17)
   (B)   Fire lanes shall be provided for all buildings which are set back more
than 150 feet from a public road or which exceed 30 feet in height and are set
back over 50 feet from a public road. Fire lanes shall be at least 20 feet in
width with road edge closest to the building at least ten feet from the
building. Any dead-end road more than 300 feet long shall be provided with a
turnaround at the closed end at least80 feet in diameter.
(‘69 Code, § 8-18) (Ord. 503, passed 3-19-79) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.12 APPROVAL OF FIRE CHIEF REQUIRED.
   The designation of fire lanes or fire zones on private property shall be
accomplished as specified by the City Fire Chief or a subordinate appointed by
him to perform this duty. Signs shall be posted designating such fire lanes or
zones.
(‘69 Code, § 8-20) (Ord. 503, passed 3-19-79)
§ 93.13 MAINTENANCE.
   The maintenance of all designated fire lanes and fire zones shall be the
sole responsibility of the owner of the private property upon which they are
located.
(‘69 Code, § 8-21) (Ord. 503, passed 3-19-79) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.14 PARKING WITHIN FIRE LANE OR ZONE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle, including
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motorbikes, or any other vehicles, on, or to
obstruct in any way, method, or manner by whatever means on private property
which has been designated as a fire zone or fire lane or within 15 feet of a
fire hydrant.
(‘69 Code, § 8-19) (Ord. 503, passed 3-19-79) Penalty, see §
93.99
Cross-reference:
   Stopping or standing, or parking regulations, see Ch. 72
§ 93.15 ISSUANCE OF CITATION FOR VIOLATION.
   It shall be the duty of any city police officer to issue a citation to any
person who violates any of the provisions of this subchapter.
(‘69 Code, § 8-22) (Ord. 503, passed 3-19-79)
§ 93.16 APPEALS OF PARKING CITATIONS.
   Any person receiving a citation for a violation of §
93.14 may appeal the citation pursuant to §
70.02 of this code.
(Ord. 1398, passed 2-20-02)
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
§ 93.20 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES; RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   (A)   As used in this section, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
      (1)   Costs mean these necessary and reasonable costs incurred in the
city in connection with investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing, or
abating discharges of hazardous substances, including, but not limited to, the
following: Actual labor costs of city personnel or its authorized agents, cost
of equipment operation and rental, cost of expendable items, including, but not
limited to, fire fighting foam, chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent
material, sand, recovery drums, acid sults, acid gloves, goggles and protective
clothing.
      (2)   Discharge means any intentional or unintentional action or omission
resulting in the releasing, spilling, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or
dumping of a hazardous substance upon public or private property located within
the corporate limits of the city.
      (3)   Hazardous substances mean any substances or materials in a quantity
or form which, in the determination of the Fire Chief or his authorized
designee, poses an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health, safety,
or welfare of persons or property within the city, and shall include, but not
be limited to those hazardous substances listed in the “N.F.P.A. Guide on
Hazardous Materials” or the E.P.A.’s list of extremely hazardous substances, or
the “Florida Substance List” promulgated by the Department of Labor and
Employment Security.
      (4)   Person means one or more individuals, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures, associates or any other entities or any combination thereof.
   (B)   (1)   Any person or persons transporting or causing to transport
hazardous substances through the city shall give advance notice of said
transport to the Fire Chief or his designee.
      (2)   The Fire Department is hereby authorized to take such steps as
necessary to clean up, remove or abate the effects of any hazardous substances
discharged upon or private property or facilities located within the corporate
limits of the city.
      (3)   Any person or persons responsible for causing or allowing any
unauthorized discharge of hazardous substances that requires emergency action
by the Fire Department of the city of or its authorized agents in order to
protect the public health, safety, or welfare shall be jointly and severally
liable to the city of for the costs incurred by the city in investigating,
mitigating, minimizing, removing and abating any such discharge.
      (4)   When responding to the emergency caused by the unauthorized
discharge of hazardous substances, the Fire Department of the city shall keep a
detailed record of the costs attributable thereto.
      (5)   The authority to recover costs under this section shall not include
costs incurred of actual fire suppression services which are normally or
usually provided by the city’s Fire Department or its authorized agents.
   (C)   (1)   Any person or persons responsible for causing or allowing an
unauthorized discharge of hazardous substances shall reimburse the city for the
full amount of all costs, as defined herein, associated with the investigating,
mitigating, minimizing, removing and abating any such discharge within a period
of 30 days after receipt of an itemized bill for such costs from the city.
      (2)   Any person or persons responsible for causing or allowing an
unauthorized discharge of hazardous substances and who fails to reimburse the
city within the time set forth in division (C)(1) above shall be subject to a
fine equal to the greater of $50 per day or 10% of the total amount of the bill
for each additional day that the bill for such costs remains unpaid.
      (3)   The remedy provided for in this section shall be to all other
available remedies at law an equity.
(Ord. 899, passed 8-16-89)
FIRE PROTECTION
§ 93.25 RESPONSIBILITY FOR FIRE PROTECTION.
   Installation of fire hydrants within public or private rights-of-way within
new developments shall be the responsibility of the developer as appurtenances
to the on-site mains. Locations, spacing, and details of fire hydrants shall be
as determined by the Fire Chief of the city, or his designee or designees, with
consultation with the Utility Director and City Engineer, or their designees,
and as listed herein.
   (A)   Fire hydrants in zoning classifications with lower residential zoning
than R-3 shall be installed on a minimum of a six-inch looped water line in
city rights-of-way or easements within 400 feet of the entrance of any future
building as measured along streets or alleys.
   (B)   Fire hydrants in zoning classifications R-3 and all residential
classifications with greater density than R-3 shall be installed on a minimum
of an eight- inch looped water line in city rights-of-way or easements and
within 300 feet of the entrance of any future building as measured along
streets or alleys.
   (C)   Fire hydrants in all commercially and business zoned areas shall be
installed on a minimum of an eight-inch looped water line in city rights-of-way
or easements and shall be spaced not further than 500 feet apart as measured
along streets or alleys.
   (D)   Buildings with standpipes/sprinklers require a fire hydrant within 100
feet of each standpipe/sprinkler input siamese connection.
   (E)   The fire hydrant 4½ inch steamer cap shall face the nearest roadway
and shall be between 24 inches and 30 inches above ground.
   (F)   No tree, bush, hedge, or shrub, shall be planted within 15 feet of a
hydrant and all grass and weeds shall be kept trimmed such that the hydrant
shall be fully visible from the street.
   (G)   In every case, at least two hydrants shall be within 400 feet of the
entrance of any future building. The administration, through the Fire Chief or
the Chief’s designee, shall have the right to temporarily waive any division of
this section as it relates to the hydrant spacing contingent upon future
development.
   (H)   The administration, through the Utility Director or his designee,
shall have the right to temporarily waive any division of this section as it
relates to the water line sizing and looping, contingent upon future
development.
(Ord. 735, passed 5-1-85)
§ 93.26 ADDITIONAL FIRE PROTECTION; FEES.
   Any additional fire protection made necessary by large commercial or
industrial developments, or for other reasons, will be extended only after
prepayment of the cost of the work as outlined hereafter. In lieu of prepayment
of cost, the city will accept facilities constructed by others but require
prior approval of the plans and inspection of the construction. All fire lanes
on private property, including those serving fire hydrants, shall require
approved detector meters and meter vaults. The minimum fire connection
construction charges and monthly billing charges covering the city’s cost of
investment in larger facilities necessary to provide service shall be as
follows.
 
Description     Minimum Charge
Hydrant         $600
6" Fire service 400
8" Fire service 500
If greater than minimum, the actual charge shall be the estimated cost of work
plus a 10% surcharge.
 
(Ord. 735, passed 5-1-85)
§ 93.27 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The city shall maintain any and all fire hydrants installed in the
public rights-of-way or public easements, but the city shall not be responsible
to maintain any facilities installed on private property.
   (B)   The city shall further be responsible for providing or replacing fire
hydrants which are part of the existing system as of the date of the enactment
of this subchapter, 5-1-85.
   (C)   Any device constructed or installed to protect the hydrant from damage
or obstruction shall be based upon a plan approved by the Fire Chief or his
designee and on file with the Building Department.
(Ord. 735, passed 5-1-85)
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 93.35 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the fire suppression subchapter.
(Ord. 754, passed 9-4-85)
§ 93.36 LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF COST OF FIRE SUPPRESSION.
   Whoever causes an uncontrolled fire in violation of §
93.01, or permits any fire to escape, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, is liable for the payment of all reasonable costs and expenses
incurred in suppressing the fire.
(Ord. 754, passed 9-4-85)
§ 93.37 LIABILITY EXTENDED TO PERSON CAUSING OR DIRECTING FIRE.
   The liability for the costs of suppression shall obtain whether there is a
criminal prosecution or not; and the liability shall extend to the person or
persons, firm, or corporation causing, directing, or permitting the activity as
well as to the actual violator.
(Ord. 754, passed 9-4-85)
§ 93.38 DETERMINATION OF COSTS AND EXPENSES OF SUPPRESSING FIRE.
   The cost and expenses of suppressing an unauthorized fire shall be
determined by the Fire Department of the city at the rate of $l,000 per hour or
fraction of an hour of time spent extinguishing the fire.
(Ord. 754, passed 9-4-85)
§ 93.39 BILL PREPARED BY CITY, PAYABLE TO CITY.
   Based on the Fire Department’s determination, the city shall prepare a bill
for the costs and expenses of suppressing the fire which shall be payable to
the city.
(Ord. 754, passed 9-4-85)
§ 93.40 LATE PAYMENT TO RESULT IN LEGAL ACTION BY CITY.
   The City Administration shall take proper legal action when payment is not
received within a reasonable time after demand.
(Ord. 754, passed 9-4-85)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The violation of §
93.01 shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500, or by imprisonment for
not more than 90 days, or both. Each day any violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of §§
93.10 through
93.13, and
93.15 shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than
$100, or by imprisonment in jail for not more than ten days, in the discretion
of the appropriate court.
(‘69 Code, § 8-23) (Ord. 503, passed 3-19-79; Am. Ord. 815, passed 12-17-86)
   (C)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of §
93.14 shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $50, plus a $3
surcharge to be used for firefighter training programs pursuant to and as
authorized by F.S. § 316.008(5), and all surcharges, court costs, fees, or
other amounts assessed, charged, or otherwise collected by the Clerk of Courts
or applicable law.
(Ord. 815, passed 12-17-86; Am. Ord. 2045, passed 5-7-25)
CHAPTER 94: GARBAGE, RUBBISH, LITTER, AND WEEDS
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Dumping or burying refuse, polluting public waters prohibited
   
94.02   Obstruction of public waters and drainage systems prohibited
Garbage, Rubbish, Litter and Weeds
   94.10    Agreement with private collector
   
94.11   Customers/property owners responsibilities
   
94.12   Collection schedule; classes of service; avoidance of collection
prohibited
   
94.13   Residential curbside service; frequency; garbage receptacles and
placement for collection
   
94.14   Certain acts prohibited
   
94.15   Collection of large and bulky items; residential
   
94.16   Collection charges and rates
   
94.17   Collection and billing of customers
   
94.18   Flow control
Clearing Lots of Rubbish, Weeds
   
94.30   Owner to keep lot clean of rubbish, vegetation
   
94.31   When vegetation to be cleared from lots
   
94.32   Failure of owner to clear lot; notice to abate
   
94.33   Hearing before City Commission
   
94.34   Abatement by city; cost
   
94.35   Owner to notify city before correcting condition
Litter
   94.45    Short title
   
94.46   Definitions
   
94.47   Political signs excluded
   
94.48   Littering prohibited; what constitutes littering
   
94.49   Distributing handbills
   
94.50   Posting advertisements or notices; abatement procedure
   
94.51   Order to remove litter, notices, advertisements, or the like; failure
to obey
   
94.52   Signs prohibiting and discouraging litter on city streets
   
94.53   Enforcement of city anti-litter regulations and the Florida Litter Law
Cross-reference:
   Burning debris or rubbish; permit required, see §§
93.01 and 93.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 DUMPING OR BURYING REFUSE, POLLUTING PUBLIC WATERS PROHIBITED.
   It is declared to be unlawful and to constitute a nuisance for any person to
deposit on, bury in, or cause to be deposited on or buried in any land, public
square, street, alley, vacant or unoccupied lot, sidewalk, parkway, bank of any
river, stream, or waterway, park, or right-of-way, any trash, rubbish, fruit
peelings, debris, refuse, garbage, brush, cans, boxes, oil, or vegetable or
mineral matter, or to do any act that will pollute or tend to pollute the
waters of any watercourse or pool.
(‘69 Code, § 9-1) (Ord. 166, passed 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.02 OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WATERS AND DRAINAGE SYSTEMS PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall place or cause to be
placed in any surface or subsurface drainage way, including but not limited to
ponds, lakes canals, channels, streams, culverts, drain pipes, manholes, catch
basins, headwalls, pumps, weirs, flood gates and other drainage bodies, lines
and structures, any material of any form, type or nature, the placement of
which would alter, impede, block or otherwise detrimentally effect the rate of
flow of water through the drainage way, except if the material has been
permitted and authorized by the city.
(Ord. 1070, passed 5-4-94)
GARBAGE, RUBBISH, LITTER AND WEEDS
§ 94.10 AGREEMENT WITH PRIVATE COLLECTOR.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COLLECTOR. The entity with which the city enters into an agreement for
the purposes of awarding the city’s solid waste collection and disposal
franchise agreement.
      HAULERS. All providers of solid waste collection and disposal services
other than the collector who provides such services within the city boundaries.
   (B)   The city, acting by and through its City Commission, and in accordance
with the provisions of this code, approved a solid waste collection and
disposal franchise agreement. The agreement is specifically made a part hereof
as Appendix A to Ordinance 1016, and a copy of same will be maintained at the
City Clerk’s office at City Hall.
   (C)   Pursuant to the agreement, the city has granted the collector the
following rights and obligations to provide solid waste collection and disposal
services:
      (1)   The exclusive right and obligation to provide solid waste
collection and disposal services within the city boundaries, present and
future, for all residences, duplex, triplex, and multi-dwelling units using
curbside service;
      (2)   The non-exclusive right to provide solid waste collection and
disposal services within the city boundaries for all existing condominium units
or additions to condominium units in existence on February 1, 1992, located
within the city which use bulk containers for their solid waste collection and
disposal;
      (3)   The exclusive right to provide solid waste collection and disposal
services to any newly annexed areas within 24 hours after official written
notification by the city;
      (4)   The exclusive right and obligation to provide solid waste
collection and disposal services within the city boundaries, present and
future, for all residential curbside, and all apartment, condominium, business,
industrial and commercial establishments, that are certified for occupancy
after February 1, 1992, and governmental establishments to the extent permitted
by law, provided, however, that a certificate of occupancy issued as a result
of remodeling with no change in ownership of the property shall not require the
customer to change to collector except for construction/remodeling demolition
and debris created thereby;
      (5)   The exclusive right and obligation to provide solid waste
collection and disposal services within the city boundaries for all
construction or remodeling demolition and debris within the city; and
      (6)   As of February 1, 1992, the exclusive right and obligation to
provide solid waste collection and disposal services within the city boundaries
for: collector’s existing customers; customers/property owners in the city that
have a change in ownership; and customers/property owners whose contract for
solid waste collection and disposal services expires and is not renewed with
the same provider.
   (D)   The collector is authorized to use the public streets, roads, alleys
and other thoroughfares in the performance of the agreements set forth in the
agreement and this subchapter.
   (E)   The collector shall refrain from and take all necessary steps to
prevent the spilling of any solid waste in the process of collection,
transporting and disposing of same.
(Ord. 1016, passed 11-4-92; Am. Ord. 1411, passed 6-19-02)
§ 94.11 CUSTOMERS/PROPERTY OWNERS RESPONSIBILITIES.
   All customers and property owners in the city boundaries are hereby required
and shall use the solid waste collection and disposal services of collector as
set forth in §
94.10(B) above and are required to show proof of same prior to issuance of a
new certificate or local business tax receipt.
(Ord. 1016, passed 11-4-92; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 94.12 COLLECTION SCHEDULE; CLASSES OF SERVICE; AVOIDANCE OF COLLECTION
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   All solid waste shall be collected and disposed of by collector for
the following classes of service: residential/curbside, residential/
condominium, residential apartment and commercial. The frequency and collection
schedules, as well as location and quantity limitations, other than for
residential curbside service which is specifically set forth herein below,
shall be as set forth in the agreement.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to place or cause to be
placed solid waste on the property of another for the purpose of avoiding the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1016, passed 11-4-92) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.13 RESIDENTIAL CURBSIDE SERVICE; FREQUENCY; GARBAGE RECEPTACLES AND
PLACEMENT FOR COLLECTION.
   (A)   The collector shall collect solid waste including horticulture trash,
from residential curbside service areas two times per week, with collection at
least three days apart.
   (B)   Customers/property owners provided with residential curbside service
in the city shall place solid waste in properly prepared containers or plastic
bags of not more than three feet in length, 32 gallons and weighing not more
than 40 pounds at curbside for collection. Yard trash shall be tied neatly in
bundles and placed at curbside along with solid waste for collection.
Newspapers shall be separately placed in containers provided by the city or
bundled in amounts not exceeding 50 pounds and placed for collection on the day
designated. The containers, yard trash and newspaper shall not be placed in the
aforementioned place sooner than 6:00 p.m. the day preceding the regularly
scheduled day of collection and shall not be permitted to remain past 10:00
p.m. of the collection date, providing, further, that the customer/property
owner shall ensure that all containers are stored and kept in a clean condition
and inside a structure, or in the back yard, or at least ten feet behind the
building line, whenever possible and practicable, in the side yard or screened
from view from the street and adjacent properties except during collection.
(Ord. 1016, passed 11-4-92; Am. Ord. 1175, passed 9-4-96)
§ 94.14 CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person to place
solid waste loosely or in or on public places, or in front of private premises
except as provided hereinabove or in the agreement. The owner or occupant of
the premises shall be primarily responsible for the presence of solid waste and
yard trash, its placement and its removal.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person, firm or
corporation not licensed or permitted by the city, other than the owner, lessee
or occupant to pick up newspapers or solid waste set out for collection.
   (C)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person, firm,
corporation or other entity, other than collector to collect and/or dispose of
solid waste originating in the city except to the extent the same is
specifically permitted by the terms of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1016, passed 11-4-92) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.15 COLLECTION OF LARGE AND BULKY ITEMS; RESIDENTIAL.
   The collector shall, at no charge, provide bulky collection and disposal for
residential customers within the city in February of each year. The city will
notify residents of the dates for such free service.
(Ord. 1016, passed 11-4-92)
§ 94.16 COLLECTION CHARGES AND RATES.
   (A)   Residential/curbside.
      (1)   The rate of $14.82 per month per residence, duplex, triplex and
multi-dwelling unit curbside customer, for the period from February 1, 1992
through September 30, 1993, with future increases or decreases will be based on
the increase or decrease in the CPI from the preceding April to April, as
provided for herein below.
      (2)   Additional services in annexed areas. The rates set forth above
shall apply to any areas annexed into the city and to any new areas which may
be built and approved for the city and to any new areas which may be built and
approved for occupancy during the term of the agreement.
   (B)   Residential/condominium. The rates to be charged by collector for
solid waste collection and disposal on all condominium/multi-dwelling container
accounts, within the boundaries of the city, during the initial term of this
agreement are set forth in the rate schedule attached as Schedule A of the
agreement.
   (C)   Residential/apartment. The rates to be charged by collector for solid
waste collection and disposal on all multi-dwellings and apartments with
container accounts, within the boundaries of the city, during the initial term
of this agreement are set forth in the rate schedule attached as Schedule B of
the agreement.
   (D)   Commercial. The rates to be charged by collector for solid waste
collection and disposal on all commercial accounts within the boundaries of the
city during the initial term of this agreement are set forth in the rate
schedule attached as Schedule C of the agreement. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the collector from
providing solid waste collection and disposal services to a commercial account
at a total charge less than the total of the amounts shown on Schedule C of the
agreement and other charges, if any, specifically permitted by this subchapter.
   (E)   Initial disposal fee. For purposes of establishing the charges and
rates set forth hereinabove and in Schedules A, B and C, the initial disposal
fee is based upon $61.70 per ton.
   (F)   Permitted CPI annual increase.
      (1)   Residential/curbside and condominium. During the first year of the
initial term (that is February 1, 1992 to September 30, 1993) collector will
have zero cost of living increase. Thereafter, the rate for each subsequent
annual period of October 1 through September 30, shall be determined by the
rate in effect the immediately preceding year with an increase or decrease for
the current period based on 75% of the increase or decrease in the CPI relating
to all urban consumers for all items as the same is published by the United
States Bureau of Labor Statistics (hereinafter referred to as CPI) for the
immediately preceding year based on the annual April to April figures.
      (2)   Commercial and residential/ apartment. The rate for each annual
period of October 1 through September 30, shall be determined by the rate in
effect the immediately preceding year with an increase or decrease for the
current period based on 100% of the increase or decrease in the CPI relating to
all urban consumers for all items as the same is published by the United States
Bureau of Labor Statistics (hereinafter referred to as CPI) for the immediately
preceding year based on the annual April to April figures.
   (G)   Tipping/dumping fees. In determining the future cost of living
adjustments in rates to be charged to each curbside account the tipping/dumping
fees shall not be utilized in calculating increases or decreases described in
division (F)(1) above which may be charged by collector for subsequent years.
   (H)   Taxes. The rates set forth hereinabove are exclusive of any and all
sales taxes which may be imposed upon the services which are the subject of
this agreement and which such sales taxes, if any, will be borne by the parties
served, to wit, the customers.
   (I)   Permitted pass through for disposal fee increase. In the event that
the dumping/tipping fee currently paid by collector for disposal of trash and
solid waste under the agreement increases or decreases after the date hereof, a
pass-through rate adjustment will be made including the effects of sales taxes
and franchise fees applicable thereto. Further, increases or decreases in costs
incurred by collector which are directly related to the disposal of processable
waste under the agreement at a different dumping/disposal site (including, but
not limited to, transportation costs) shall be treated as a pass-through rate
adjustment. Collector shall, upon request, substantiate to city the
identification and amount of such costs. The pass through shall be effective as
of the date the increase is implemented.
(Ord. 1016, passed 11-4-92)
§ 94.17 COLLECTION AND BILLING OF CUSTOMERS.
   (A)   The city is the billing entity responsible for the billing and
collection of all customers of collector subject to the charges and rates set
forth in this subchapter and Schedules A, B and C attached to the agreement.
The collector is responsible to the city for all costs incurred by the city for
billing in accordance with the solid waste collection and disposal franchise
agreement.
   (B)   Each customer of collector shall be billed by the city for solid waste
collection and disposal services provided by collector to customer. Billing and
collection procedures used by the city shall be in accordance with the billing
and collection practices and procedures currently used by the city for billing
and collection of water and sewer accounts as set forth in Chapter 50 of this
code.
   (C)   The city is the billing entity responsible for the billing and
collection of solid waste collection service fees from all customers of all
haulers. In order to insure the proper collection of fees from all haulers, the
haulers shall provide to the city, no later than August 1 of each year, a list
of all of the haulers’ customers, including customer name, contact person,
customer billing address, and monthly billing amount.
   (D)   The haulers are responsible to the city for all costs incurred by the
city for billing services. The city shall advise haulers no later than August
31 of each year of the cost to be charged for the city’s billing and collection
services.
   (E)   The haulers shall be responsible for billing the customer for any
services provided to the customer in addition to the regular monthly solid
waste service. The haulers shall be responsible for notifying the city before
providing its customers with any additional services. Additional services
include recycling services and any other service provided to the customer not
provided for in the customer’s monthly billing.
(Ord. 1016, passed 11-4-92; Am. Ord. 1411, passed 6-19-02)
§ 94.18 FLOW CONTROL.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the definitions
contained in the Solid Waste Disposal Agreement shall apply unless otherwise
specifically stated in this section. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number
include the plural. The word SHALL is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
   CONTRACT MUNICIPALITIES. The Cities of Dania, Hallandale, Pompano Beach and
Pembroke Pines, each of which is a municipal corporation existing under the
laws of the state and located within Broward County, State of Florida.
   HAULER. Those persons, firms or corporations or governmental agencies
permitted (under either oral or written contracts or otherwise) to collect
solid waste within the geographic boundaries of one or more contract
municipalities.
   POINT OF DELIVERY. For each contract municipality, the location or locations
at which acceptable waste generated and collected within the boundaries of such
contract municipality is to be delivered, as designated at any time by such
contract municipality.
   RESOURCE RECOVERY SYSTEM. The resource recovery facility or facilities which
are constructed, operated and maintained or caused to be constructed, operated
and maintained pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Agreement.
   SOLID WASTE. Shall have the meaning set forth in Chapter 403, Part IV,
Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time. The terms ACCEPTABLE WASTE,
NON-PROCESSABLE WASTE AND UNACCEPTABLE WASTE shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in the Solid Waste Disposal Agreement.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AGREEMENT. That certain Solid Waste Disposal Agreement
dated August 19, 1988, by and among the contract municipalities and Reuter
Recycling of Florida, Inc., as amended by the letter agreement dated February
15, 1989 and the consent and agreement dated as of February 1, 1990, and as
further amended from time to time pursuant to the provisions of the Solid Waste
Disposal Agreement.
   (B)   Waste flow control. It is the purpose of this section to require all
inhabitants and all haulers operating within the city, as defined in §
112.56 to use exclusively the resource recovery system identified in the Solid
Waste Disposal Agreement for the disposal of all acceptable waste generated
within the city for the purpose of ensuring that the resource recovery system
receives an adequate quantity of acceptable waste.
      (1)   The city hereby directs that commencing on the date the resource
recovery system is available to receive acceptable waste (as communicated in
writing by Reuter Recycling of Florida, Inc.) all acceptable waste generated
within its geographic boundaries be delivered to the resource recovery system
transfer station or disposal facility or facilities designated in the plan of
operation under the Solid Waste Disposal Agreement and further hereby
relinquished any and all title and interest in such acceptable waste collected
or generated within its geographical boundaries upon delivery of such
acceptable waste to the point of delivery and acceptance thereof by Reuter
Recycling of Florida, Inc.
      (2)   Any agreement that city may have with a hauler of solid waste shall
provide for conformity with the terms and conditions of the Solid Waste
Disposal Agreement.
      (3)   Nothing herein is intended to either discourage or prohibit either
voluntary or locally ordained solid waste segregation programs segregating
scrap or new or used materials at the point of generation and held for the
purposes of recycling.
   (C)   Penalty. Anyone who violates any provision of this section shall be
punishable as provided for in §
10.99. Additionally, violators will be responsible for the city’s attorney’s
fees, if any, which are imposed.
(Ord. 948, passed 3-20-91; Am. Ord. 976, passed 11-6-91)
CLEARING LOTS OF RUBBISH, WEEDS
§ 94.30 OWNER TO KEEP LOT CLEAN OF RUBBISH, VEGETATION.
   The allowing of debris, rubbish, trash, tin cans, papers, or stagnant water
to accumulate or a dense growth of trees, vines, grass, and useless vegetation
to develop on any lot, tract, or parcel of land within the city or the failure
to maintain and keep in good repair a residence and all property appurtenant
thereto, including the abutting sidewalks, driveways, and alleys, by the owner,
occupant, or lessee thereof to such an extent that it constitutes a menace to
life, property, public health, or the public welfare, or creates a fire hazard,
is prohibited and declared to be a public nuisance.
(‘69 Code, § 9-31) (Ord. 166, passed 9-5-67; Am. Ord. 495, passed 1-29-79)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.31 WHEN VEGETATION TO BE CLEARED FROM LOTS.
   The owner, lessee, or occupant of any lot, tract, or parcel of land in the
city shall cut and clear the land of weeds and useless vegetation on or before
May 15, August 15, October 15, and February 15 of each year.
(‘69 Code, § 9-32) (Ord. 166, passed 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.32 FAILURE OF OWNER TO CLEAR LOT; NOTICE TO ABATE.
   (A)   If the City Manager finds that any nuisance described in §
94.30 has developed on any lot, tract, or parcel of land within the city or
that any owner, lessee, or occupant of the land has failed to cut and clear it
in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter, he shall notify the
record owner of the property in writing at his last known mailing address of
the specific condition constituting the nuisance on the lot, tract, or parcel
of land described in the notice, or that he has failed to comply with the
requirements of a particular section hereof, and demand that the owner cause
the condition to be remedied within 20 days after mailing of the notice. He
shall also cause a copy of the notice to be served by a police officer of the
city on the occupant of the property or on any agent of the owner thereof.
   (B)   The mailing of notice shall be by registered or certified mail and the
delivery of notice shall be equivalent to mailing.
(‘69 Code, § 9-33) (Ord. 166, passed 9-5-67)
§ 94.33 HEARING BEFORE CITY COMMISSION.
   (A)   The property owner may, within ten days after the mailing of the
notice referred to in §
94.32, or the service thereof, file a written request with the City Clerk for a
hearing before the City Commission to show that such condition does not exist
or to show why the debris, rubbish, trash, tin cans, papers, or stagnant water,
or the dense growth of trees, grass, vines, or useless vegetation that have
developed on the lot or tract of land do not constitute a menace to life,
property, the public health, or the public welfare, or does not create a fire
hazard, or why the condition should not be remedied by the city at the expense
of the owner of the property.
   (B)   Upon the receipt of such request for a hearing, the City Clerk shall
set a date for hearing by the City Commission, which shall be not less than ten
days nor more than 15 days from the date when the request is made, and shall
notify the property owner by mail of the date and time of the hearing.
(‘69 Code, § 9-34) (Ord. 166, passed 9-5-67)
§ 94.34 ABATEMENT BY CITY; COST.
   (A)   If the condition described in the notice given under §
94.32 has not been remedied within 20 days after the mailing or service of the
notice, or in the event there is a hearing as provided for in this subchapter
within five days after notice to the property owner of the unfavorable decision
of the City Commission, the City Manager shall cause the condition to be
remedied by the city at the expense of the owner of the property.
   (B)   After causing the condition to be remedied, the City Manager shall
certify to the Director of Finance the expense incurred, together with his
certificate as to the condition of the property which necessitated incurring
the expense, and a copy of the notice mentioned above with proof of service
thereof and a copy of the result of the hearing before the City Commission.
Such expense shall thereupon be assessed against the lots or tracts as a
special assessment and the procedure designated in F.S. § 170.10 for enforcing
the special assessment shall be utilized.
(‘69 Code, § 9-35) (Ord. 166, passed 9-5-67)
§ 94.35 OWNER TO NOTIFY CITY BEFORE CORRECTING CONDITION.
   In the event an owner of property within the city receives the notice to
abate a nuisance referred to in this subchapter, the property owner, prior to
remedying the conditions specified in the notice, shall notify the City Manager
of the date and time that he intends to take such action, in order that the
City Manager or his duly authorized representative may supervise such action by
the property owner for the purpose of preventing the spreading of rodents or
any other living wild animal and destroying any plants or pests that are
detrimental to the health and safety of the residents of the city.
(‘69 Code, § 9-36) (Ord. 166, passed 9-5-67) Penalty, see §
10.99
LITTER
§ 94.45 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the City Anti-Litter
Regulations.
(‘69 Code, § 9-47) (Ord. 116, passed 6-7-65)
§ 94.46 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection receptacle.
   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:
      (1)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or
thing; or which directs attention to or advertises any theatrical performance,
exhibition, or event of any kind; or
      (2)   Which directs attention to any business, mercantile, or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
      (3)   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit or gain of
any person.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
   LITTER. Garbage, refuse, or rubbish as defined herein, or any other waste
material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, would tend to
create a nuisance to public health, welfare, or safety.
   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or
any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature not included in the aforesaid definition of a COMMERCIAL HANDBILL.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling house, building, or other structure, designed
or used either wholly or in part for private residential, commercial, or
industrial purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, walk, grounds, driveway,
porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such premises.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, sidewalk, boulevard, alley, or other public way
and any public park, square, space, grounds, or building.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including garbage,
rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and
solid market and industrial wastes.
   RUBBISH. Nonputresible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar
materials.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, on, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn on a highway, although it may not be in presently
operating condition, including devices used exclusively on stationary rails or
tracks.
(‘69 Code, § 9-48) (Ord. 116, passed 6-7-65)
§ 94.47 POLITICAL SIGNS EXCLUDED.
   The distribution or posting of political signs, posters, banners, handbills,
or other political literature shall not be deemed to come within the purview of
this subchapter, nor shall the presence of the same on public or private
property be considered or defined as litter within the intendment of this
subchapter.
(‘69 Code, § 9-49) (Ord. 116, passed 6-7-65)
§ 94.48 LITTERING PROHIBITED; WHAT CONSTITUTES LITTERING.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or on any public place
within the city except in authorized receptacles.
(‘69 Code, § 9-50)
   (B)   Persons placing litter in public or private receptacles shall do so in
such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements
on any private premises or public place.
(‘69 Code, § 9-51)
   (C)   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or
private or public premises, the accumulation of litter from any building, lot,
or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
(‘69 Code, § 9-54)
   (D)   No person shall drive or move any vehicle containing garbage, trash,
or refuse unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any
load, contents, or litter from being blown or deposited on any public or
private place. No person, while occupying a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter on any street, or public or private premises.
(‘69 Code, § 9-55)
   (E)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private
property, whether owned by that person or not. The owner or person in control
of private property shall maintain receptacles on property where litter
accumulates in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried
or scattered by the elements or by animals. The owner or person in control of
private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter.
(‘69 Code, § 9-58)
   (F)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant property
whether owned by that person or not.
(‘69 Code, § 9-59) (Ord. 116, passed 6-7-65) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.49 DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS.
   No person shall throw or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill
in or on any sidewalk, public place, or private premises, or where there is a
conspicuous sign bearing the words: “No Trespassing”, “No Peddlers or Agents”,
“No Advertisements,” “No Solicitation,” or any other similar notice except
where there is an authorized distribution not previously provided for. However,
it shall not be unlawful if the recipient is willing to receive the same. The
city administration may provide “No Solicitation” stickers for city residents
available to be picked up at City Hall and may further provide for notification
of the availability of the stickers in a manner deemed appropriate by the city
administration. Additional “No Solicitation” stickers shall be available to the
public at City Hall and at the city’s Public Safety Department. The term “No
Solicitation” shall be deemed to include as synonymous therewith “No
Trespassing”, “No Peddlers or Agents”, and “No Advertisements” and are included
in the definitional terminology hereof.
(‘69 Code, § 9-56) (Ord. 116, passed 6-7-65; Am. Ord. 874, passed 10-5-88)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.50 POSTING ADVERTISEMENTS OR NOTICES; ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   No person shall post or affix any notice, poster, or other paper or
device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost,
public utility pole, tree, public structure, or building. The owner of the
business so advertised whose notice or poster is so affixed or posted as set
forth in this section shall be deemed to be the person who had the same posted.
   (B)   The Police Department or the Code Enforcement Officers shall cause a
notice to be served in person or by certified mail at the last known address to
such person or persons believed to be responsible for the posters, signs or
notices within the time specified in the notice to remove, which time shall be
not less than one day nor more than three days after mailing of the notice.
Failure to comply with the notice of removal within the time specified shall be
a punishable violation and shall subject the person placing the notices or
causing them to be posted to the penalties prescribed in §
10.99 of this code or by order of the Code Enforcement Board.
   (C)   The city shall not be required to prove that the owner of the business
so advertised in such notices or posters actually or personally placed or
caused the same to be placed or posted.
   (D)   In any prosecution for the violation of the terms and provisions of
this section, it shall be presumed that the owner of the business whose name or
business appears on such prohibited notices or posters is the person who posted
or caused the same to be posted.
(‘69 Code, § 9-57) (Ord. 116, passed 6-7-65; Am. Ord. 1086, passed 8-3-94)
Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Offenses against public peace and safety, posting advertisements or notices;
abatement procedure, see §
134.50
§ 94.51 ORDER TO REMOVE LITTER, NOTICES, ADVERTISEMENTS, OR THE LIKE; FAILURE
TO OBEY.
   (A)   The owner of the business or person in charge of any private property
on which litter is found or the person whose name appears on any handbill,
commercial, or noncommercial, or whose notice or poster is unlawfully posted,
affixed, scattered, or distributed shall for the purpose of this subchapter be
presumed to be the person who so posted, distributed, scattered, or otherwise
unlawfully disposed of the same or allowed the same to become litter.
   (B)   Upon notification made to the person to remove the litter, either by
certified mail or served in person by a Code Enforcement Officer or a police
officer, and failure to remove the litter, the person so notified shall be
charged with a violation of the provisions of this subchapter.
(‘69 Code, § 9-60) (Ord. 116, passed 6-7-65; Am. Ord. 1086, passed 8-3-94)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.52 SIGNS PROHIBITING AND DISCOURAGING LITTER ON CITY STREETS.
   The city shall erect signs, and where appropriate, coordinate efforts with
the Florida Department of Transportation to erect signs discouraging and
prohibiting littering on designated city streets in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter, F.S. Chapter 403, Part I, and the City Sign
Code. (Ord. 1086, passed 8-3-94)
§ 94.53 ENFORCEMENT OF CITY ANTI-LITTER REGULATIONS AND THE FLORIDA LITTER LAW.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall be enforced and carried out by
the city’s police officers and Code Enforcement Officers.
   (B)   Every officer and member of the Police Department of the city and
every Code Enforcement Officer of the city shall have the same rights, duties,
and obligations of enforcing the provisions of this subchapter and the Florida
Litter Law in accordance with F.S. § 403.413, as amended.
(‘69 Code, § 9-61) (Ord. 116, passed 6-7-65; Am. Ord. 1086, passed 8-3-94)
CHAPTER 95: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
State Sanitary Code
   
95.01   Adoption of State Sanitary Code by reference
   
95.02   Violation of State Sanitary Code
Parathion
   
95.10   Sale, possession, and the like prohibited
   
95.11   Violation of parathion regulations
 
   
95.99   Penalty
STATE SANITARY CODE
§ 95.01 ADOPTION OF STATE SANITARY CODE BY REFERENCE.
   The State Sanitary Code in effect on August 17, l961, is adopted as the
sanitary code of the city and its provisions are incorporated by reference as
though fully set forth herein, subject to any amendments, deletions, or
additions contained herein, and subject to any more restrictive provisions of
this code.
(‘69 Code, § 10-1) (Ord. 39, passed 8-17-61)
Editor’s note:
   The State Sanitary Code is found in the Florida Administrative Code under
control number 170C, three copies of which are on file with the City Clerk
§ 95.02 VIOLATION OF STATE SANITARY CODE.
   (A)   Upon written or verbal notification of a violation of the sanitary
code made to the property owner, his tenants, lessees, agents, servants, or
employees, a period of 72 hours shall be allowed to such person in order to
correct the condition, unless a shorter period of time for correction of a
violation is necessary because of its threat to the health of the community.
      (1)   A reinspection of the violation shall be made within the time limit
allowed or set forth in the notice of violation and if the inspection reveals
that the condition has not been corrected, a summons for the arrest of the
party responsible for the commission of the violation shall be issued
returnable to the appropriate court.
      (2)   A greater length of time may be allowed for the correction of any
violation, should the same be necessary, in the discretion of the inspecting
official.
(‘69 Code, § 10-2)
   (B)   Each day a violation of the sanitary code is continued or permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense punishable on conviction in the
manner described in §
95.99. The imposition of any sentence for a violation of the sanitary code
shall not be construed as excusing or permitting the continuance thereof.
(‘69 Code, § 10-3) (Ord. 39, passed 8-17-61) Penalty, see §
95.99
PARATHION
§ 95.10 SALE, POSSESSION, AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, deliver,
distribute, store, possess, or apply, treat, or otherwise use parathion or
products which contain parathion within the city.
(‘69 Code, § 10-16)
   (B)   The sale, possession, application, or use of parathion O, O-diethyl,
O-p-nitrophenyl, thiophosphate, or products which contain parathion are
declared to be and do constitute a nuisance by reason of their extreme hazard
and deleterious effect on and to the health, welfare, and safety of the
inhabitants of the city.
(‘69 Code, § 10-17)
(Ord. 119, passed 6-21-65) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.11 VIOLATION OF PARATHION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Health and Sanitation Inspector, his deputies, and any city police
officer are authorized to warn or instruct any person carrying on any activity
prohibited by the provisions of this subchapter to cease and desist from doing
so within the time ordered by the officer and to order the person to remove the
product or substance containing parathion from the confines of the city.
   (B)   Refusal to comply with the order shall be deemed a violation of the
provisions of this subchapter and subject the person so refusing to comply to
arrest and confiscation of the product or substance containing parathion found
in his possession.
(‘69 Code, § 10-18) (Ord. 119, passed 6-21-65) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any section of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(‘69 Code, § 10-4) (Ord. 39, passed 8-17-61)
CHAPTER 96: NOISE
Section
General Provisions
   
96.01   Short title
   
96.02   Intent
   
96.03   Definitions
   
96.04   Noise disturbances
   
96.05   Exemptions
   
96.06   Fans and air conditioners
   
96.07   Sound level limitations by receiving land use designation
   
96.08   Measurement of sound
   
96.09   Enforcement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter may be known and cited as the “Pembroke Pines Noise Abatement
Chapter.”
(Ord. 1486, passed 6-16-04)
§ 96.02 INTENT.
   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to regulate uses and activities
in the City of Pembroke Pines in such a manner as to prevent excessive noises,
which degrade the quality of life, disturb the public peace, and jeopardize the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Pembroke Pines. It is further the
intent of this chapter to recognize that factors such as the time of day,
location (such as proximity to residences), necessity of public projects for
the public good, and necessity of sounds incidental to allowed uses and
activities must be considered in balancing the protection of public peace and
individual freedoms.
(Ord. 1486, passed 6-16-04)
§ 96.03 DEFINITIONS.
   All terminology used in this chapter, not specifically defined herein, shall
be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successors and/or assignee. The following
words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings:
   A-WEIGHED SOUND LEVEL.  The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on
a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is
designated dBA.
   CONSTRUCTION. Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair,
alteration (or similar action) of structures, utilities, public or private
right-of-way or other property. Construction does not include demolition.
   DECIBEL (dB). A unit for measuring the volume of sound, it is a logarithmic
(dimensionless) unit of measure used in describing the amplitude of sound.
DECIBAL is denoted as dB.
   dBA. The A-weighted unit of sound pressure level.
   DEMOLITION. Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar
property.
   EMERGENCY.  Any occurrence or circumstances involving actual or imminent
physical injury to persons or property, which demands immediate action. It
shall be the burden of the alleged violator to prove the EMERGENCY.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. A motor vehicle, vessel, or aircraft used in response to
a public emergency or to protect persons or property from imminent danger.
   EMERGENCY WORK. Work necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a public calamity, work to restore public utilities, or work required
to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger.
   EQUIVALENT. The level of a constant sound, which in a given situation and
time period, has the same sound energy as does a time varying sound. The Leq is
the level of the time-averaged, means square, A-weighted sound pressure, the
time interval over which measurement is taken as being specified.
   IMPULSIVE NOISE. A sound of short duration, usually less than one second
with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of IMPULSIVE NOISE,
includes explosions and the discharge of firearms.
   LMAX. The maximum A-weighted sound level for a given event.
   LEGAL HOLIDAYS. Those recognized by the city include New Year’s Day, Martin
Luther King Jr. Day, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, Day After Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve, and
Christmas Day or any other legally recognized holidays.
   MAXIMUM SOUND LEVEL.  The greatest A- weighted sound level reading obtained
when measuring a source of sound during a designated time interval using the
fast meter exponential integration time. Alternatively the slow meter
exponential integration time may be employed or the C-frequency weighting may
be employed.
   MICROPASCAL. The international unit for pressure, analogous to pounds per
square inch in English units; l microPascal is one millionth of a Pascal; the
reference pressure used for airborne sound is 20 microPascals.
   MOTORBOAT. Any vehicle which is primarily operated on water or which does
operate on water, such as boats, barges, amphibious craft, or hover craft, and
which is propelled by mechanical power.
   MOTORIZED EQUIPMENT. Any self-propelled vehicle, such as, but not limited
to, passenger cars, trucks, truck trailers, semi-trailers, campers,
motorcycles, mini-bikes, go-carts, gopeds, dune buggie, all-terrain vehicles or
racing vehicles which are propelled by mechanical power.
   MUFFLER. Any apparatus consisting of baffles, chambers, or acoustical
absorbing material whose primary purpose is to transmit liquids or gases while
causing a reduction in sound emission at one end.
   NOISE. Any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause an
adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound that endangers the safety or health of any
person, disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or endangers
personal or real property.
   OCTIVE BAND SOUND LEVEL. The unweighted sound pressure level in the
specified octave band.
   PERSON. Any natural person, individual, association, partnership,
corporation, municipality, governmental agency, business trust, estate, trust,
two or more persons having a joint or common interest or any other legal entity
and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of
the United States, a state or any political subdivision of a state or any other
entity whatsoever or any combination of such, jointly or severally.
   POWERED MODEL VEHICLES. Any powered vehicle, either airborne, waterborne or
land-borne, which are designed not to carry persons or property, such as, but
not limited to, model airplanes, boats, cars, rockets, and which are being
propelled by mechanical means.
    PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk,
bike path, or alley, or similar place, which is not owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
   PROPERTY BOUNDARY. An imaginary line exterior to any enclosed structure, at
the ground surface, which separates the real property owned by one person from
that owned by another person, and its vertical extension.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, alley, or
public space, which is dedicated to owned or controlled by a public
governmental entity.
   PUBLIC SPACE. Any real property or structures thereon normally accessible to
the public.
   REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY. The line, including its vertical extension that
separates one parcel of real property from another.
   RECEIVING LAND USE. The land, which is receiving the noise as designated by
the City of Pembroke Pines Zoning Map (and for recently incorporated areas, the
effective zoning category).
   SOUND. An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity
or other physical parameter in a medium with internal forces that cause
compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of SOUND may
include any characteristic of such SOUND, including duration, intensity, and
frequency.
   SOUND LEVEL. The reading in decibels of a sound level meter constructed and
operated in accordance with the latest edition of American National Standard
Institute (ANSI) specifications for the measurement of noise and other sounds.
The meter reading in decibels corresponds to the total value of the sound
pressure and is ten times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the A-
weighted squared sound pressure to the squared reference sound pressure of 20
micro-Pa, the squared sound pressure being obtained with fast exponentially
weighted time averaging. Alternatively, slow exponentially weighted time
averaging or C-weighting may be specified.
   SOUND LEVEL METER (SLM). An instrument used to measure sound pressure levels
conforming to Type 1 or Type 2 standards as specified in the American National
Standards Institute Publication 51.41971, or the latest version thereof.
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL (SPL).  Ten times the logarithm to the base ten of the
ratio of the time-mean-square pressure of a sound of the reference pressure of
20 microPascals (in air) with the units of decibels.
   USE. Any activity, event, operation, or facility, which creates noise.
(Ord. 1486, passed 6-16-04)
§ 96.04 NOISE DISTURBANCES.
   The following acts which enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive,
are declared to be noise disturbances and shall constitute a violation of this
chapter. No sound level measurement is needed to prove the existence of the
following noise disturbances:
   (A)   Particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Sunday
through Thursday, 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Friday, Saturday, and legal
holidays, and on New Year’s Eve into New Year’s Day, between the hours of 12:30
a.m. through 7:00 a.m.:
      (1)   Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing or creating similar
noises on the public streets in such a manner so as to cause a disturbance so
as to disturb the peace, health, quiet or comfort of the neighborhood or
vicinity thereof; and
      (2)   The operating or permitting the use or operation of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, television, stereo, car or truck stereo,
drum, compact disc or tape player, exterior loudspeaker, or other device for
the production or reproduction of sound in a loud and raucous manner so as to
disturb the peace, quiet or comfort of the neighborhood.
   (B)   Any public entertainment establishment or person associated with or
working for said establishment which operates, plays or permits the operation
or playing of any radio, television, stereo, drum, musical instrument, sound
amplifier, or similar device, shall not operate, play, or permit the operation
or playing of such devices in a manner which would result in noise across a
real property boundary so as to disturb the peace, health, and comfort of a
reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities, between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday; 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Friday,
Saturday, and legal holidays, and on New Year’s Eve into New Year’s Day,
between the hours of 12:30 a.m. through 7:00 a.m.
   (C)   The sounding of any horn or signaling device, except as a danger
warning, for any unnecessary or an excessive period of time or the unreasonable
use of any horn or signaling device, in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance so as to disturb the peace, health, quiet or comfort of the
neighborhood or vicinity thereof.
   (D)   The using, operating, or permitted to be used or operated, of any loud
speaker or public address system in such a manner so as to emit therefrom loud
or raucous noises so as to disturb the peace, health, quiet or comfort of the
neighborhood or vicinity thereof.
   (E)   The loading, unloading, compacting, opening or otherwise handling
boxes, crates, containers, garbage cans, or otherwise similar objects in such a
manner so as to cause a disturbance so as to disturb the peace, health, quiet
or comfort of the neighborhood or vicinity thereof.
   (F)   The operating or causing to be operated any equipment used in
construction activity, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings,
structures, streets, alleys, or appurtenances thereto with sound-control
devices less effective than those provided on the original equipment.
   (G)   Creating, making, or maintaining any loud or raucous noise by the use
of any drum, cymbals, loudspeaker, or other similar instruments in the city for
the purpose of attracting attention to any performance. show, sale, or display
of merchandise, or place of business. This provision does not apply to approved
public events.
   (H)   Using, in connection with an unauthorized vehicle, any bell or siren
similar to that used on ambulances or vehicles of the police, fire departments,
and other public safety agencies.
   (I)   The operating or causing the operation of any motorboat in any lake,
canal, or other waterway, in such a manner so as to disturb the peace, health,
and comfort of a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities.
   (J)   The operating of causing the operation of any powered model vehicle or
boat in such a manner so as to disturb the peace, health, and comfort of a
reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities.
   (K)   The creation or permitting of any loud or raucous noise so as to
disturb the peace, quiet or comfort of the adjacent neighborhood.
   (L)   The following activities may not be operated or caused to be operated
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless for a public works
transportation or utilities project approved by the city in division (M) below:
      (1)   Any equipment used in construction activity, repair, alteration or
demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys, or appurtenances
thereto with sound-control devices less effective than those provided on the
original equipment;
      (2)   Any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or
electric hoist;
      (3)   Any other machinery, appliance, etc., the use of which is attended
by loud or raucous noise so as to disturb the peace, health, quiet or comfort
of the neighborhood or vicinity thereof.
   (M)   Any person desiring to engage in the use of equipment for a public
works transportation or utilities project beyond the hours of limitations
aforementioned, based upon cases of necessity or in the interest of public
health, safety and convenience, may apply to the city manager or his designee
for a special permit allowing hours of operation other than those specified
above. Such permits, if granted, shall be limited to a period of up to 30 days
in duration, but may be renewed for additional periods of up to 30 days if the
emergency or need therefore continues. In the issuance of such permits the city
shall weigh all facts and circumstances and shall determine whether the reasons
given for the necessity are valid and reasonable, whether the public health,
safety and convenience will be protected or better served by granting the
permit requested, and whether the manner and amount of loss or inconvenience to
the person seeking the permit imposes a significant hardship upon such person.
An application fee of $200 dollars must be paid at the time the application is
filed with the city.
(Ord. 1486, passed 6-16-04)
§ 96.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following noises shall be exempt from the restrictions set forth in the
other sections of this chapter:
   (A)   Noises of authorized safety signals and warning devices.
   (B)   The generation of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency.
   (C)   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, vessel, or
aircraft.
   (D)   Noises resulting from emergency work, which is to be construed as work
made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public
emergency, or work required to protect persons or property from any imminent
exposure to danger.
   (E)   Noise from landscape and yard equipment when operated between 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m., provided all motorized equipment are equipped with
functioning mufflers or other effective sound control devices similar to those
provided on the original equipment.
   (F)   Noises associated with uses or activities whereby an administrative
approval to produce such noises contrary to the restrictions of this chapter
has been obtained from the city manager or his designee.
   (G)   Community events such as fairs, sporting events, school activities,
community festivals, etc. Such events or activities shall not start before 8:00
a.m. and those events or activities, shall not extend their activities beyond
11:00 p.m. Any community activity or event, which is proposed to extend beyond
11:00 p.m., must obtain the approval of the city manager or his designee.
   (H)   Noise generated from municipally sponsored or approved celebrations or
events shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
   (I)   Noises associated with the Police Department’s firearms facility.
   (J)   Noises from construction activity, tools or equipment used and
operated on a construction site between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
provided that all tools or motorized equipment used in such activity are
equipped with all sound reducing features and equipment originally part of the
tool or equipment, or other effective sound control devices similar to those
provided or as effective as that installed as original equipment.
(Ord. 1486, passed 6-16-04)
§ 96.06 FANS AND AIR CONDITIONERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to create any excessive loud noise, exceeding the
sound level limitations set forth in §
96.07 of the Code, by the use or operation of any noise-creating air
conditioner, compressor unit, power fan or blower or the electric motor or any
engine used to drive such device, the operation of which causes such excessive
noise, unless such noise is muffled and deadened by adequate noise suppression
and muffling devices to eliminate annoyance and disturbance to persons within
the range of hearing. In addition, the city manager or designee shall require
compliance with all reasonable sound abatement measures and sound screening
which may be necessary or desirable to prevent such air conditioning equipment
from creating excessive or unnecessary noise.
   (B)   Generators installed in all residential districts shall be exempt from
the sound rating values set forth in §
96.07 of the Code of Ordinances when operated during power outages provided
however, in, no event shall the sound rating value of emergency generators in
any residential district exceed 72 dBA. Generators in all residential districts
may be operated for testing purposes one time for a period not to exceed 30,
minutes in any seven-day period. Testing of generators in all residential
districts is permitted between the hours of 11:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday.
(Ord. 1486, passed 6-16-04)
§ 96.07 SOUND LEVEL LIMITATIONS BY RECEIVING LAND USE DESIGNATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate, cause, suffer or allow, the operation
of any source of sound or to project a sound or noise across a real property
boundary in such a manner as to create an L50 A-weighted sound level which
exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving land use designation in Table 1
when measured at or within the property line of the receiving land use
designation.
   (B)   Such a sound source would constitute a noise disturbance. For the
purposes of this chapter, the L50 shall be the sound, which exceeded for more
than 50% of any measurement period which shall be not less than ten minutes
when measured at or within the boundary of a property within the receiving land
use district and as a result of a source of sound being located on some other
property.
   (C)   For the purposes of this chapter, the L50 may be established by
recording the instantaneous A-weighted sound level using the slow meter
response at equal intervals of ten seconds. The resulting sound level sample
that exceeds half the samples will be taken as the L50. Equally, for the
purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise established by measurements, if the
Leq is measured instead of the L50, the L50 shall be taken to be two decibels
less than the measured equivalent sound level of Leq.
   Exterior Sound Level Limits for L50 Sound Levels by Receiving Property
                                                                          L50
Receiving                                                                 Sound
Property      Time                                                        Level
Designation                                                               Limit
                                                                          (dBA)
Institutional 7:00 a.m. -10:00 p.m.                                       65
Includes the                                                              dBA
following
designations:
Community
Facilities,   10:00 p.m. -7:00 a.m.                                       60
Recreational,                                                             dBA
Agricultural
and Open
Space
Residential   7:00 a.m. -10:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday              65
Includes all  7:00 a.m. -11:00 p.m., Friday, Saturday, legal holidays     dBA
Residential   7:00 a.m. on New Year’s Eve -12:30 a.m. New Year’s Day.
Multi-        10:00 p.m. -7:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday              60
Family, PUD   11:00 p.m. -7:00 a.m., Friday, Saturday, legal holidays     dBA
and MXD       12:30 a.m. -7:00 a.m., New Year’s Day
Commercial    7:00 a.m. -10:00 p.m.                                       70
Includes all                                                              dBA
business      10:00 p.m. -7:00 a.m.                                       65
districts                                                                 dBA
              7:00 a.m. -10:00 p.m.                                       80
Industrial                                                                dBA
              10:00 p.m. -7:00 a.m.                                       80
                                                                          dBA
 
   (D)   The maximum exterior A-weighted sound level or Lmax measured during a
period of not less than ten minutes using the slow meter response shall not
exceed the L50 sound level limits specified in Table 1 by more than ten dBA.
   (E)   Within a multifamily dwelling, it shall be unlawful to create or
permit any noise that exceeds the L50 and/or Lmax sound level limits specified
in Table 1 and division (D) reduced by ten dBA.
   (F)   In addition to the limits of Table 1 and division (E), for any sound
source which impacts residential, public space, or institutional property, the
maximum (Lmax) allowable exterior sound level limits for the individual
unweighted octave bands measured using the slow meter response whose centers
are 63, 125, 250 and 500 Hertz shall not exceed 65 dBA.
   (G)   District boundaries. When a noise source can be identified and its
noise measured in more than one land use designation, the pressure level limits
of the most restrictive use district shall apply at that designation boundary.
   (H)   The burden shall be on any person contesting the equivalent sound
levels to establish the actual equivalent noise level by clear and convincing
evidence.
(Ord. 1486, passed 6-16-04)
§ 96.08 MEASUREMENT OF SOUND.
   (A)   When applicable, sound shall be measured with a sound level meter.
   (B)   The sound level shall be measured at a distance no closer to the point
from which the sound in question is emanating than the property line of the
parcel or lot from which the sound is emanating.
   (C)   A measurement period shall not be less than ten minutes in duration.
   (D)   The sound being measured shall be representative of the sound which
instigated the complaint.
   (E)   A measurement shall be recorded so as to secure and ensure an accurate
representation of the sound.
   (F)   A measurement should be taken at approximately five feet above the
ground or water surface away from any obstruction or reflecting surface.
   (G)   When necessary, a microphone windscreen shall be required to avoid
wind noise biasing of a measurement.
   (H)   All manufacturer’s directions on the operation of the sound level
meter shall be followed (such as proper microphone angle).
   (I)   All sound level meters used for measurement shall be in conformance
with ANSI section 1.4-1983, as amended.
   (J)   All octave and third octave band filter sets of the sound level meter
shall be in conformance with ANSI section 1.11-1976, as amended.
   (K)   Calibration of all instruments, components, and attachments shall
conform to the ANSI standards, as amended.
   (L)   Instrumentation for sound level measurements maybe class 1 or class 2
(ANSI section 1.4-1971), as amended.
   (M)   Measurements of sound shall be made by individuals trained in a noise
measurement program.
(Ord. 1486, passed 6-16-04)
§ 96.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Alleged noise disturbance violations shall be investigated on a
complaint basis and only when the person or persons making the complaint
contacts the Pembroke Pines Police Department or Code Enforcement Division
stating the details of the complaint.
   (B)   The city may prosecute violators of Pembroke Pines Noise Abatement
Code pursuant to §§ 32.035 through 32.053 of the Code or by issuance of a city
ordinance citation. If by citation, the penalty for a violation shall be as
provided in §
10.99 of the Code.
   (C)   Each occurrence shall constitute a separate violation.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude or prohibit the
enforcement of the Pembroke Pines Noise Abatement Code by any other available
legal means.
(Ord. 1486, passed 6-16-04)
CHAPTER 97: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
97.01   Definitions
   
97.02   Hours of operation
   
97.03   Powers of the Director of Recreation and Cultural Arts
   
97.04   Use of park facilities
   
97.05   Permits
   
97.06   Alcoholic beverages in public parks
   
97.07   Illegal substances
   
97.08   Sanitation
   
97.09   Noise
   
97.10   Operation of vehicles within parks
   
97.11   Parking
   
97.12   Certain activities restricted
   
97.13   Fire
   
97.14   Animals
   
97.15   Swimming and bathing
   
97.16   Boating
   
97.17   Fishing
   
97.18   Weapons, destructive devices and fireworks
   
97.19   Picnic areas and use
   
97.20   Public nuisance and disorderly conduct
   
97.21   Vending and peddling
   
97.22   Advertising and publicity
   
97.23   Camping
   
97.24   Organized athletics/games
   
97.25   Authority to donate use of city-owned facilities
   
97.26   Permit to use city facilities, public parks or other areas for private
instruction
   
97.27   Photography
   
97.28   Tennis facilities
   
97.29   Smoking prohibited in parks
Public Art Program
   
97.40   Short title; intent
   
97.41   Definitions
   
97.42   Public art program master plan
Cross-reference:
   Public Art Committee, see §§
32.180 -
32.184
 
   
97.99   Enforcement and penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. Includes any wine, fortified wine, liquor, beer, or any
beverage considered to be an alcoholic drink.
   CITY. The City of Pembroke Pines, Florida, a municipal corporation existing
under the laws of the State of Florida.
   DESTRUCTIVE DEVICE. As defined in F.S. § 791.01, as may be amended from time
to time.
   FACILITY USE AGREEMENT. A contractual agreement that must be obtained from
the city with specific rules and requirements for the use of park facilities
over a period of time.
   FIREWORKS. As defined in F.S. § 791.01, as may be amended from time to time.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any member of the City of Pembroke Pines Police
Department or any certified law enforcement officer who is a duly sworn
officer.
   ORGANIZED ATHLETICS. Any gathering of ten or more individuals for the
purpose of playing or practicing for sports activities such as but not limited
to football, soccer, baseball, softball, swimming, hockey, lacrosse, rugby, and
the like.
   PARK FACILITY or PARK FACILITIES. Any public park, recreational or
playground area, or building or facility therein, within the city owned or
leased, subleased and maintained as a public park, whether or not such areas
have been formally dedicated to serve such purpose.
   PARK PERSONNEL. The Director of Recreation and Cultural Arts, Assistant
Director, Division Director, coordinators, supervisors, contracted personnel
and any and all individuals working in the jurisdiction of the department.
   PERMIT. The written permission that must be obtained from the Director of
Recreation and Cultural Arts or their designee to carry out a given activity in
the park.
   WEAPON. Shall be as defined in F.S. § 790.001, as may be amended from time
to time.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18)
§ 97.02 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Unless otherwise determined by the city, park facilities shall be open
to the public every day of the year between sunrise and sunset. Lighted
facilities such as lighted courts, baseball/softball diamonds and fields shall
be open for use beyond sunset during the times such lights are illuminated; and
upon cessation of such illumination, the facilities shall be considered closed.
The Director of Recreation and Cultural Arts may extend or contract these times
for any park or portion thereof. No person shall enter, be, or remain in any
park after the park closing time unless a permit for same has been obtained.
   (B)   Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public
at any time or limited to certain users or times as public interest demands, or
safety and security dictates at the discretion of the Director of Recreation
and Cultural Arts.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18)
§ 97.03 POWERS OF THE DIRECTOR OF RECREATION AND CULTURAL ARTS.
   The Director of Recreation and Cultural Arts shall have the power to make,
from time to time, such reasonable rules and regulations as are necessary to
manage, use, preserve and govern park facilities and activities.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18)
§ 97.04 USE OF PARK FACILITIES.
   (A)   The park facilities of the city are held by the city for the use,
convenience and enjoyment of the residents and visitors of the city.
   (B)   It is intended that the use of all park facilities shall be on a first
come, first served basis. It is also intended that no group or organization be
permitted to monopolize any area of facilities to the exclusion of all others.
Whenever the situation warrants, use of the facilities will be regulated by the
use of permits and/or facility use agreement. Terms and forms of permits or
facility use agreement will be formulated and regulated by the Director of
Recreation and Cultural Arts to obtain the results intended as expressed above.
   (C)   In general, the facilities and equipment are to be used for the
purposes for which they were designed. Use of facilities and equipment for
purposes other than for which they were designed is prohibited.
   (D)   Playgrounds are restricted to children aged 12 and under. Adults are
allowed in playgrounds only when supervising a child.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18)
§ 97.05 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits are required for certain activities so that park personnel can
limit or eliminate activities which would tend to damage the park, or which are
likely to create an atmosphere which would discourage use of the park for its
intended purpose, or which, if not eliminated, would allow monopolizing of a
park or some facilities in a park by one group to the exclusion of other groups
or individuals.
   (B)   Facility use.
      (1)   Park facilities may be reserved in advance with the Director of
Recreation and Cultural Arts by completing an application and paying the
required fees. It is unlawful for any person to make a material
misrepresentation with the intent to obtain a facility rental. Any applicant
who makes a material misrepresentation will be subject to denial of the
facility rental or revocation of authorization for the rental and may be
prohibited from obtaining facility rentals for a period of not less than one
year. Each material misrepresentation shall constitute a separate offense. The
Director of Recreation and Cultural Arts shall be the authority with regards to
all applications for use of a park facility.
      (2)   A facility rental permit is required when one or more of the
following conditions apply:
         (a)   Any picnic, outing, or gathering sponsored by an organization,
entity or individual that is will be attended by more than ten persons;
         (b)   Any commercial activity, contest, exhibit, dramatic performance,
play, motion picture, radio, or television broadcast, fair, circus, musical
event or any similar event;
         (c)   Any public meeting, assembly, or parade, including but not
limited to, drills, maneuvers, ceremonies, addresses, speeches, or political
meetings;
         (d)   Any activity or gathering involving organized athletics;
         (e)   Any activity to provide for the sale distribution, or sampling
of materials, merchandise, food, and or beverages to the general public;
         (f)   Any use of any park facility by a certain organization, person
or group of persons to the exclusion of the general public.
      (3)   No person in a park facility shall refuse or fail to produce and
exhibit any permit upon the request of any law enforcement officer or
authorized park personnel who wishes to inspect the permit for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with this chapter. Failure to produce and exhibit any
permit, upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the
permit for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule will
result in expulsion from park facilities.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.06 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PARKS.
   No person shall bring into, consume or sell alcoholic beverages in a park
facility except:
   (A)   Alcoholic beverages may be sold by persons operating under a
concession from the city, subject to the regulation and control of the Director
of Recreation and Cultural Arts. Sale of alcoholic beverages shall be by the
individual drink only and the drinks shall only be consumed on the premises of
the concession. Sale of beer and wine in unopened containers shall not be
permitted.
   (B)   Alcoholic beverages may be permitted to private entrepreneurs who
develop and/or operate facilities upon premises leased from the city for food
services as the city deems appropriate.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.07 ILLEGAL SUBSTANCES.
   No person shall use, distribute, or possess with the intent to use or
distribute any illegal substance in any park facility at any time. Violators
shall be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.08 SANITATION.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Litter. Throw or cause to be thrown, place, cast, deposit, dump, or
drop any bottles, glass, broken glass, boxes, cans, ashes, refuse, fruit,
vegetables, garbage, tobacco products, containers or foil, cinders, shells,
straw, shavings, paper, scraps, dirt or like matter, filth, waste, refuse,
trash, litter, or rubbish of any kind in any park facility, except to place the
same in cans or receptacles provided for such matter. Where receptacles are not
provided, the same shall be carried away from the park facilities by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. Refuse and
trash receptacles shall only be used by those persons using the park facilities
for park or recreational activities.
   (B)   Pollute waters. Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be
placed in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or
adjacent to any city park, or any storm sewer, or drain flowing into such
water, any substance, liquid or solid, organic or inorganic, which will or may
result in the pollution of such waters.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.09 NOISE.
   (A)   Noise in any park facility shall be subject to
chapter 96 of the city’s code of ordinances, as may be amended from time to
time.
   (B)   No person shall cause amplified sound at any park facility unless such
activity is conducted as an incidental activity to a public meeting or assembly
for which a facility permit is approved and provided such amplified sound is
contained within the rental area.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.10 OPERATION OF VEHICLES WITHIN PARKS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle in a park facility except upon
designated paved or improved park roads or driveways, or in and upon designated
areas or trails set aside for use by such vehicles, unless directed by a law
enforcement officer or park personnel to do so, or by official signs or
markings.
   (B)   All applicable state and local vehicle and traffic laws and ordinances
shall continue in full force and effect in any park facility.
   (C)   No person shall operate a vehicle within a Park Facility in excess of
the posted speed limit.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.11 PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall parka vehicle in any park facilities other than in
areas designated for parking, unless there is an emergency or unless directed
to do otherwise by authorized park personnel. Parking shall conform to
officially posted signs and markings.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be left parked in park facilities after park closing
hours. Any vehicle left parked inside park facilities after park closing hours
shall be subject to being towed.
   (C)   No person shall make non-emergency repairs, perform routine
maintenance or wash any private or commercial vehicles in any park facility.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.12 CERTAIN ACTIVITIES RESTRICTED.
   Except as previously authorized by the city, no person shall, in any park
facility, do or cause to be done any of the following:
   (A)   Willfully mark, deface, or injure in any manner, or displace, remove,
or tamper with any park building , bridge, table, bench, railing, paving or
paving materials, water line or other public utility or parts thereof, park
sign or marking whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post, or other
structure or equipment, facility, or park property of any kind;
   (B)   Willfully dig, cut, move or remove from any park or park area any
sand, wood, turf, grass, gravel, plant, tree shrub, or other material, or make
any excavation by hand, tool, equipment, blasting or other means;
   (C)   Construct or erect any building structure of any kind, whether
permanent or temporary, or run or string any public and/or private utility
into, upon or across a park;
   (D)   Willfully pick, saw, chop, cut, carve, remove or injure any flowers,
seeds, blooms, bark, branches, twigs, or leaves of any tree, plant, shrub,
vine, bush, or any other vegetation;
   (E)   Willfully drive any nail, staple, or attach or fasten any wire, rope,
or other device to any tree or plant, or tie or hitch any animal to any tree or
plant;
   (F)   Willfully dig in or disturb any grass areas, or in any way injure or
impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any park facility;
   (G)   Willfully climb any tree, or walk, stand or sit upon any monument,
fountain, railing, fence, or any other park property non designated or normally
used for such purpose;
   (H)   Willfully bring in or dump illegally at city facilities.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.13 FIRE.
   Fires are not permitted except in city-provided containers such as barbeque
grills. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches,
burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco, paper or other flammable materials,
within any park facilities.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.14 ANIMALS.
   (A)   No animals or pets of any kind are permitted in park facilities except
city-operated dog parks or equestrian parks.
   (B)   This section does not apply to the following:
      (1)   Service animals, as defined by F.S. § 413.08(l)(d), and in
accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 413.08, as may be amended from time to
time;
      (2)   Horses or dogs used by a law enforcement officer or park personnel
in the performance of their duties;
      (3)   Animals or fowl kept by the Department of Recreation and Cultural
Arts under its direction.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.15 SWIMMING AND BATHING.
   No person in any park facility shall:
   (A)   Swim, bathe or wade in any waterway in or adjacent to any park;
   (B)   Frequent any water or places where swimming or bathing or wading is
permitted, except during scheduled hours that the Director of Recreation and
Cultural Arts has established for such activities:
   (C)   Change into bathing clothes from street clothes or from bathing
clothes into street clothes, except in a bathroom or other structure designated
for such use.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.16 BOATING.
   Unless expressly permitted by the city, no person shall bring into or
operate any boat, cruiser, canoe, raft or other watercraft whether motor
powered or not, upon any park.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.17 FISHING.
   No fishing is permitted in any park facility.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.18 WEAPONS, DESTRUCTIVE DEVICES AND FIREWORKS.
   (A)   No person, except a law enforcement officer, shall bring or possess
any weapon or destructive device in any park facility.
   (B)   No person shall bring into any park facility or have in their
possession in a park facility any fireworks. Fireworks shall not be displayed
in any park facility without the expressed authorization by the city.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.19 PICNIC AREAS AND USE.
   (A)   The Director of Recreation and Cultural Arts shall designate those
areas of a park facility where picnicking is permitted. No person shall picnic
other than in a designated area. Park personnel shall have the authority to
regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and
to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors
shall comply with any directions given by park personnel to achieve this end.
   (B)   Picnic areas are subject to permit requirements.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.20 PUBLIC NUISANCE AND DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   No person shall engage in any activity that interferes with the use and
enjoyment of park facilities by others. Any person that engages in brawling,
fighting or violent activity, engages in such conduct as to constitute a hazard
to the health, safety or welfare of themselves or other park visitors, or
violates the rules and/or regulations of any park area, shall upon due notice
of violation be classified as a trespasser, and ordered to leave the park.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.21 VENDING AND PEDDLING.
   No person shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall any
person, station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation,
sale or display of any such article or merchandise within the limits of any
park facility. Exception is made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire
acting by and under the authority and regulation of the city and providing
foods, goods or services for the benefit of the public.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.22 ADVERTISING AND PUBLICITY.
   All advertising or publicity posted or announced in or on any park facility
must be approved by the Director of Recreation and Cultural Arts or designee.
No person shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or cause to
be erected any sign whatsoever.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.23 CAMPING.
   No camping is permitted in any park facility. No person shall set up tents,
shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping,
nor shall any person sleep in a city park, nor shall special vehicles that
could be for such purpose, such as a house trailer, camp trailer, camp vehicle,
or like vehicles be left on city property overnight.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.24 ORGANIZED ATHLETICS/GAMES.
   (A)   The playing of organized athletics and holding organized practices is
prohibited except on fields, courts, or areas designated for such use and
approved by a facility use agreement or permit.
   (B)   The interpretation of organized play will be at the sole discretion of
Park Personnel.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.25 AUTHORITY TO DONATE USE OF CITY-OWNED FACILITIES.
   The city, through its Director of Recreation and Cultural Arts, is
authorized to donate the use of the city-owned parks facilities for which a
user fee has been established. The association or entity granted a donation
shall pay for any other costs to the city in conjunction with their use of the
facility, including any staff overtime.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.26 PERMIT TO USE CITY FACILITIES, PUBLIC PARKS OR OTHER AREAS FOR PRIVATE
INSTRUCTION.
   It is unlawful for any person to use any park facility for private
instruction for compensation, in money or any other thing of value, without the
prior written permission of the Director of Recreation and Cultural Arts.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.27 PHOTOGRAPHY.
   No person shall take still or motion pictures for commercial purposes
involving the use of special settings or structures, or the performance of a
cast or persons, either amateur or professional, without first obtaining a
permit from the Director of Recreation and Cultural Arts.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.28 TENNIS FACILITIES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to occupy a tennis court at a non-
supervised city tennis facility for more than one hour at a time where there
are not sufficient vacant courts available at such facility for people waiting
for them.
   (B)   This section does not apply to those courts that are in use by the
city authorized tennis instructors.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.29 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PARKS.
   (A)   Smoking or holding lighted tobacco products, and use or consumption of
tobacco products, including the use of e-cigarettes or vapes, in parks under
the control and management of the city, is prohibited and unlawful. It is
prohibited and unlawful for any person to smoke or carry a lighted cigar,
cigarette, cigarillo or pipe, or use any sparks, flame, match or fire-producing
device normally used in tobacco smoking, or, to use or consume tobacco
products, including e-cigarettes or vapes, in any city park, under the control
and management of the city, except smoking of unfiltered cigars is permitted.
The city designees, shall post signs reading “Smoking Prohibited by Law”, which
shall be conspicuously displayed in all appropriate locations.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall be enforced consistent with the
controlling provisions of Florida law and City Code of Ordinances §
10.99.
(Ord. 1994, passed 8-3-22)
PUBLIC ART PROGRAM
§ 97.40 SHORT TITLE; INTENT.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the "Public Art Program."
   (B)   It is the intent and purpose of this subchapter to further the
commitment of the city to providing public art to beautify the appearance of
the city, commemorate the city's history, and to enhance cultural opportunities
throughout the city.
(Ord. 1960, passed 3-3-21)
§ 97.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires different meaning.
   ART, ARTWORK OR WORKS OF ART. Tangible creations by artists exhibiting the
highest quality of skill and aesthetic principles and includes all forms of the
visual arts conceived in any medium, material, or combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, paintings, sculptures, engravings, carvings,
frescos, stained glass, mosaics, mobiles, tapestries, murals, photographs,
video projections, digital images, bas-relief, high relief, fountains,
kinetics, collages, drawings, monuments erected to commemorate a person or an
event, functional furnishings, such as artist designed seating and pavers,
architectural elements designed by an artist, and artist designed landforms or
landscape elements. The following shall not be considered artwork or works of
art for purposes of this subchapter:
      (1)   Reproductions or unlimited copies of original artwork.
      (2)   Art objects which are mass produced.
      (3)   Works that are decorative, ornamental, or functional elements of
the architecture or landscape design, except when commissioned from an artist
as an integral aspect of a structure or site.
   ART CONSERVATION. The maintenance and preservation of works of art and their
protection from future damage and deterioration.
   ART RESTORATION. Denotes the repair or renovation of works of art that have
already sustained injury or decay and the attempted restoration of such objects
to something approaching their original undamaged appearance.
   ARTIST or PROFESSIONAL ARTIST. A practitioner in the visual arts, generally
recognized by critics and peers as a professional of serious intent and
ability. Indications of a person's status as a professional artist include, but
are not limited to, income realized through the sole commission of artwork,
frequent or consistent art exhibitions, placement of artwork in public
institutions or museums, receipt of honors and awards, and training in the
arts.
   PUBLIC ART. Art accessible to the public and typically reflects an awareness
of its site, both physically and socially and involves community process in
creation. Public art can be a stand-alone sculpture, mural or other artwork, an
integration into architecture, an urban design/placemaking project that
contributes to the cityscape or creates a sense of place or a temporary
installation (non-permanent art work).
   PUBLIC ART COMMITTEE. The entity appointed by the City Manager or his/her
designee to administer the public art program.
(Ord. 1960, passed 3-3- 21)
§ 97.42 PUBLIC ART PROGRAM MASTER PLAN.
   (A)   The Recreation and Cultural Arts Department shall prepare, and from
time to time revise, public art master plan which shall include public art
needs and priority assessment, recommendations on types of public art and
potential locations in the city, and implementation strategies for acquisition
and maintenance.
   (B)   The public art master plan shall include program guidelines, which
shall provide guidance for program organization, organizational governance and
staffing responsibilities; procedures for project planning; artist selection;
art selection criteria; art placement criteria, donations; loans and memorials,
collection management.
   (C)   The plan shall be developed with input from stakeholders including,
but not limited to, the Arts and Culture Advisory Board and the Public Art
Committee and adopted by the Commission.
(Ord. 1960, passed 3-3-21)
§ 97.99 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required by this chapter, or for any person to fail to comply
with any lawful and reasonable order given by law enforcement officers or
authorized park personnel.
   (B)   The Director of Recreation and Cultural Arts, park personnel, or any
law enforcement officer of the city or duly sworn officer shall have the
authority to eject from a park facility any person acting in violation of this
chapter, state or federal law.
   (C)   Any person, including agents, servants, and employees, found guilty of
violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of the city’s code of ordinances. Each day that a violation is permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of any fine or
penalty shall not be construed as excusing or permitting the continuance of any
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1911, passed 9-4-18)
CHAPTER 98: (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 99: VEHICLE REPAIRS
Section
   
99.01   Vehicle repairs prohibited in residential districts; exception
   
99.02   Repairs on swales, in public rights-of- way prohibited
   
99.03   Car parts to be stored in enclosed areas
   
99.04   Repairs to be competed within two days; notice of violation
§ 99.01 VEHICLE REPAIRS PROHIBITED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS; EXCEPTION.
   All vehicle repairs are prohibited in residential districts of the city
except repairs made to a privately owned vehicle of the owner or tenant of the
residential property on which site the repairs are being made. The vehicle must
be owned and registered in the name of the property owner or tenant at the
residence address where the repairs are being effectuated. In no event shall
anyone be permitted to perform vehicle repairs on the property of another
person in residential districts of the city.
(Ord. 738, passed 5-15-85) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 99.02 REPAIRS ON SWALES, IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY PROHIBITED.
   Permitted vehicle repairs in residential districts shall be prohibited from
being performed on swales or in public rights-of-way or on any public property.
(Ord. 738, passed 5-15-85) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 99.03 CAR PARTS TO BE STORED IN ENCLOSED AREAS.
   Removed defective vehicle car parts or parts kept for future use shall not
be left in view on or near residential property. These defective car parts or
parts kept for future use shall be stored in enclosed areas such as garages or
storage buildings.
(Ord. 738, passed 5-15-85) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 99.04 REPAIRS TO BE COMPLETED WITHIN TWO DAYS; NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   All vehicle repairs shall be completed within two days after commencement
thereof and any individual who fails to complete the same within 48 hours of
receipt of notice of violation of this chapter shall be punished in accordance
with §
10.99.
(Ord. 738, passed 5-15-85) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 99.5: CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY; BASKETBALL POLES, BACKBOARDS AND HOOPS
Section
   
99.5.01    Intent
   
99.5.02   Application for permit; fee
   
99.5.03   Minimum requirements; guidelines
   
99.5.04   Duration of permit
§ 99.5.01 INTENT.
   The intent of this chapter is to provide a mechanism by which to permit
basketball poles, backboards and hoops existing as of March 1, 1994, to
encroach on the city right-of-way, provided the adjoining property owner
complies with the procedures and minimum requirements set forth in this
chapter.
(Ord. 1068, passed 3-16-94)
§ 99.5.02 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a permit, a written application therefor,
signed by the property owner, shall be filed with the City Engineer upon forms
prescribed by the city.
   (B)   The form for application for a permit to maintain a basketball pole,
backboard and hoop on the city right-of-way shall include an affidavit to be
sworn to by the property owner/applicant before a notary public of this state.
It shall set forth, at a minimum, the following pertinent information:
      (1)   The name of the property owner;
      (2)   The address of the residential property for which the application
for the permit is made;
      (3)   A sketch of the placement of the basketball pole, backboard and
hoop; and
      (4)   An affidavit of the property owner acknowledging that if a permit
is granted in accordance with this chapter, the property owner agrees to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its trustees, elected and
appointed officials, agents, servants and employees from and against any and
all actions, claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, penalties,
liabilities and judgments for damages, or equitable relief of any nature
whatsoever, sustained by the city, or any third party, whatsoever, arising out
of or in connection with the placement of, existence of, or use of the
basketball pole, backboard and hoop herein permitted, for all costs, losses and
expenses, including, but not limited to, damages to persons or property,
judgments and attorneys’ fees arising out of or in connection to the placement
of, existence of or use of the basketball pole, backboard and hoop permitted
herein, and that the property owner agrees to comply with all of the terms and
conditions set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   All applications for permits shall be accompanied by the full amount
of the fees chargeable for the permit.
   (D)   Upon receipt of a completed application by the city, the City Engineer
shall review the application and determine initially whether or not the
applicant’s residential property satisfies the minimum requirements set forth
in § 99.5.03. If the minimum requirements are not satisfied, the application
will be returned to the applicant with a letter stating that the application is
being returned due to the residential property not meeting the minimum
requirements of this chapter. If the minimum requirements are satisfied, the
notification and hearing requirements set forth in subdivision (E) below will
be followed.
   (E)   Immediately following receipt of notice from the City Engineer that
the application has not been returned to the applicant in accordance with
subdivision (D) above, the city, at the cost of the applicant, shall cause an
inspection of the applicant’s residential property and the location of the
basketball pole, backboard and hoop.
   (F)    Upon receipt of an application, the City Engineer, at the applicant’s
expense, shall notify by certified mail, the surrounding property owners
located within 200 feet of the property, that an application is pending for the
issuance of a permit under this chapter. Notice shall also be sent to all
departments of the city for review and comment.
      (1)   The notification shall set forth the name of the applicant, the
street address of the residential property for which the permit is sought, and
the location of the basketball pole, backboard and hoop.
      (2)   Following the notice, if any objections are received from any of
the surrounding residential property owners or from a city department objecting
to the application, the City Manager or a designee shall evaluate the
objections.
      (3)   The city shall presume all objections are objective and valid and
the burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate sufficient grounds for
granting the permit.
      (4)   In reviewing objections, the City Manager or a designee shall
consider the effect of the use on existing and future dwellings in the
vicinity, the site, the traffic safety and the general health and safety of the
community.
      (5)   In the event the applicant has satisfied his burden of proof and
the objections are found invalid, the city shall continue processing the
application.
      (6)   In the event the applicant has failed to satisfy the burden of
proof and valid objections do exist, the application shall be denied. In which
case the applicant shall be entitled to appeal the denial to the City
Commission. Such appeal shall be made in writing within ten days of
notification that the application is denied. The decision of the City
Commission shall be binding on the applicant.
(Ord. 1068, passed 3-16-94)
§ 99.5.03 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS; GUIDELINES.
   (A)   An application for a permit under this chapter shall not be granted
for any residential property which:
      (1)   Abuts an arterial or collector street (as defined in the city’s
Comprehensive Plan); only local streets and cul de sacs will be permitted; and
      (2)   Where the distance from the edge of the roadway pavement to the
property line is less than 14 feet; AND
   (B)   An application for a permit under this chapter shall not be granted
for any residential property unless the property owner/applicant agrees that
within two years from the date the permit is issued the following requirements
will be fully complied with or the permit will be revoked by the city and the
property owner/applicant will be responsible for the removal of any portion of
the basketball pole, backboard and hoop which encroaches on city property
within 30 days of revocation.
      (1)   Where the distance from the edge of the roadway pavement to the
closest edge of the basketball pole, backboard or hoop is located less than
four feet; and
      (2)   Where the basketball pole, backboard and hoop is located less than
100 feet from the centerline of an intersecting street; provided, however, that
if a stop sign exists for the intersecting street, this distance may be reduced
to 75 feet; and
      (3)   Where the face of the backboard is parallel with or at any angle
less than 45 degrees to the centerline of the road.
(Ord. 1068, passed 3-16-94)
§ 99.5.04 DURATION OF PERMIT.
   The permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for as long as
the property owner/applicant owns the adjoining property for which the permit
was issued. The permit granted herein is non-transferable and non-assignable.
(Ord. 1068, passed 3-16-94)
CHAPTER 100: NAMING AND RECOGNITION PROCEDURES
Section
   
100.01   Findings and intent
   
100.02   Procedures
§ 100.01 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   It is the intent of the City Commission to adopt a policy whereby the Mayor
and City Commissioners may recognize certain individuals, business entities,
and civic organizations that have made a substantial contribution to the city
at either the federal, state or local level by naming public places in their
honor.
(Ord. 1583, passed 6-6-07)
§ 100.02 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   A public place may be nominated by the Mayor or any City Commissioner
to be named after a person who, or a business entity or civic organization
that, made a major contribution to or impact on the city. A plaque may be
installed at a public place to commemorate or honor a person who, or a business
entity or civic organization that, made a major contribution to or impact on
the city after nomination by the Mayor or any Commissioner.
   (B)   Any naming of a public place or the installation of a plaque at a
public place shall require the adoption of a resolution, which must be approved
by a majority vote of the City Commission.
   (C)   Any member of the City Commission may nominate a public place to be
named after an individual who or entity which meets the criteria as set forth
in division (A) of this section by having such nomination placed on the agenda
of the City Commission in accordance with the procedures for meetings of the
City Commission. An individual or entity may be nominated only once during any
given 12 month period.
   (D)   The City Manager shall have the duty to establish procedures under
this section to ensure proper evaluation and due diligence reviews over all
persons, business entities and civic organizations nominated.
   (E)   This section shall not apply to public places named after persons,
business entities or civic organizations on or before May 1, 2007.
(Ord. 1583, passed 6-6-07)
CHAPTER 101: NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURES
Section
   
101.01   Purpose and intent
   
101.02   Definitions
   
101.03   Declaration of nuisance and menace
   
101.04   Accumulation of trash, junk, or debris, living and nonliving plant
material, and stagnant water
   
101.05   Excessive growth of grass, weeds, brush, and other overgrowth
   
101.06   Keeping of fill on property
   
101.07   Imminent public health threat
   
101.08   Enforcement
   
101.09   Appeals
   
101.10   Special assessment imposed
   
101.11   Notice of assessment
   
101.12   Assessments for lot maintenance and clean-up
§ 101.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prohibit the following:
   (A)   Accumulation of trash, junk, or debris, living and nonliving plant
material, and stagnant water.
   (B)   Excessive and untended growth of grass, weeds, brush, branches, and
other overgrowth.
   (C)   The existence of all other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary
matter, materials, and conditions on property, whether improved or unimproved.
   (D)   Property being inhabited by, or providing a habitat for rodents,
vermin, reptiles, or other wild animals.
   (E)   Property providing a breeding place for mosquitoes.
   (F)   Property being a place, or being reasonably conducive to serving as a
place, for illegal or illicit activity.
   (G)   Property threatening or endangering the public health, safety or
welfare of city residents.
   (H)   Property reasonably believed to cause currently, or potentially to
cause in the future, ailments or disease.
   (I)   Property adversely affecting and impairing the economic value or
enjoyment of surrounding or nearby property.
(Ord. 1716, passed 5-2-12)
§ 101.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTUAL COST.  The actual cost to the city, and if by contract the amount
plus interest, if any, as invoiced by an independent, private contractor for
terminating and abating a violation of this section on a lot, tract, or parcel,
plus the cost of serving notice of the violation, obtaining title information
on the property, and all other identifiable costs incurred by the city in the
clean-up of the lot, tract, or parcel.
   COMPATIBLE ELECTRONIC MEDIUM OR MEDIA.  Machine-readable electronic
repositories of data and information, including, but not limited to, magnetic
disk, magnetic tape, and magnetic diskette technologies, which provide without
modification that the data and information therein are in harmony with and can
be used in concert with the data and information on the ad valorem tax roll
keyed to the property identification number used by the Broward County Property
Appraiser.
   COMPOST BIN. A container designed for the purpose of allowing nonliving
plant material to decompose for use as fertilizer. For purposes of this
chapter, any such compost bin shall be constructed of wire, wood lattice or
other material which allows air to filter through the structure. A compost bin
shall not exceed an area of 64 square feet or a height of five feet.
   EXCESSIVE GROWTH. Grass, weeds, rubbish, brush, branches, or undergrowth
that has reached a height of eight inches or more.
   FILL. Material such as dirt that is imported and deposited on property by
artificial means.
   GRASS, WEEDS, OR BRUSH. Grass or weeds or brush that, when allowed to grow
in a wild and unkempt manner, will reach a height of eight inches or more. This
definition does not include bushes, shrubs, trees, vines, flowering plants, and
other living plant life typically used and actually being used for landscaping
purposes.
   IMMINENT PUBLIC HEALTH THREAT. The condition of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land that, because of the accumulation of trash, junk, or debris, such as
broken glass, rusted metal, automotive and appliance parts, some of which may
contain chemicals, such as freon, oils, fluids, or the like, may cause injury
or disease to humans or contaminate the environment, or the condition of a lot,
tract or parcel that, because of the excessive growth of grass, weeds, or
brush, can harbor criminal activity, vermin, or disease.
   LEVY. The imposition of a non-ad valorem assessment against property found
to be in violation of this chapter.
   NON-AD VALOREM ASSESSMENT.  A special assessment that is not based upon
millage and that can become a lien against a homestead as permitted in Section
4 of Article X of the Florida Constitution.
   NON-AD VALOREM ASSESSMENT ROLL.  The roll prepared by the city and certified
to the Broward County Property Appraiser Tax Collector, as appropriate under
Florida law, for collection.
   NONLIVING PLANT MATERIAL. Nonliving vegetation such as leaves, grass
cuttings, shrubbery cuttings, tree trimmings and other material incidental to
attending the care of lawns, shrubs, vines and trees.
   PROPERTY. A lot or tract or parcel of land and the adjacent unpaved and
ungraded portion of the right-of-way, whether such lot or tract or parcel is
improved or unimproved.
   TRASH, JUNK, OR DEBRIS. Waste material, including, but not limited to,
putrescible and non-putrescible waste, combustible and non-combustible waste,
and generally all waste materials such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, lumber,
concrete rubble, glass, bedding, crockery, household furnishings, household
appliances, dismantled pieces of motor vehicles or other machinery, rubber
tires, and rusted metal articles of any kind.
(Ord. 1716, passed 5-2-12)
§ 101.03 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE AND MENACE.
   The:
      (A)   Accumulation of trash, junk, or debris, living and nonliving plant
material, or stagnant water upon property,
      (B)   The excessive growth of grass, weeds, brush, branches, and other
overgrowth upon property, and
      (C)   The keeping of fill in a unsafe and unsanitary manner are declared
to be a nuisance and menace to the public health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens of the city for the following reasons:
         (1)   The aesthetic appearance of property preserves the value of
other properties within the city.
         (2)   The items listed in divisions (A) through (C) above are
dangerous, unhygienic, unhealthy, visually unpleasant to the reasonable person
of average sensibilities, and a visual nuisance because it depreciates, or
potentially can depreciate, the value of neighboring property, that unless
addressed properly in this Code of Ordinances, city taxpayers could be and
would be required to pay the cost of cleaning up such properties, and such
clean-ups would have to be undertaken by the city several times a year, in some
cases for the same properties.
(Ord. 1716, passed 5-2-12)
§ 101.04 ACCUMULATION OF TRASH, JUNK, OR DEBRIS, LIVING AND NONLIVING PLANT
MATERIAL, AND STAGNANT WATER.
   (A)   Every owner and, if applicable, every agent, custodian, lessee, or
occupant of property shall reasonably regulate and effectively control
accumulations of trash, junk, or debris, living and nonliving plant material,
and stagnant water
      (1)   On the property, and
      (2)   That portion of the adjoining public right-of-way between the
property and the paved or graded street.
   (B)   The following uses are permissible:
      (1)   Storage of trash, junk, debris, and living and nonliving plant
material in garbage cans that comply with applicable ordinances relating to
solid-waste collection.
      (2)   The storage of nonliving plant material in compost bins, except
that no property may have more than two compost bins.
      (3)   Keeping wood on the property for use as fire or fuel, provided,
such wood shall be piled, stacked, bundled, or corded and the area surrounding
the piles, stacks, bundles, or cords shall be free of excessive growth of
grass, weeds, brush, branches, and other overgrowth.
(Ord. 1716, passed 5-2-12)
§ 101.05 EXCESSIVE GROWTH OF GRASS, WEEDS, BRUSH, AND OTHER OVERGROWTH.
   (A)   (1)   Every owner and, if applicable, every agent, custodian, lessee,
or occupant of property shall reasonably regulate and effectively control the
excessive growth of grass, weeds, brush, and other overgrowth:
         (a)   On the property, and
         (b)   That portion of the adjoining public right-of-way between the
property and the paved or graded street.
      (2)   Excessive growth of grass, weeds, brush, and other overgrowth that
exceeds the height limitations as provided for in
Chapter 98 of this Code, as may be amended from time to time, is prohibited.
   (B)   Vegetative growth that is a mature Florida ecological community, as
defined by the Soils Conservation Service in its publication entitled 26
Ecological Communities in Florida, or any similar successor publication, is not
prohibited by this section. However, in the event this vegetative growth
constitutes an imminent public health threat, it shall be removed upon the
order of the City Manager.
(Ord. 1716, passed 5-2-12)
§ 101.06 KEEPING OF FILL ON PROPERTY.
   Every owner and, if applicable, every agent, custodian, lessee, or occupant
of property shall reasonably regulate and effectively control the property so
as to prevent the keeping of fill on it to prevent the creation of:
   (A)   A habitat for rodents, vermin, reptiles, or other wild animals,
   (B)   Breeding ground for mosquitoes,
   (C)   A place conducive to illegal activity,
   (D)   A place that threatens or endangers the public health, safety or
welfare of city residents,
   (E)   A place that is reasonably believed to cause currently, or potentially
to cause in the future, ailments or disease, or
   (F)   A condition on the property that adversely affects and impairs the
economic value or enjoyment of surrounding or nearby property.
(Ord. 1716, passed 5-2-12)
§ 101.07 IMMINENT PUBLIC HEALTH THREAT.
   (A)   An:
      (1)   Accumulation of trash, junk, debris, living and nonliving plant
material, or stagnant water,
      (2)   Excessive growth of grass, weeds, brush, or other overgrowth, or
      (3)   The keeping of fill on property that presents an imminent public
health threat may be remedied by the city immediately without notice to the
owner or, if applicable, the agent, custodian, lessee, or occupant. The City
Manager shall determine whether, under the provisions of this section, an
imminent public health threat exists.
   (B)   After-the-fact notice will be provided by the city to the owner and,
if applicable, the agent, custodian, lessee, or occupant within a reasonable
time after the abatement. After-the-fact notice shall be sent as set forth in §
101.08 below, and the owner and, if applicable, the agent, custodian, lessee,
or occupant shall have 15 days from the date notice is received to:
      (1)   Reimburse the city, or
      (2)   Appeal the City Manager's determination to the City Commission that
an imminent public health threat existed on the property. (Ord. 1711, passed 5-
2-12)
§ 101.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violations. Failure or refusal by the owner and/or, if applicable, the
agent, custodian, lessee or occupant of property to comply with the
requirements set forth in this chapter is a violation of this chapter. The
existence of an imminent public health threat on a property is a violation of
this chapter.
   (B)   Notice of violation. 
      (1)   Whenever the City Manager or his/her designee determines there is a
violation of this chapter, the City Manager shall serve, or cause to be served,
a notice of violation on the owner and, if applicable, the agent, custodian,
lessee, or occupant of the property. The notice of violation shall direct the
owner and, if applicable, the agent, custodian, lessee, or occupant to
terminate and abate the violation within 20 calendar days of the date the
notice is received. If the notice of violation pertains to an imminent public
health threat abated by the city, the notice shall direct the owner and, if
applicable, the agent, custodian, lessee, or occupant to pay to the city the
cost of such abatement.
      (2)   If the notice of violation is sent or delivered to the owner and
the owner's agent, custodian, lessee, or occupant, they shall be jointly and
severally responsible to remedy the violation.
   (C)   Notice is received. 
      (1)   The notice of violation shall be sent by United States certified
mail with a return receipt requested. Notice is received on the date the owner
or, if applicable, the agent, custodian, lessee, or occupant of the property
initials or otherwise indicates receipt of the notice on the return receipt.
      (2)   In the event that certified-mail delivery cannot be accomplished,
and after reasonable search by the city for such owner or, if applicable, the
agent, custodian, lessee, or occupant of the property, or if the notice is not
accepted or is returned to the city, a physical posting of the notice of
violation on the property shall be deemed the date the notice of violation is
received.
   (D)   Notice of violation. The notice shall be in substantially the
following form:
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION
Name of owner:
                                                                            
Address of owner:
                                                                          
Name of agent, custodian, lessee or occupant (if applicable):
                                                                                                       
Address of agent, custodian, lessee, or occupant (if applicable):
                                                                                                                                                                 
Our records indicate that you are the owner, agent, custodian, lessee or
occupant of the following property in the City of Pembroke Pines, Florida:
   [description of property]
An inspection of this property discloses, and I have found and determined, that
a public nuisance exists on this property. This public nuisance violates
[description of section violated] of the Code of Ordinances of the CITY OF
PEMBROKE PINES, Florida in that:
   [description of the violation in this section]
YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED THAT IF, WITHIN TWENTY DAYS (20) FROM THE DATE OF THIS
NOTICE,
   a.   THE VIOLATION DESCRIBED ABOVE IS NOT REMEDIED AND ABATED, OR
   b.   THIS VIOLATION NOTICE HAS NOT BEEN TIMELY APPEALED, ASSET FORTH IN
SUBSECTION 101.09 OF THE CITY'S CODE OF ORDINANCES, THE CITY WILL CAUSE THE
VIOLATION TO BE REMEDIED, AND THE COSTS INCURRED BY THE CITY IN CONNECTION WITH
THE CLEANUP WILL BE ASSESSED AGAINST THE PROPERTY. TO APPEAL THIS NOTICE OF
VIOLATION, YOU MUST FILE YOUR NOTICE OF APPEAL NO LATER THAN 15 DAYS AFTER
RECEIPT OF THIS NOTICE WITH THE CITY CLERK.
CITY OF PEMBROKE PINES
By:                                           
Title:                                        
If the notice is an after-the-fact notice of an imminent public health threat,
the capitalized portions shall be deleted and, in their place, the information
required in Section 101.12 regarding levy of assessment on the property for the
costs of abatement incurred by the City shall be substituted.
(Ord. 1716, passed 5-2-12)
§ 101.09 APPEALS.
   Within 15 days after notice is received, the owner or, if applicable, the
agent, custodian, lessee, or occupant of the property may appeal to the City
Commission that a notice of violation is not warranted for the property or that
the property did not pose an imminent public-health threat that required
immediate cleanup.
   (A)   Content of appeal. 
      (1)   The owner or, if applicable, the agent, custodian, lessee, or
occupant of the property must appeal the notice of violation by written notice
to the City Clerk. The written notice must be accompanied by a reasonable
filing fee, as determined by the City Clerk, and shall be either hand delivered
to the City Manager, or mailed to the City Clerk and postmarked, within the 15-
day period after notice is received.
      (2)   Upon timely receipt, the City Manager will schedule the appeal for
a public hearing before the City Commission. At the public hearing, the
appellant shall be afforded due process and may present such evidence as is
probative of the appellant's case. The City Manager or other city staff shall
present such evidence as is probative of the alleged violation. Members of the
public shall be afforded the opportunity to present germane testimony and
evidence. Thereafter, the hearing shall be closed and the City Commission shall
rule on the appeal.
   (B)   Unsuccessful appeal. If the appeal is unsuccessful, the property must
be "cleaned up" and the violation remedied and removed within 15 days from the
date of the City Commission's decision.
(Ord. 1716, passed 5-2-12)
§ 101.10 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT IMPOSED.
   (A)   In the event an appeal is not made within 15 days after notice is
received and the violation is not remedied, or a timely appeal is made, but is
unsuccessful and the violation is not remedied, the city may undertake such
action as is necessary or useful to remedy the violation. The costs incurred by
the city to remedy the violation, including the actual cost of clean-up, all
administrative expenses, and all other identifiable costs incurred by the city,
shall be assessed against the property as authorized by this chapter. All
assessments shall be paid in full no later than the close of city business on
the twentieth business day after the property owner has received notice of the
assessment.
   (B)   Thereafter, the unpaid amount of the assessment will accrue interest
at the rate of 10% per annum or at the maximum rate allowed by law, whichever
is less.
(Ord. 1716, passed 5-2-12)
§ 101.11 NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Upon completion of the actions undertaken by the city to remedy the
violation on the property, the city shall notify in writing the owner and, if
applicable, the agent, custodian, lessee, or occupant that a special assessment
has been imposed on the property. The notice shall be delivered to them the
manner set forth for delivery of the notice of violation in § 101.08.
   (B)   The notice of assessment shall set forth the following:
      (1)   A description of the violation, a description of the actions taken
by the city to remedy the violation, and the fact that the property has been
assessed for the costs incurred by the city to remedy the violation.
      (2)   The aggregate amount of such costs and an itemized list of such
costs.
      (3)   The intent of the city to record the assessment as a lien against
the property if not paid timely, within the period of 20 business days as set
forth in § 101.08.
      (4)   The intent of the city to place the assessment on the tax roll as a
non-ad valorem assessment if not paid by the following December 1.
      (5)   The potential for the property to be subject to the sale of a tax
certificate, bearing interest by law at a rate as high as 18% per annum, if the
non-ad valorem assessment is not paid as part of the tax bill on the property.
      (6)   The potential for the property to be sold and conveyed by tax deed
if the tax certificate is not redeemed by payment of the non-ad valorem
assessment in full, plus interest, as required by Florida law. (Ord. 1716,
passed 5-2-12)
§ 101.12 ASSESSMENTS FOR LOT MAINTENANCE AND CLEAN-UP.
   (A)   Establishment of special assessment district. The City of Pembroke
Pines in its entirety, as its city boundaries exist on the date of enactment of
this chapter and as they may be expanded or contracted from time to time, is
hereby declared a special- assessment district for the purposes of abating and
remedying violations of this chapter. Individual properties within the city's
boundaries, as they may exist from time to time, may be assessed for the costs
incurred by the city in abating and remedying violations of this chapter.
   (B)   Levy of non-ad valorem assessments. There is hereby levied, and the
City Commission is authorized to levy from time to time, a non-ad valorem
assessment against each and every property in the city:
      (1)   On which there occurs or has occurred a violation of this chapter,
      (2)   The city undertakes or has undertaken action pursuant to this
chapter to abate and/or remedy the violation and, thereby, incurs or has
incurred costs, and
      (3)   The property of the property fails or refuses or has failed or
refused, for whatever reason, to pay timely the amount owed to the city under
this chapter for the costs incurred by the city in carrying out such abatement
and remedy.
   (C)   Collection of non-ad valorem assessments.  The City Commission elects
to use the uniform method to impose and collect non-ad valorem assessments
against properties on which violations of this chapter occur or have occurred.
The non-ad valorem assessments collected pursuant to this section will be
included in the combined notice for ad-valorem taxes and non-ad valorem
assessments as provided in F.S. § 197.3635. Non-ad valorem assessments
collected pursuant to this section are subject to all collection provisions in
F.S. § 197.3632, including provisions relating to discount for early payment,
prepayment by installment method, deferred payment, penalty for delinquent
payment, and issuance and sale of tax certificates and tax deeds for
nonpayment.
   (D)   Agreement to reimburse the Broward County Property Appraiser and the
Broward County Tax Collector. In order to use the uniform method for the levy,
collection, and enforcement of the non-ad valorem assessments, the city is
authorized to enter into a written agreement with the Broward County Property
Appraiser and the Broward County Tax Collector providing for the reimbursement
of their costs incurred in the administration and collection of the non-ad
valorem assessments levied under this section.
   (E)   Adoption of a resolution.
      (1)    The City Commission will adopt a resolution at a public hearing
prior to January 1, 2012 or if agreed by the property appraiser, tax collector,
and the city by March 1, in accordance with F.S. § 197.3632(3)(a), which
resolution shall state the following:
         (a)   The city's intent to use the uniform method of collecting non-ad
valorem assessments.
         (b)   The city's need for the imposition of the non-ad valorem
assessments.
         (c)   The entire city is declared a special-assessment district, with
individual properties being subject to the non-ad valorem assessment from time
to time if and when violations of this chapter occur.
         (d)   Publish in a newspaper of general circulation four weeks
preceding the hearing of the boundaries of the local government of the
properties subject to levy.
         (e)   The city shall send a copy of the resolution by January 1, 2012,
or March 1, 2012 if agreed by the property appraiser, tax collector, and the
city.
      (2)   The city will comply with all statutory notice prerequisites set
forth in F.S. § 197.3632.
   (F)   Annual non-ad valorem assessment roll.  
      (1)   Each year, the City Commission will approve a non-ad valorem
assessment roll at a public hearing between January 1 and September 15. The
non-ad valorem assessment roll will be comprised of properties that have had
levied against them non-ad valorem assessments under this section, and such
assessments have not otherwise been paid in full prior to approval of the roll.
      (2)   The City Clerk is authorized and directed each year:
         (a)   To prepare the notice that must be provided as required by F.S.
§ 197.3632(4)(b), and
         (b)   To prepare and publish the newspaper notice required by F.S. §
197.3632(4)(b).
      (3)   The notice to be sent by first-class mail will be sent to each
person owning property that will be on the non-ad valorem assessment roll and
will include the following:
         (a)   The purpose of the assessment,
         (b)   The total amount to be levied against the parcel, which includes
the actual cost incurred by the city,
         (c)   A statement that failure to pay the assessment will cause a tax
certificate to be issued against the property, which may result in a loss of
title,
         (d)   A statement that all affected property owners have a right to
appear at the hearing and to file written objections with the local governing
board within 20 days of the notice, and
         (e)   The date, time, and place of the hearing.
      (3)   Upon its approval by City Commission, the non-ad valorem assessment
roll will be certified to the tax collector as required by law.
(Ord. 1716, passed 5-2-12)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
111.   AMUSEMENTS; SPECIAL EVENTS
      
112.   FRANCHISES
      
113.   COMMERCIAL AND CHARITABLE SOLICITATION
      
114.   FOOD SALES
      
115.   LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPTS
      
116.   (RESERVED)
      
117.   MASSAGE PARLORS
      
118.   USE OF CITY FACILITIES BY DAY-CARE CENTERS; CHILD-CARE CENTERS
      
119.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE
      
120.   OTHER BUSINESSES
      
121.   COMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY
      
122.   AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS
      
123.   RESERVED
      
124.   SECURITY REQUIREMENTS FOR CHILDCARE FACILITIES
      
125.   BLEEDING CONTROL KIT REQUIREMENTS FOR CHILD CARE FACILITIES
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
110.01   Credit against state, county tax
   
110.02   Hours of sale; exception for New Year's Day
 
   
110.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Possession, consumption in public parks, see §
97.02
   Zoning requirements for alcoholic beverage establishments, see §§ 155.285
through 155.290
§ 110.01 CREDIT AGAINST STATE, COUNTY TAX.
   Any manufacturer, distributor, vendor, or club paying the city license tax
under this chapter shall be issued a city license so that the manufacturer,
distributor, vendor, or club shall be entitled to a reduction in his state and
county license as provided in F.S. § 561.342.
('69 Code, § 3-11) (Ord. 60, passed 9-4-62)
§ 110.02 HOURS OF SALE; EXCEPTION FOR NEW YEAR'S DAY.
   (A)   No person, vendor, or distributor shall sell, or offer to sell,
deliver, serve, or permit to be consumed upon the premises of that person,
vendor, or distributor, any alcoholic beverage, regardless of alcoholic
content, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. ('69 Code, § 3-13(a))
(Ord. 60, passed 9-4-62; Am. Ord. 349, passed 11-19-73; Am. Ord. 674, passed
12-14-83; Am. Ord. 680, passed 2-15-84; Am. Ord. 944, passed 1-2-91)
   (B)   All persons firms or entities duly and regularly licensed to operate a
nightclub in the city, and to sell and dispense spirituous, vinous, and
alcoholic beverages therein, shall not sell, permit to be sold, offered for
sale, delivered, served, or permit to be consumed upon the premises of that
person, any spirituous, vinous, or alcoholic liquors on any weekday between the
hours of 4:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. The fee for a nightclub local business tax
receipt shall be $375.
('69 Code, § 3-14) (Ord. 60, passed 9-4-62; Am. Ord. 944, passed 1-2-91; Am.
Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
   (C)   A special permit extending the hours of sale to 6:00 a.m. on January
l, may be obtained by licensed vendors of alcoholic beverages upon the payment
to the city of a fee of $150, which shall be valid for one extended closing
time only. The permit shall be issued by the City Clerk.
('69 Code, § 3-13(b)) (Ord. 60, passed 9-4-62; Am. Ord. 131, passed 12-20-65;
Am. Ord. 349, passed 11-l9-73; Am. Ord. 944, passed 2-1-91)
   (D)   No person, firm, or entity duly and regularly licensed by the city to
operate a hotel, golf club, or racquet club as defined herein and licensed to
sell and dispense spirtuous, vinous, and alcoholic beverages therein, shall
sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage regardless of alcoholic content
between 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. or 4:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. if also duly
licensed as a nightclub.
      (1)   A hotel for the purpose of this section is defined as a facility
that provides public lodging and meals for the public on a transient basis.
      (2)   A golf club for the purpose of this section shall provide at least
one 18 hole golf course and related facilities for the use of its patrons,
including a restaurant or banquet hall and such other amenities as locker
rooms, pro shop, and other related support services.
      (3)   A racquet club for this section shall provide at least six racquet
ball, tennis, or squash courts or other indoor/outdoor court type facility and
related facilities for the use of its patrons including a restaurant or banquet
hall and such other amenities as locker rooms, pro shop, and other related
support services.
   (E)   The holding of more than one city local business tax receipt shall not
be used to circumvent hours of sale restrictions.
   (F)   No person, vendor or distributor shall sell, or offer to sell,
deliver, serve, or permit to be consumed "off the premises" of that person,
vendor or distributor, any alcoholic beverage, regardless of alcoholic content,
between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. 944, passed 1-2-91; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipality's authority to regulate hours of sale, see F.S. § 562.14
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any individual, firm, corporation, or licensee found to be violating any
section of this chapter shall be punishable in accordance with §
10.99 of the code, providing for the imposition of a fine of not more than
$500, or by imprisonment for a period not in excess of 90 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
('69 Code, §§ 3-15.1, 3-30)
CHAPTER 111: AMUSEMENTS; SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
Special Events
   
111.10   Definition
   
111.11   Permit required
   
111.12   Signage
   
111.13   Noise
   
111.14   Exemptions
SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 111.10 DEFINITION.
   For purposes of this subchapter the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SPECIAL EVENT. Any meeting, activity, gathering, or group of persons,
animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof, having a common purpose, design
or goal (excluding any such event conducted for the primary purpose of First
Amendment speech or assembly), which special event is intended to or does draw
public attention, and interferes with or has the tendency to interfere with the
normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic upon any public
facility, street, sidewalk, swale, alley, park, public recreation area or other
place or building. The term shall include, but not be limited to, festivals,
carnivals, concerts, parades, walks, races, fundraising sales, grand opening
promotions, sidewalk sales, and similar gatherings, but shall not include
demonstrations.
(Ord. 1644, passed 6-3-09)
§ 111.11 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall initiate, sponsor, organize, promote, conduct or
advertise a special event unless a permit has been obtained from the city.
Special event permits may be issued to an applicant for special events that are
conducted for a period not to exceed nine calendar days in length conducted on
private property, at the discretion of the City Manager. Applicants requesting
special event permits may include, but are not limited to, commercial,
educational, civic, recreational, and religious organizations.
   (B)   General criteria and limitations for special event permits shall be as
follows:
      (1)   The activity must be compatible with the surrounding land uses;
however, no special event permits shall be issued for events in areas zoned for
single-family residential.
      (2)   No special event permits shall be approved for proposed events
which sell, market, or display goods or services that directly compete with a
licensed business located within the same center or within 300 feet of the
event area, unless the event holder is a tenant within the center or has
obtained written permission from the affected business owner.
      (3)   If off-site parking is to be utilized, permission must be in
writing from the owner of said property.
      (4)   An applicant may not receive a special event permit more than two
times within a calendar year, unless approved by the City Manager or designee.
      (5)   No more than two special event permits may be issued at one period
of time per center, unless approved by the City Manager or designee.
      (6)   An applicant must submit an affidavit that permission has been
secured from the owner of the land upon which the special event is to be held.
      (7)   If canopies, recreational vehicles, or accessory structures are to
be utilized in connection with a special event activity, a general site plan
and parking plan shall be included as part of the special event application.
The plan shall be subject to city approval, which shall be in the sole
discretion of the City Manager or designee. The location of these recreational
vehicles or accessory structures shall not obstruct traffic or violate
applicable city, county or state laws.
      (8)   If a portable lighting system is to be utilized for a special event
activity, a plan for the usage of such portable lighting system shall be
required. The plan shall be subject to city approval, which shall be in the
sole discretion of the City Manager or designee. The portable lighting system
shall utilize full cut off fixtures, and shall not adversely affect the
neighboring properties and shall not exceed general lighting requirements of
Chapter 116 of this code.
   (C)   Building permits. All applicable building permits shall be obtained
prior to issuance of a special event permit.
(Ord. 1644, passed 6-3-09) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Public fairs and expositions, see F.S. § 616.09l
§ 111.12 SIGNAGE.
   All signage relating to such special events shall comply with §
155.325.
(Ord. 1644, passed 6-3-09)
§ 111.13 NOISE.
   The activities that require a special event permit shall be governed by the
noise regulations of this code. Additionally, the activities may be subject to
additional specific limitations on noise as set forth in the permit, violations
of which shall constitute grounds for immediate revocation of the permit by the
City Manager or designee.
(Ord. 1644, passed 6-3-09)
§ 111.14 EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to city events.
(Ord. 1644, passed 6-3-09)
CHAPTER 112: FRANCHISES
Section
Cable Television and Open Video Systems
   
112.01   Short title
   
112.02   Intent and purpose
   
112.03   Definitions
   
112.04   Applicability
   
112.05   Reservation of rights
   
112.06   Franchise required
   
112.07   Characteristics of a franchise
   
112.08   Franchisee subject to other laws, police power
   
112.09   Applications for grant, modification, renewal, and transfer
   
112.10   Grant of franchise
   
112.11   Franchise fees
   
112.12   Renewal of franchise
   
112.13   Transfer of a franchise
   
112.14   Revocation or termination of franchise
   
112.15   Effective date of a franchise
   
112.16   Use of public rights-of-way
   
112.17   Suspension of permits
   
112.18   Construction bond
   
112.19   Minimum facilities and services
   
112.20   Technical standards
   
112.21   Access channels and facilities
   
112.22   Insurance and indemnification
   
112.23   Security fund
   
112.24   Records and reports
   
112.25   Compliance with consumer protection standards
   
112.26   Business office
   
112.27   Toll-free telephone number; answering time standards
   
112.28   Installation and service standards
   
112.29   Disconnection and downgrades
   
112.30   Service interruptions
   
112.31   Franchise identification
   
112.32   Complaint procedures
   
112.33   Communications with customers and billing
   
112.34   Service credits for outages
   
112.35   Alteration of service
   
112.36   Duty of franchisee to maintain adequate staff and equipment
   
112.37   Subscriber privacy
   
112.38   Discrimination prohibited
   
112.39   Continuance of service mandatory
   
112.40   Rates
   
112.41   Exclusive contracts
   
112.42   Customer service planning
   
112.43   Certification of compliance
   
112.44   Administration of consumer protection standards
   
112.45   Enforcement of consumer protection standards
   
112.46   Written applications for open video systems
   
112.47   Minimum OVS requirements for educational and government use of system
   
112.48   Administration and appeals
   
112.49   Performance evaluations; notices; force majeure
   
112.50   Enforcement
   
112.51   Removal of facilities
   
112.52   Municipal cable system ownership and acquisition
Solid Waste Collection and Disposal
   
112.55   Title of subchapter
   
112.56   Definitions
   
112.57   Franchise required to operate; restrictions on operating in city
   
112.58   Franchise application and fee schedule
Private Collection Services for Recovered Materials at Commercial
Establishments
   
112.60   Intent
   
112.61   Definitions
   
112.62   Registration and application
   
112.63   Inspection of books and records
   
112.64   Exemptions
   
112.65   Immediate registration required; grace period
   
112.66   Violations; civil penalty
Ambulance Services
   
112.70   Intent and purpose
   
112.71   Grant of authority; franchise required
   
112.72   Franchise characteristics
   
112.73   Franchisee subject to other laws; police power
   
112.74   Application for grant, renewal, or transfer of franchise
   
112.75   Grant of franchise
   
112.76   Indemnification
   
112.77   Franchise fee
   
112.78   Use of public streets
   
112.79   Revocation of a franchise
   
112.80   Applicability and reservation of rights
Franchise Service Fee Increases
   
112.90   Definitions
   
112.91   Basis for increase in rates
 
   
112.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to levy tax on cable services, see F.S. § 166.231
CABLE TELEVISION AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS
§ 112.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Pembroke Pines Cable
Services Ordinance."
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.02 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the intent of the city and the purpose of this subchapter:
      (1)   To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by
providing for the grant of one or more franchises for the construction and
operation of a cable system or cable systems and open video systems within the
city;
      (2)   To provide for the regulation, to the full extent provided for by
law, of each cable system and open video system within the city in the public
interest;
      (3)   To provide for the payment of fees and other valuable consideration
by a franchisee to the city for the use of the city's rights-of-way;
      (4)   To promote the widespread availability of quality cable services to
the city's residents and businesses, the city, and other public institutions;
      (5)   To encourage the development of cable and other communications
technologies as a means of communication between and among members of the
public, businesses, the city, and other public institutions;
      (6)   To promote competition in cable rates and services;
      (7)   To promote the safe and efficient use of the city's rights-of-way;
and
      (8)   To encourage the provision of a diversity of information sources to
residents, businesses, the community, the city, and other public institutions
by cable technology.
   (B)   Recognizing the continuing development of communications technology
and uses, it is the policy of the city to encourage experimentation and
innovation in the development of cable system and open video system uses,
services, programming, and techniques that will be of general benefit to the
community to the extent all such experiments and innovations are consistent
with applicable laws.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in
the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are
mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined herein or in
any franchise agreement that might be granted hereunder shall be given the
meaning set forth in the Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC 521 et seq., and
the Telecommunications Act of 1996, codified at 47 USC, as amended, and if not
defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning:
   ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel on a cable system set aside without charge by a
franchisee for non- commercial, public, educational and/or local governmental
use.
   ACTIVATED CHANNEL. Those channels engineered at the headend of a cable
system for the provision of services generally available  subscribers of the
cable system, regardless of whether such services actually are provided,
including any access channels.
   AFFILIATE. Any person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is
under common ownership or control with a franchisee.
   APPLICANT. Any person submitting an application within the meaning of this
subchapter.
   APPLICATION. Any proposal, submission or request to:
      (1)   Construct and operate a cable system or open video system within
the city;
      (2)   Transfer a franchise or control of the franchisee;
      (3)   Assign a franchise;
      (4)   Renew a franchise;
      (5)   Modify a franchise; and/or
      (6)   Seek any other relief from the city pursuant to this subchapter, a
franchise agreement, the Cable Act, or other applicable law. An application
includes an applicant's initial proposal, submission or request, any and all
subsequent amendments or supplements to the proposal and relevant
correspondence, and all written and oral representation and/or material made or
provided by the franchisee, whether in writing, in a public hearing, or in any
other type of correspondence between the city and the franchisee or the
franchisee and any other person.
   BASIC CABLE SERVICE or BASIC SERVICE. Any service tier that includes local
television broadcast signals, and access channels. BASIC CABLE SERVICE as
defined herein shall be consistent with 47 USC 543(b)(7), as may be amended
from time to time.
   CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 USC 151 et seq.,
as that Act has been amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992, P.L. 102-385, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996,
P.L. 104-104, codified at 47 USC, and as may be amended from time to time.
   CABLE SERVICE. The transmission of video or other programming services to
subscribers together with any subscriber interaction, if any, which is required
for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming
services. CABLE SERVICE shall include entities that provide cable service in
their communities, regardless of whether the entity is a cable operator, an
open video system operator, or another form of video service provider, which
utilizes part or all of public rights-of-way.
   CABLE SYSTEM, CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM, or SYSTEM. Any facility consisting of
a set of closed transmission paths or other transmission lines or forms of
terrestrial transmission and associated signal generation, reception and
control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, which includes
video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the
city. Such term does not include:
      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations;
      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-
of-way;
      (3)   A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of Title 11 of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC
201 et seq., except that such facility will be considered a cable system to the
extent it is used in the transmission of video programming directly to
subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-
demand services;
      (4)   An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 USC 573;
      (5)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility systems. The foregoing definition of CABLE SYSTEM shall
not be deemed to circumscribe the valid authority of the city to regulate the
activities of any other communications system or provider of communications
services, including, but not limited to, telephone and open video systems.
   CHANNEL. A portion of the electromagnetic spectrum that is capable of
carrying one industry standard video signal, in either analog or digital form.
   CITY. Pembroke Pines, Florida, a municipal corporation of the state, in its
present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged
or reincorporated form.
   COMPLAINT. Any oral, written or electronic inquiry, allegation or assertion
made by a person regarding service, a franchisee or system operations.
   CONTROL OF A FRANCHISEE OR APPLICANT. Possessing the ability to direct or
cause the direction of the management or policies of a franchisee or applicant,
or the operation of a franchisee's cable system or open video system, whether
through operational control in whatever manner exercised or ownership of voting
securities, by contract or understanding, or in any other manner.
   DROP. The cable or cables that connect the subscribers of the system to the
distribution system.
   EQUITABLE PRICE. The fair market value adjusted downward to account for harm
to the city or subscribers, if any, resulting from a franchisee's breach of its
franchise or violation of this chapter, and as further adjusted to account for
other equitable factors that may be considered consistent with the Cable Act,
47 USC 547.
   FAIR MARKET VALUE. The price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing
seller for a cable system or open video system valued as a going concern but
with no value allocated to the franchise itself.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission, or any successor governmental
entity.
   FRANCHISE. The right granted by the city to a franchisee in a franchise
agreement to construct, maintain and operate a cable system or open video
system under, on, and over streets, roads and any other public ways, rights-of-
ways, or easements within the city. The term does not include any local
business tax receipt or permit that may be required by this subchapter or other
laws, ordinances or regulations of the city for the privilege of transacting
and carrying on a business within the city or for construction or carrying out
any work on any street.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. A contract entered into in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter between the city and a franchisee that sets forth
the terms and conditions under which the franchise will be exercised.
   FRANCHISEE. Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this subchapter who
has entered into a franchise agreement with the city.
   GROSS REVENUES. All revenues recognized in accordance with generally
accepted accounting procedures (GAAP) generated directly or indirectly by the
franchisee and any affiliates, subsidiaries or parent of the franchisee from
any source whatsoever arising from, attributable to, or in any way derived from
the operation of the cable system to provide cable services within the city. By
way of illustration, gross revenues include, but are not limited to, fees
charged for basic service; fees charged for any optional, premium, or any tier
of service other than basic service; installation, disconnection, reconnection
and change-in-service fees; late fees; leased access fees; revenue from cable
internet service (unless the FCC determines in a final binding order that such
service is not a cable service), payments or other consideration from
programmers for carriage of programming on the system including, but not
limited to, infomercials (excluding marketing support provided for the launch
of new services on the system to the extent such funds are not considered
revenue under GAAP); net launch fees, revenue from converter, remote, modem or
any other equipment rentals or sales; revenues from studio and studio equipment
rental; revenues from leases of cable or fiber optic lines and other
transmission devices and equipment; revenues from transmission of data;
revenues from consumer products including, but not limited to, cable guides;
and advertising revenues allocable to the city based on a percentage of
subscriber base in the city divided by the subscriber base of the system. Such
percentage will then be multiplied by the system's total advertising revenue to
determine the allocable gross revenue  stemming from advertising; revenues from
home shopping channels or other sources allocable to the city, provided that
where certain home shopping channel or other such revenue is allocable to more
than one franchise authority due to common zip codes, the franchisee will
allocate the percentage of revenue to the city which is equivalent to the
percentage of the city's population divided by the total population for the
allocable franchise areas in question. GROSS REVENUES shall be the basis for
computing the franchise fee imposed pursuant to this subchapter. GROSS REVENUES
shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the franchisee which are
imposed upon any subscriber or user by the state, city or other governmental
unit and collected by the franchisee on behalf of said governmental unit and
which the franchisee passes on in full to the applicable tax authority or
authorities. However, it is hereby expressly provided that unless otherwise
prohibited by applicable law, franchise fees shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues. The definition of GROSS REVENUES contained
herein is subject to state and federal law, and shall only apply if the city is
able to charge and collect franchise fees pursuant to this chapter and a
franchise agreement.
   INITIAL FRANCHISE. An initial authorization issued by a franchising
authority which authorizes the construction and/or operation of a cable system
and which expressly states that such authorization is intended as a cable
franchise.
   INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK or I-NET. A voice, data and/or video communications
network constructed, operated and/or maintained by a franchisee for the city,
the transmissions on which are generally available only to, and intended to be
sent and received by, governmental and other users other than subscribers.
   INTERCONNECTION. The electronic connection of two or more cable systems for
the purpose of sharing programming on access channels.
   LAW. All duly enacted federal, state, county and city laws, ordinances,
codes, rules, regulations and orders.
   LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL. A channel designated in accordance with Section 612
of the Cable Act, 47 USC 532, for commercial use by persons unaffiliated with
the franchisee.
   LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT. The legal authorization, terminable at will, to
use particular and limited portions of the public rights-of-way.
   OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM or OVS. A facility consisting of a set of transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that
is designed to provide cable service, which includes video programming, which
is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, and which the FCC has
certified as compliant with Part 76 of the Rules of the FCC, 47 CFR Part 76, as
amended from time-to- time.
   OVERBUILD. A cable system or OVS constructed to serve subscribers already
served by an existing cable system or OVS.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint
venture, organization or legal entity of any kind, and any lawful trustee,
successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof, but shall
not mean the city.
   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The surface, the air space above the surface and the
area below the surface of any public street, highway, road, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, freeway, thoroughfare, parkway, sidewalk, bridge, tunnel,
waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, court, lane, path, alleyway, drive,
circle, easement or any other public right-of-way or public place, including
public utility easements dedicated for compatible uses, or any other property
in which the city holds any kind of property interest or over which the city
exercises any type of lawful control, and any temporary or permanent fixtures
or improvements located thereon, as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent
to construct and operate a cable system or OVS. PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY do not
include buildings, parks, or other property owned or leased by the city.
   RENEWAL OF A FRANCHISE. Renewal of an authorization issued by the city,
which authorizes the upgrade or continued operation of a cable system or OVS
for an additional term.
   SERVICE INTERRUPTION. Any interference with cable service so as to interrupt
the audio or video portion of the transmission.
   SERVICE TIER. A category of cable service provided by a franchisee and for
which a separate charge is made by the franchisee.
   STATE OF THE ART. That level of production facilities, technical
performance, channel capacity, equipment, components and service equivalent to
that which has been developed and demonstrated to be at least as modern as
generally accepted and used in the cable industry in the state. In no event
shall a system having a bandwidth of less then 750 MHz be considered state of
the art unless the city, in its sole discretion, determines that a cable system
operating at less than 750 MHz is state of the art; and offers a level of
production facilities, technical performance, channel capacity, and service
equivalent to a system operating at a bandwidth of no less than 750 MHz.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person who lawfully receives cable service delivered over a
cable system or OVS. However, notwithstanding anything to the contrary,
SUBSCRIBER shall not mean any homeowner or condominium association or other
bulk purchaser unless mandated by FCC rules.
   SUBSCRIBER BASE. The total number of residential and commercial subscribers
within the city. For purposes of calculating and identifying subscribers under
bulk or multi-user contracts, for determining compliance with this subchapter,
for imposing capital contributions pursuant to this chapter and fines for
violations of this chapter, a franchisee shall count each individual unit or
home (e.g., in a multiple family dwelling, a unit will be defined as each
subscriber unit within the structure) included within a contract as one
subscriber. The franchisee shall not use any equivalency measures except as may
be required by FCC rules.
   TRANSFER. Any transaction in which:
      (1)   An ownership or other interest in a franchisee is transferred from
one person or group of persons to another person or group of persons so that
control of a franchisee is transferred;
      (2)   Assignment, sale or transfer of more than 20% of the ownership of
any parent corporation, parent entity or holding company that owns or, by
ownership of other entities, controls a franchisee;
      (3)   All or a portion of a cable system or OVS is sold or assigned; or
      (4)   The rights and/or obligations held by a franchisee under a
franchise agreement are transferred or assigned to another person or group of
persons.
A transfer shall be considered “pro forma” when it involves a transfer to a
person or group of persons wholly owned by the franchisee or the same legal
entity with controlling interest in the franchisee, and will not result in a
change in the control or ultimate ownership of the franchisee.
   TWO-WAY CAPABILITY. The incorporation into a cable system or OVS of all
appropriate design and engineering characteristics and features so that two-
way transmission, including, but not limited to, addressability, can be
implemented and activated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 112.04 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter shall be applicable to all cable franchises granted by,
renewed by or transferred after the effective date hereof, and shall apply to
all cable franchises in existence as of the effective date of this subchapter,
to the full extent permitted by law.
   (B)   Any franchisee whose franchise agreement predates the effective date
of this subchapter shall continue to operate pursuant to the franchise
agreement and shall notify the city in writing within 45 calendar days of the
passage of this subchapter, or any subsequent amendment thereof, of:
      (1)   Any provision which it believes should not be applicable to it by
reason of the pre-existing franchise agreement; and
      (2)   The reason for each such claim of non-applicability.
   (C)   Failure to notify the city as provided in division (B) above shall
constitute a waiver of any right to object.
   (D)   The operator of any cable system or OVS that requires a franchise or
local business tax receipt under this subchapter shall have three months from
the effective date of this chapter to file an application for a franchise or
local business tax receipt.
   (E)   Applications pending as of the effective date of this subchapter shall
be subject to this subchapter. A person with a pending application shall be
provided 30 calendar days from the effective date of this subchapter to amend
the application if necessary to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   Nothing herein requires the city to apply the provisions of this
chapter to a government entity if the city determines that it is not in the
public interest to do so. Nothing in this subchapter shall require a government
entity to comply with this chapter to the extent that the city cannot enforce
the provisions of this chapter with respect to the government entity under
applicable law.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 112.05 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.
   (A)   The city reserves the right to amend this subchapter as it shall find
necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers.
   (B)   Any additional regulations adopted by the city shall be incorporated
into this subchapter and complied with by all franchisees within 60 days of the
date of adoption of such additional regulations unless imposition of such
regulations would be otherwise prohibited by applicable law, or the city
extends the time for such compliance.
   (C)   The city reserves the right to exercise the power of eminent domain to
acquire the property of a franchisee's cable system or open video system,
consistent with law. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, this section
shall not enlarge or restrict the city's exercise of eminent domain except to
the extent provided by law.
   (D)   To the full extent permitted by law, the city reserves the right to
acquire, construct, own, and/or operate a cable system or open video system.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.06 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The city may grant one or more non-exclusive franchises in accordance
with this subchapter.
   (B)   Unless expressly permitted by applicable law, no person may construct
or operate a cable system, OVS, or communications transmission facilities using
the city's public rights-of-way without a franchise or applicable authorization
granted by the city, and no person may be granted a franchise without having
entered into a franchise agreement with the city pursuant to this subchapter.
   (C)   Unless otherwise authorized by law, any franchise granted pursuant to
this subchapter is solely for the provision of cable service and shall not be
construed to authorize the provision of telephone, non- cable video, or other
communications service.
   (D)   Any person who operates a cable system, open video system, or provides
cable service in the city without a franchise or other appropriate authority
may be subject to penalties as provided herein and other sanctions as provided
by applicable law. Such violations may be punishable as provided in §
10.99 this code, as well as other appropriate sanctions under applicable law.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.07 CHARACTERISTICS OF A FRANCHISE.
   (A)   A franchise authorizes use of the public rights-of-way for installing
cables, wires, optical fiber, underground conduit, ducts, conductors,
amplifiers, vaults and other facilities as necessary and pertinent to operate a
cable system or open video system to serve subscribers within the city. A
franchise does not authorize, expressly or implicitly, a franchisee to provide
service to, or install cables, wires, lines, underground conduit, or any other
equipment or facilities upon other property of the city or upon private
property without owner consent (except for use of compatible casements pursuant
to Section 621 of the Cable Act, 47 USC 541(a)(2)), or to use publicly or
privately owned conduits without a separate agreement with the owners.
   (B)   Any franchise granted pursuant to this subchapter shall be
nonexclusive, and will not preclude, expressly or implicitly, the issuance of
other franchises within the city, or affect the city's right to authorize use
of public rights-of-way to other persons to operate cable systems or open video
systems or for other purposes as it determines appropriate. All privileges
prescribed by a franchise shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of
the public rights-of-way, and the city reserves the right to designate where a
franchisee's facilities are to be placed within the public rights-of- way. A
franchise does not convey any title, equitable or legal, in the public rights-
of-way.
   (C)   A franchise shall be a personal privilege that is in the public trust.
No transfer of a franchise shall occur without the prior consent of the city
and unless application is made by the franchisee, and the city approval
obtained, pursuant to this subchapter and a franchise agreement.
   (D)   A franchise granted pursuant to this subchapter to construct, operate
and maintain a cable system or OVS within the city shall be deemed to
constitute both a right and an obligation on the part of the franchisee to
provide the services and facilities of a cable system or OV S as required by
the provisions of this subchapter and the franchise. The franchise agreement
shall incorporate by reference all of the provisions of the franchisee's
application for the franchise that are finally negotiated and agreed upon by
the city and franchisee. All of a franchisee's application and all written and
oral representations and/or material made or provided by the franchisee in its
application, public hearing, or in any correspondence by the city and
franchisee or the franchisee and any other person shall be deemed to be
material and made for the purpose of inducing the city to grant the franchise
in the form accepted.
   (E)   In the event that a franchisee or it's affiliate elects to offer to
subscribers video programming services through any means or method not included
within the definition of a cable system, including, but not limited to, an open
video system, the franchisee shall remain subject to all terms and conditions
of the franchise granted pursuant to this subchapter to the extent permitted by
applicable law.
   (F)   Unless a franchise agreement specifically provides otherwise, all
franchises granted pursuant to this subchapter shall apply to the entire
territorial area of the city. A franchise agreement may provide that a
franchisee must provide a certain level of service to a particular area of the
city, before a franchisee may extend service to other areas of the city.
   (G)   The city may waive the requirement of a franchise for the construction
of a cable system or OVS that is not constructed to provide service within the
city and that does not provide such services within the city. For the
construction of such facilities, pursuant to other code provisions of the city
and state law, the city may grant a local business tax receipt for a term no
longer than five years and providing for reasonable compensation to the city
for use of its public rights-of- way. A local business tax receipt shall be
revocable at the will of the City Commission. Except as to matters specifically
addressed in the license, the terms of this subchapter will apply to a
licensee. If a person granted a license provides cable services within the
city, the person shall comply with the requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 112.08 FRANCHISEE SUBJECT TO OTHER LAWS, POLICE POWER.
   (A)   A franchisee shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with
all applicable law. A franchisee shall at all times be subject to all lawful
exercise of the police power of the city.
   (B)   Subject to applicable law, except as may be provided specifically in
this subchapter or under the terms of a franchise agreement and subject to the
Cable Act, the failure of the city, upon one or more occasions, to exercise a
right or to require compliance or performance under this subchapter or a
franchise agreement shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or
a waiver of compliance or performance.
   (C)   The provisions of this subchapter shall be applied to franchisees in
addition to the terms of any franchise agreement, and shall apply to a
franchise agreement as if fully set forth in the franchise agreement. It is the
intent of the city not to impair existing franchise agreements in violation of
applicable law. The express terms of this subchapter will prevail over
conflicting or inconsistent provisions in a franchise agreement unless such
franchise agreement expresses an explicit intent to waive a requirement of this
subchapter.
   (D)   Except as to matters that are governed by federal law or regulation, a
franchise agreement will be governed by and construed in accordance with the
laws of the state.
   (E)   In the event of any change in law which would require the city to
amend this subchapter, the city and a franchisee may modify an existing
franchise in a mutually agreed upon manner.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.09 APPLICATIONS FOR GRANT, MODIFICATION, RENEWAL, AND TRANSFER.
   (A)   A written application shall be filed with the city for:
      (1)   Grant of an initial franchise;
      (2)   Renewal of a franchise under 47 USC 546, or other applicable law;
      (3)   Modification of a franchise agreement;
      (4)   Transfer; and/or
      (5)   Any other relief pursuant to this subchapter or a franchise
agreement.
   (B)   To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application
shall be submitted together with seven copies, be accompanied by the required
nonrefundable application filing fee as set forth herein, conform to any
applicable request for proposals, and contain all reasonably required
information. All applications shall include the names and addresses of persons
authorized to act on behalf of the applicant.
   (C)   The city shall make all applications available for public inspection.
   (D)   An application for the grant of an initial franchise may be filed
pursuant to a request for proposals issued by the city or on an unsolicited
basis. The city, upon receipt of an unsolicited application, may issue a
request for proposals. If the city elects to issue a request for proposals upon
receipt of an unsolicited application, the applicant may submit an amended
application in response to the request for proposals, or may inform the city
that its unsolicited application should be considered in response to the
request for proposals, or may withdraw its unsolicited application. An
application that does not conform to the reasonable requirements of a request
for proposals may be considered non-responsive and denied on that basis.
   (E)   An application for the grant of an initial franchise shall contain, at
minimum, the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant and identification of the
ownership and control of the applicant, including: the names and addresses of
all persons with 50% or more ownership interest in the applicant, including the
names and addresses of parents or subsidiaries holding such ownership interests
directly or indirectly; the persons who control the applicant; all officers and
directors of the applicant; and any other cable system ownership or other
communication ownership interest of each named person;
      (2)   A demonstration of the applicant's technical ability to construct
and/or operate the proposed cable system, including:
         (a)   Identification of key personnel for management of the system;
         (b)   A description of the applicant's prior experience in cable
system ownership, including identification of municipalities and counties
within the state in which the applicant or any person controlling the
applicant, or currently having more than a 10% ownership interest in applicant
has, or has had, a cable franchise or local business tax receipt or controlling
interest therein. If an applicant has no other franchises in the state, the
applicant shall provide this information for other states with respect to
franchises or local business tax receipts that have expired or will expire
within two years of the date of its application;
         (c)   A description and location of the physical facilities proposed
and proposed channel capacity, performance characteristics, headend and access
facilities, and institutional network facilities; and upon request, the
applicant shall make information on technical design available for inspection;
and
         (d)   Where applicable, a description of the method of construction of
the proposed system, including an estimate of plant mileage and location, the
proposed construction schedule, a description, where appropriate, of how
services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and
information on the availability of space in conduits including, where
appropriate, an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing
facilities.
      (3)   A demonstration of the applicant's financial qualifications,
including:
         (a)   A statement prepared by a certified public accountant or duly
authorized financial officer regarding the applicant's financial ability to
complete the construction and operation of the cable system proposed;
         (b)   For informational purposes, the proposed rates for subscribers
and proposed discounts for bulk subscribers, including projected charges for
each service tier, installation, converters, and other equipment or services,
and the applicant's ownership interest in any proposed programming to be
delivered over the cable system.
         (c)   Pro forma financial projections for five years including a
statement of projected income, and a schedule of planned capital additions,
with all significant assumptions explained in notes or supporting schedules.
      (4)   To the extent that the applicant is relying on the financial or
technical resources of another person, including an affiliate, the proofs
required pursuant to divisions (2) and (3) above should be provided for that
person;
      (5)   A demonstration that the applicant is legally qualified, including:
         (a)   Whether the applicant or any person controlling the applicant,
or any officer, director or person with 50% or more ownership interest in the
applicant, has been adjudged bankrupt, had a cable franchise or local business
tax receipt revoked, has been fined by a franchise authority, or been found by
any court or administrative agency to have violated any law; and, if so,
identification of any such person and a full explanation of the circumstances;
         (b)   Whether the applicant has received, or is in a position to
receive, necessary authorizations from state and federal authorities;
         (c)   Whether the applicant has engaged in conduct (fraud,
racketeering, or violation of antitrust, consumer protection, or similar laws)
that would lead the city to conclude the applicant cannot be relied upon to
comply with requirements of a franchise or provisions of this subchapter;
         (d)   Whether the applicant is a convicted vendor pursuant to F.S.
Chapter 287, or was removed from the convicted vendor list pursuant to F.S. §
287.133, 36 months or fewer prior to the date of the application;
         (e)   Whether the applicant is willing to enter into a franchise, to
pay required compensation and to abide by the provisions of applicable law,
including those relating to the construction, operation or repair of its
system, and has not entered into any agreement that would prevent it from doing
so;
         (f)   Whether the applicant had a request for an initial or renewal
OVS franchise denied within 36 months of the application;
         (g)   Whether the applicant had a request for an initial or renewal
cable franchise denied based upon past performance, or for failing to propose a
franchise that reasonably met the cable-related needs and interests of the
community in light of the costs thereof, within 36 months of the application;
and
         (h)   Whether the applicant has a pending application for an OVS
franchise.
      (6)   An applicant may provide information that it would be inappropriate
to deny it a franchise for any information submitted pursuant to division (5)
above, by virtue of the particular circumstances surrounding the matter and the
steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and prevent
their recurrence, the lack of involvement of the applicant's principals, or the
remoteness of the matter from the operation of a cable system;
      (7)   A demonstration of how the applicant's proposal will reasonably
meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, including a
description of how the proposal will meet the needs described in any recent
community needs assessment conducted by or for the city;
      (8)   A summary of any non-cable communications services offered by the
applicant or an affiliate and applicant's plan with respect to the availability
of such services in the city;
      (9)   Identification of the area of the city to be served, and the
proposed franchise area boundaries. If an applicant proposes to provide cable
service to an area already served by an existing franchisee, the identification
of the area where the overbuild would occur, the potential number of
subscribers in the area which would encompass the overbuild, and the ability of
the public rights-of-way to accommodate an additional system;
      (10)   Upon the city's request, copies of all agreements with bulk
subscribers with any proprietary information in connection with rates redacted.
      (11)   Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this subchapter and information
that the city may request of the applicant that is relevant to the city's
consideration of the application; and
      (12)   An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer
certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application,
acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying
that the proposal meets all requirements of applicable law.
   (F)   The city may, in its sole discretion, waive any or all of the above
application requirements, unless the requirements are determined to be a
requirement of applicable law.
   (G)   An application for modification of a franchise agreement shall
include, at a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   The specific modification requested;
      (2)   The justification for the requested modification, including the
impact of the requested modification on subscribers and others, and the
financial impact on the applicant if the modification is approved or
disapproved;
      (3)   A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section
625 of the Cable Act, 47 USC 545, and, if so, a demonstration that the
requested modification meets the standards set forth in 47 USC 545;
      (4)   Any other reasonable information requested by the city to make an
informed determination on the application for modification; and
      (5)   An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer
certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, and
certifying that the application is consistent with all requirements of
applicable law.
   (H)   An application for renewal of a franchise shall comply with the
requirements of §
112.12.
   (I)   An application for approval of a transfer of a franchise shall comply
with the requirements of §
112.13.
   (J)   (1)   A nonrefundable fee in an amount established by the City
Commission by resolution, which may be amended from time to time, shall
accompany every application, including, but not limited to, divisions (A)(1)
through (A)(5) above.
      (2)   The purpose of the filing fee is to defray a portion of the city's
cost in processing an application. The fee may be credited against amounts due
under §
112.10. The filing fee is therefore intended to be a charge incidental to the
awarding or enforcing of a franchise within the meaning of Section 622(g)(2)(D)
of the Cable Act, 47 USC 542(g)(2)(D), and may not be deducted from the
franchise fee imposed in a franchise agreement, unless required by federal law.
To the extent federal law authorizes the deduction of filing fees from
franchise fees, the franchisee shall deduct the fees over the entire term of
the franchise.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 112.10 GRANT OF A FRANCHISE.
   (A)   The city may grant a franchise for a period not to exceed ten years.
   (B)   The city may make the grant of a franchise after the effective date of
this subchapter conditioned upon the completion of construction, upgrades or
rebuilds of a cable system or OVS within a reasonably prescribed time or upon
the performance of other specific obligations which are to be set forth in the
franchise agreement, specifying that failure to comply with the condition may
cause the franchise to be terminated or may require the franchisee to pay
liquidated damages to the city as specified in the franchise agreement.
   (C)   In evaluating an application for a franchise, the city may consider,
among other things, the following factors: the applicant's technical,
financial, and legal qualifications to construct and operate the proposed
system; the adequacy of the proposed construction methods, facilities,
equipment, and services based on the public convenience, safety, and welfare;
the applicant's experience in constructing and operating cable systems and
providing cable service in other communities, if any; the ability of public
rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed system; the potential disruption to
users of the public rights-of-way and any resultant inconvenience to the
public; the applicant's service under any existing franchise or prior
experience with the city; whether approval may reduce competition in the
delivery of cable service in the city; and whether the proposal will meet
reasonably anticipated needs, including adequate public, educational and
government access channels and support, channel capacity, and will serve the
public interest. Evaluation by the city shall not be based on the programming
the applicant proposes to provide.
   (D)   The City Commission shall hold one or more public hearings to consider
any application. The applicant shall be notified of the hearing and shall be
given an opportunity to be heard. Based upon the application, the testimony
presented at the public hearing, any recommendations of the city or staff, and
any other information relevant to the application, the city shall decide by
resolution whether to grant or deny a franchise application and decide the
terms and conditions of any franchise granted. If the City Commission denies a
franchise, it shall issue a written decision setting forth its reasons. Upon
the grant of a franchise, the franchisee's application shall become an integral
part of the franchise, and the franchisee shall be bound by the representations
therein made.
   (E)   After complying with the above requirements, the City Commission shall
approve or disapprove the proposed franchise agreement by resolution.
   (F)   The franchisee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable expenses
incurred by the city in considering and processing the application, including,
but not limited to, consulting and legal costs, less only the amount of the
application fee. The city shall bill the franchisee for the amount of the
processing fee and describe its method of calculation, and the applicant shall
pay the processing fee within 30 days of the date of the bill. If the fee is
not received by the city within 30 days of the date of the bill, the city shall
notify such franchisee and the franchisee shall pay a late fee at the rate of
18% per annum of the amount of the unpaid or underpaid fee, provided, however,
that such rate does not exceed the maximum amount allowed under applicable law.
If the city does not receive the fee in total within 60 days of the date of the
bill, the city shall notify such franchisee and the city may revoke the
franchise or pursue other remedies as appropriate. This processing fee is
intended to be a charge incidental to the awarding or enforcing of a franchise
within the meaning of Section 622(g)(2)(D) of the Cable Act, 47 USC 542(g)(2)
(D), and may not be deducted from the franchise fee imposed in a franchise
agreement and, to the extent consistent with applicable law, shall not be
passed through to subscribers. To the extent federal law authorizes a
franchisee to deduct the processing fee from franchise fees, a franchisee shall
deduct such over the entire term of the franchise.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.11 FRANCHISE FEES.
   (A)   This section, and any franchise fee provision in a franchise
agreement, shall not apply during such time as state law prohibits the city
from collecting franchise fees or similar compensation. During the period state
law prohibits the city from collecting franchise fees, a franchisee shall pay
the tax required by state law to the state. If the city is legally entitled to
charge franchise fees or similar fees, a franchisee will pay the highest fee
legally authorized.
   (B)   A franchisee, as compensation for the privilege granted under a
franchise for use of the public rights-of-way to construct and operate a cable
system, shall pay to the city a franchise fee:
      (1)   In an amount up to a maximum of either 5% of the franchisee's gross
revenues during the term of its franchise; or
      (2)   In the event the Cable Act or other applicable law is amended to
permit the city to assess a fee of a greater amount or on a broader revenue
basis than that specified in division (1) above, the franchisee agrees to pay
to the city the new amount after a public hearing in which the public and the
franchisee are given an opportunity to comment on the impact of the higher fee.
   (C)   To the extent that an OVS is used to provide cable service, an
operator of an OVS shall pay the city a fee in lieu of a franchise fee. This
fee will be based on the Gross Revenues derived from the operation of the open
video system to provide cable services. To prevent evasion of franchise fees,
any revenues from activities performed by an affiliate that could have been
performed by the franchisee of the OVS, including but not limited to selling
advertisements and selling services to subscribers, will be treated as revenues
of the operator. The amount of the fee shall be equal to the percentage rate of
the franchise fee imposed on franchisees of cable systems pursuant to this
section.
   (D)   (1)   A franchisee shall pay fees due to the city on a calendar-year,
quarterly basis. Payment for each quarter shall be made to the city not later
than 30 calendar days after the end of each calendar quarter.
      (2)   A franchisee shall file with the city, on a quarterly basis with
the payment of the franchise fee, a financial statement setting forth the
computation of gross revenues used to calculate the fee for the preceding
quarter and a detailed explanation of the method of computation.
      (3)   The statement shall be certified by a certified public accountant
or the franchisee's chief financial or other duly authorized officer. The
franchisee will bear the cost of the preparation of the financial statements.
      (4)   Subject to applicable law, no acceptance by the city of any fee or
payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the
correct amount, nor shall the acceptance of payment be construed as a release
of any claim the city may have for additional sums payable.
      (5)   The franchise fee or other fee payment is not a payment in lieu of
any other tax, fee, or assessment, except as specifically provided in this
section. By way of example and not limitation, the city does not waive and may
still require permit fees and business taxes that may be established from time
to time by the city. Nothing in this section shall alter the effect of any
election the city has made with respect to permit fees and taxes pursuant to
state law.
      (6)   Within 90 calendar days following the end of the calendar year, a
franchisee shall submit a statement, attested to by a certified public
accountant or chief financial officer, setting forth the gross revenues of the
cable or OVS for the previous calendar year and describing what revenues were
included and what revenues, if any, derived from the operation of the system,
were excluded in the fee calculation, and any adjustments made to gross
revenues.
   (E)   Unless prohibited by applicable law, the city may, from time to time,
but not more frequently than annually, upon reasonable notice, inspect and
audit any and all books and records of a franchisee relevant to the
determination of gross revenues and the computation of franchise fees due, and
may recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the franchise, subject
to the applicable statute of limitations. The cost of the audit will be borne
by the franchisee if, as a result of the audit, the city determines that the
franchisee has underpaid the franchise fees owed in an amount equal to or
exceeding 3% of the franchise fees actually paid. A franchisee shall make all
books and records necessary to perform the audit readily available to the
auditors in the city, for inspection and copying or, in the alternative, the
franchisee shall pay all costs necessary for the city to perform the audit at a
location outside of the city.
   (F)   In the event that a franchise fee or other payment required by this
section is not received by the city on or before the due date set forth herein,
or is underpaid, the franchisee will pay a late charge of $5,000 per 30 day
period that the fee is not paid in full, or the maximum amount allowed under
state law. Any interest and/or late charges paid by the franchisee is intended
to be a charge incidental to the enforcing of a franchise within the meaning of
Section 622 (g)(2)(D) of the Cable Act, 47 USC 542(g)(2)(D), and may not be
deducted from the fee imposed by this subchapter or any franchise agreement.
   (G)   When a franchise terminates for any reason, the franchisee shall file
with the city, within 90 calendar days of the date on which its operations in
the city cease, a financial statement, certified by a certified public
accountant or the franchisee's chief financial officer, showing the gross
revenues received by the franchisee since the end of the previous fiscal year.
Adjustments will be made at that time for franchise fees due to the date that
the franchisee's operations ceased.
   (H)   The payment of a fee pursuant to this section on cable service
provided over a cable or open video system does not excuse an operator from any
requirements that may exist to pay fees or other payments on services other
than cable services provided over the facilities. As an example and not as a
limitation of the foregoing, a cable operator that pays a franchise fee on
revenues derived from the provision of cable services must pay the fees imposed
upon providers of communications services to the extent that it provides such
services.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 112.12 RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Renewal shall be conducted in a manner consistent with Section 626 of
the Cable Act, 47 USC 546.
   (B)   To the extent such additional requirements are not prohibited by
applicable law, the following requirements shall apply:
      (1)   Upon completion of the review and evaluation process set forth in
Section 626(a)(1)(2) of the Cable Act, 47 USC 546, should that process be
invoked, the city shall notify the franchisee that it may file a renewal
application including a renewal proposal. The notice shall specify the
information to be included in the renewal application and the deadline for
filing the application, which shall be no earlier than 30 calendar days
following the date of the notice.
         (a)   The application shall comply with the requirements of §
112.09(A) through (C), and (J), and provide the specific information requested
in the notice. If the franchisee does not submit a renewal application by the
date specified in the city's notice to the franchisee pursuant to this
subsection, the franchisee will be deemed not to be seeking renewal of its
franchise.
         (b)   Upon receipt of the renewal application, the city shall publish
notice of its receipt and make copies available to the public. The city,
following prior public notice, may hold one or more public hearings on the
renewal application.
      (2)   The City Commission shall consider the renewal application at a
public hearing at which the City Commission will either:
         (a)   Pass a resolution agreeing to renew the franchise, subject to
the negotiation of a
franchise agreement satisfactory to the city and the franchisee; or
         (b)   Pass a resolution that makes a preliminary assessment that the
franchise should not be renewed.
      (3)   If a preliminary assessment is made that a franchise should not be
renewed, at the request of the franchisee or on its own initiative, the city
will commence a proceeding in accordance with Section 626(c) of the Cable Act,
47 USC 546(c), to address the issues set forth in Section 626(c)(1)(A) through
(D) of the Cable Act, 47 USC 546(c)(1)(A) though (D). Any denial of a proposal
for renewal that has been submitted in compliance with Subsection (b) of
Section 546 shall be based on one or more adverse findings made with respect to
the factors described in Section 546(c)(1)(A) through (D), pursuant to the
record of proceedings under Section 546(c). The city shall not base a denial of
renewal on a failure to substantially comply with the material terms of the
franchise under Section 546(c)(1)(A) or on events considered under Section 546
(c)(1)(B) unless the city has provided the franchisee with notice and
opportunity to cure, or in any case in which it is documented that the city has
waived its right to object, or the franchisee gives written notice of a failure
or inability to cure and the city fails to object within a reasonable time
after receipt of such notice.
      (4)   Any request to initiate a renewal process or proposal for renewal
not submitted within the time period set forth in Section 626(a) of the Cable
Act, 47 USC 546(a), shall be deemed an informal proposal for renewal and shall
be governed in accordance with Section 626(h) of the Cable Act, 47 USC §546(h).
The City Commission may hold one or more public hearings or implement other
procedures under which comments from the public on an informal proposal for
renewal may be received. Following such public hearings or other procedures,
the City Commission shall determine whether the franchise should be renewed and
the terms and conditions of any renewal.
      (5)   If the City Commission grants a renewal application, the city and
the franchisee shall agree on the terms of a franchise agreement, pursuant to
the procedures specified in this subchapter, before the renewal becomes
effective.
      (6)   If renewal of a franchise is lawfully denied, the city may acquire
ownership of the cable system or require a transfer of the system upon approval
of the City Commission in a manner not inconsistent with federal law. The city
may not acquire ownership of the system or approve a transfer while an appeal
of a denial for renewal is pending in any court pursuant to 47 USC 546(e).
      (7)   If renewal of a franchise is lawfully denied and no appeal to a
court is pending, and the city does not purchase the cable system or approve or
require a transfer of the cable system to another person, the city may require
the former franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment at the former
franchisee's expense. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a
reasonable period of time, the city may have the removal done at the former
franchisee's and/or surety's expense.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.13 TRANSFER OF A FRANCHISE.
   (A)   No transfer of a franchise shall occur without prior approval of the
City Commission. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter,
pledges in trust or mortgages of the assets of a cable system or OVS to secure
construction, operation or repair of the system and the sale of a portion of
the assets of the system that will not substantially affect the system's
operations, may be made without application and without the city's prior
consent; except that no such arrangement may be made if it would in any respect
under any condition prevent the cable system or OVS operator or any successor
from complying with the franchise and applicable law, nor may any such
arrangement permit a third party to succeed to the interest of the franchisee,
or to own or control the cable system or OVS without the prior consent of the
city. Any mortgage, pledge or lease shall be subject and subordinate to the
rights of the city under this subchapter or other applicable law.
   (B)   All applications for a transfer of a franchise shall be filed at least
120 calendar days prior to the effective date of the transfer, shall meet the
requirements of this subchapter, and shall provide complete information on the
proposed transaction, including details on the legal, financial, technical, and
other qualifications of the transferee, and on the potential impact of the
transfer on subscriber rates and services. Except in the case of a pro forma
transfer, the application shall contain, at a minimum, the information required
in §
112.09(E)(1) through (5), (8), (11), and (12) with respect to the proposed
transferee. If the information to be provided in response to these items will
not change as a result of the transfer, the transferee may so indicate in its
response. The information required in §
112.09(E)(7), (9), and (10) shall also be provided whenever the proposed
transferee expects material changes to occur in those areas. The following
information must be included in the application, provided that a franchisee is
not required to duplicate information that it submits to the city to comply
with its obligations under federal or state law:
      (1)   All information and forms required under federal law, or the
equivalent of the forms if no longer required by federal law;
      (2)   Any contracts or other documents that relate to the proposed
transaction, and all documents, schedules, exhibits or the like referred to
therein to the extent that the documentation is required by the FCC;
      (3)   Any shareholder reports or filings with the Securities and Exchange
Commission that discuss the transaction;
      (4)   Other information deemed necessary by the city to provide a
complete and accurate understanding of the financial position of the cable
system or OVS before and after the proposed transfer;
      (5)   Complete information regarding any potential impact of the transfer
on subscriber rates and service;
      (6)   A brief summary of the proposed transferee's plans for at least the
next five years regarding line extension, plant and equipment upgrades, channel
capacity, expansion or elimination of cable services, and any other changes
affecting or enhancing the performance of the cable system or OVS.
   (C)   An application for approval of a pro forma transfer of a franchise
shall be considered granted on the 91st calendar day following the filing of
such application with the city unless, prior to that date, the city notifies
the franchisee to the contrary. An application for approval of a pro forma
transfer of a franchise shall clearly identify the application as such,
describe the proposed transaction, and explain why the applicant believes the
transfer is pro forma. Unless otherwise requested by the city within 30
calendar days of the filing of an application for a pro forma transfer, the
applicant shall be required only to provide the information required in §
112.09(E)(1), (3)(a), (5)(b) and (12) with respect to the proposed transferee.
   (D)   In making a determination on whether to grant an application for a
transfer, the City Commission shall consider the legal, financial, and
technical qualifications of the transferee to operate the system; whether the
incumbent franchisee is in substantial compliance with the material terms of
its franchise agreement and this subchapter and, if not, the proposed
transferee's commitment to cure the noncompliance; whether the transfer may
reduce competition in cable services within the city; and whether operation by
the transferee would adversely affect subscribers or the city, or otherwise be
contrary to the public interest.
   (E)   No application for a transfer shall be granted unless the transferee
agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this subchapter
and the franchise agreement, and that it will assume the obligations and
liabilities, known and unknown, of the previous franchisee under this
subchapter and the franchise agreement.
   (F)   Approval by the city of a transfer of a franchise does not constitute
a waiver or release of any of the rights of the city under this subchapter or
the franchise agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the
transfer.
   (G)   The transferee shall notify the city that the transfer is complete
within five business days of the date the transfer is complete.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.14 REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   The City Commission may revoke a franchise for a franchisee's failure
to construct, operate or maintain the cable system as required by this
subchapter or the franchise agreement, or for any other material violation of
this subchapter or material breach of the franchise agreement or material
violation of applicable law. To invoke the provisions of this section, the city
shall give the franchisee written notice by certified mail at the last known
address that the franchisee is in material violation of this subchapter or in
material breach of the franchise agreement. The notice shall describe the
nature of the alleged violation or breach with specificity and demand
correction within 30 calendar days or, within a reasonable time period stated
in the notice, which shall not be less than 30 calendar days. If within 30
calendar days following receipt of the written notice from the city the
franchisee has not cured the violation or breach, or has not commenced
corrective action and such corrective action is not being actively and
expeditiously pursued, the city may give written notice to the franchisee of
its intent to revoke the franchise, stating its reasons.
   (B)   Prior to revoking a franchise under division (A) above, the City
Commission shall hold a public hearing, upon 10 calendar days notice, at which
time the franchisee and the public shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
Following the public hearing, the City Commission may determine whether to
revoke the franchise based on the evidence presented at the hearing, and other
evidence of record. If the City Commission makes a determination to revoke a
franchise, it shall direct that a written decision setting forth the reasons
for its decision shall be transmitted to the franchisee.
   (C)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) and (B) above, any franchise may, at the
option of the City Commission following a public hearing before the Commission,
be revoked 120 calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors
or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the
franchisee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy assignment
for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding, unless within that
120 day period:
      (1)   Such assignment, receivership, or trusteeship has been vacated; or
      (2)   Such assignee, receiver, or trustee has fully complied with the
terms and conditions of this subchapter and the franchise agreement and has
executed an agreement, approved by a court having jurisdiction, assuming and
agreeing to be bound by the terms and conditions of this subchapter and the
franchise agreement.
   (D)   In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the
facilities, equipment, or property of a franchisee, the city may revoke the
franchise, following a public hearing before the Commission, by serving notice
upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at the sale, in which event the
franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchise will be revoked and
will terminate 30 calendar days after serving the notice, unless:
      (1)   The city has approved the transfer of the franchise to the
successful bidder; and
      (2)   The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the city to
assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement and
this subchapter.
   (E)   If the city revokes a franchise, or if for any other reason a
franchisee abandons, terminates, or fails to operate or maintain service to its
subscribers for a period of six months, the following procedures and rights are
effective:
      (1)   The city may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities
and equipment at the former franchisee's expense. If the former franchisee
fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the city may have the
removal done at the former franchisees and/or surety's expense.
      (2)   The city, by resolution of the City Commission, may acquire
ownership pursuant to this subchapter, or effect a transfer of the cable
system.
      (3)   If a cable system is abandoned by a franchisee, the city may sell,
assign or transfer all or part of the assets of the system.
   (F)   The city may revoke the franchise if the franchisee commits or
participates in an act of fraud or deceit upon the city.
   (G)   Where the city has issued a franchise specifically conditioned in the
franchise agreement upon the completion of construction, system upgrade, or
other specific obligation by a specified date, the city may revoke a franchise
by resolution for failure of the franchisee to complete such construction or
upgrade, unless the city, at its discretion and for good cause demonstrated by
the franchisee, grants an extension of time.
   (H)   The foregoing provisions shall not be deemed to preclude the city from
obtaining any other available remedies for repeated violations of the same
general type, whether remedied or not.
   (I)   Except as provided in division (G) above, the city shall not take
action against a franchisee pursuant to this section except after a noticed
public hearing at which the franchisee is given an opportunity to participate.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF A FRANCHISE.
   Unless a franchise agreement provides otherwise, the effective date of any
franchise agreement shall be as follows:
   (A)   If an initial franchise, the date of acceptance of the franchise
agreement by the franchisee; or
   (B)   If a renewal of a franchise, the date the initial franchise ceases to
be effective or the date the initial franchise expires, whichever is earlier in
time.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.16 USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Any pavements, sidewalks, curbing, or other paved area taken up or any
excavations in the public rights-of-way made by a franchisee shall be done
under the supervision and direction of the city under permits issued for work
by the proper officials of the city, and shall be done in such manner as to
give the least inconvenience to the inhabitants of the city. A franchisee shall
not commence construction in the public rights-of-way until the city has issued
all applicable permits, except in the case of an emergency. The term
"emergency" shall mean a condition that affects the public's health, safety or
welfare, which includes an unplanned out-of-service condition of a pre-
existing service. A franchisee shall provide prompt notice to the city of
construction in the public rights-of- way in the event of an emergency. As a
condition of granting such permits, the city may impose rules or regulations
governing the construction in public rights- of-way. Permits shall apply only
to the areas of public rights-of-way specifically identified in the permit. The
city may issue a blanket permit to cover certain activities, such as routine
maintenance and repair activities, that may otherwise require individual
permits or may impose lesser requirements.
   (B)   As part of any permit application to perform construction in the
public rights-of-way, the franchisee shall provide at least the following:
      (1)   An engineering plan signed and sealed by a state registered
professional engineer, or prepared by a person who is exempt from such
requirements as provided in F.S. § 471.003, identifying the location of the
proposed facilities, including a description of the facilities to be installed,
where they are to be located, and the approximate size of facilities and
equipment that will be located in the public rights-of-way;
      (2)   A description of the manner, in which the facilities will be
installed (i.e., anticipated construction methods and/or techniques);
      (3)   A traffic maintenance plan for any disruption of the public rights-
of-way;
      (4)   Information on the ability of the public rights-of-way to
accommodate the proposed facilities, if available (such information shall be
provided without certification as to correctness to the extent obtained from
other persons with facilities in the public rights-of- way);
      (5)   If appropriate given the construction proposed, an estimate of the
cost of restoration to the public rights-of-way;
      (6)   The timetable for construction of the project or each phase
thereof, and the areas of the city which will be effected; and
      (7)   Such additional information requested by the city that the city
finds necessary to review the permit application.
      (8)   Unless prohibited by applicable law, the city shall have the power
to prohibit or limit construction within the public rights-of-way if there is
insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests to perform construction
or place facilities in that area of the public rights-of-way, for the
protection of existing facilities in the public rights-of-way, or to
accommodate city plans for public improvements or projects that the city
determines are in the public interest.
   (C)   All poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other
fixtures erected by a franchisee in, upon, along, across, above, over and under
the public rights-of-way within the city shall be so located, and all
construction in the public rights-of-way shall be performed so as not to
interfere unreasonably with the use of the public rights-of-way by the
traveling public and to cause minimum interference with the rights or
reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the public rights-
of-way. A franchisee shall not place facilities, equipment, or fixtures where
they will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer, or other
utility facilities, or obstruct or hinder in any manner the various utilities
serving the residents of the city or their use of any public rights-of-way.
   (D)   A franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense, and in a manner
approved by the city, replace and restore any such pavements, sidewalks,
curbing, other paved areas, lawn, landscaping or any other areas where the
franchisee performed construction to at least as good a condition as before the
work was done. A franchisee shall warrant its restoration for a period of 12
months after completion of the restoration. If the franchisee fails to make
such restoration within 20 calendar days after completion of construction, or
such other time as may be required by the city, the city may, after ten days
notice to the franchisee, perform such restoration using city employees, agents
or contractors, and charge all costs of the restoration against the franchisee
and require reimbursement within 20 days after the submission of the bill by
the city to the franchisee.
   (E)   The city shall have the authority to require a franchisee to remove or
to relocate its facilities in the public rights-of-way, unless prohibited by
applicable law. A franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a
building-moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires
to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of the temporary removal or
raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same,
and the franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance,
except in the case where the requesting person is the city, in which case no
such payment shall be required. The franchisee shall be given not less than
five calendar days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
   (F)   A permit from the city constitutes authorization to undertake only
certain activities on public rights-of-way in accordance with this subchapter,
and does not create a property right or grant authority to impinge upon the
rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way. The city
may issue such rules and regulations concerning the installation and
maintenance of a cable system and OVS installed in the public rights-of-way, as
may be consistent with this subchapter and the franchise agreement. The city
makes no warranties or representations regarding the fitness, suitability or
availability of public rights-of-way for a franchisee's facilities and any
performance of work or costs incurred by a franchisee shall be at the
franchisee's sole risk. Nothing in this subchapter shall affect the city's
authority to add, vacate or abandon public rights-of-way.
   (G)   In connection with excavation in the public rights-of-way, a
franchisee shall, where applicable, comply with the Underground Facility Damage
Prevention and Safety Act set forth in F.S. Chapter 556, as it may be amended.
   (H)   A franchisee shall, upon notice to the city of not less than seven
days, emergency situations excepted, have the authority to trim trees or other
natural growth upon and overhanging the public rights- of-way so as to prevent
the branches of the trees from coming in contact with the wires and other
equipment of the franchisee, except that, at the option of the city, such
trimming as may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the
expense of the franchisee. All such work shall be done in accordance with such
standards as have now or hereafter may be established by the city.
   (I)   A franchisee shall install and maintain its facilities in the public
rights-of-way in a manner consistent with accepted industry practice and
applicable law. A franchisee shall use all safety practices required by law
when performing construction, maintenance, and repair. A franchisee shall, at
all times:
      (1)   Install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other
equipment in accordance with the requirements of §§
150.10 through
150.24 of this code, as they may be amended, and any other applicable building
or electrical safety code, and in such manner so that they will not interfere
with any installations of the city; and
      (2)   Keep and maintain in a safe, suitable, and substantial condition,
and in good order and repair, all structures, lines, equipment, and connections
in the public rights-of-way or places of the city, wherever situated or
located;
   (J)   On public rights-of-way where electrical or telephone utility wiring
is located underground, either at the time of initial construction of a cable
or open video system or at any time thereafter, a franchisee's facilities shall
also be located underground at the franchisee's expense. Between a street and a
subscriber's residence, a franchisee's drop must be located underground if both
electrical and telephone utility wiring are located underground. If a
franchisee is otherwise not required to locate its facilities underground, a
franchisee shall, at the subscriber's request, locate its drop between a street
and a subscriber's residence underground if the subscriber pays the
franchisee's actual costs of the underground location. The city shall
encourage, to the extent feasible, that other users of the public rights-of-way
and the franchisee cooperate in opening up trenches and making such trenches
available to all parties with the understanding that the costs of opening and
retiling of such trenches would be shared equally by all users of such
trenches. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, with respect to underground
or aerial construction, a franchisee shall install underground extensions of
lines in new residential subdivisions over five units or new multiple occupancy
buildings.
   (K)   A franchisee shall publicize the initial build or any substantial
rebuild, upgrade or extension of its facility that involves work in public
rights-of-way in each affected neighborhood at least one week prior to
commencement of that work by causing written notice of the construction to be
delivered to the city and by notifying those persons whose property is within
300 feet of the work in at least 2 of the following ways: by telephone, in
person, by mail, by distribution of flyers, by publication in local newspapers,
or in any other manner approved by the city that is reasonably calculated to
provide adequate notice. Apart from any initial build or substantial rebuild or
upgrade, any underground construction will be publicized in accordance with
applicable notice requirements. Before performing construction on private
property, a franchisee shall use its best efforts to contact the property owner
or resident and describe the construction to be performed.
   (L)   The city shall have the right to make such inspections of facilities
in the public rights-of-way as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with
this subchapter. In the event the city determines that a violation exists with
respect to a franchisee's facilities in the public rights-of-way that is not
considered to be an emergency or danger to the public health, safety or
welfare, the city will provide the franchisee no less than three days notice
setting forth the violation and requesting correction.
   (M)   A franchisee shall ensure that it provides the city with plans,
revised as necessary, or "as-builts," that show the locations of the actual
installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way. The plans shall be in a
digitized format showing the two-dimensional location of the facilities based
on the city's geographical database, or other format acceptable to the city.
The franchisee shall provide such plans at no cost to the city. The city shall
maintain the confidentiality of such plans and any other information provided
in accordance with F.S. § 202.195, as it may be amended.
   (N)   The city reserves the right to place and maintain, and permit to be
placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water, electric, storm drainage,
communications, and other facilities, cables or conduit, and to do, and to
permit to be done, any underground and overhead installation or improvement
that may be deemed necessary or proper by the city in public rights-of-way
occupied by a franchisee. A franchisee may allow city facilities to be co-
located within the city's public rights-of-way through the use of a joint
trench during franchisee's construction project. Such joint trench projects
shall be negotiated in good faith by separate agreement between a franchisee
and city, and may be subjected to other city rights-of-way requirements. The
city further reserves, without limitation, the right to alter, change, or cause
to be changed, the grading, installation, relocation or width of the public
rights-of- way within the limits of the city and within said limits as the same
may from time to time be altered.
   (O)   The city shall have the right to install and maintain free of charge
upon any pole or in any conduit owned by a franchisee any wire or fixtures that
do not interfere unreasonably with a franchisee's operations, and the city may
be required to indemnify the franchisee, to the extent permitted by applicable
law, for all claims arising out of the city's use of the franchisee's poles and
conduits.
   (P)   To the extent that any person leases or otherwise uses facilities of a
franchisee, such person shall make no claim, nor assert any right, which will
impede the lawful exercise of the city's rights, including requiring the
removal of such facilities from the public rights-of-way of the city,
regardless of the effect on the person's ability to use the franchisee's
facilities in public rights-of-way of the city.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.17 SUSPENSION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Subject to this subchapter, the city may suspend a permit issued or
deny an application for a subsequent permit to a franchisee for work in the
public rights-of-way for one or more of the following:
      (1)   Failure to satisfy permit conditions, or conditions set forth in
this subchapter or other applicable city codes, regulations or orders governing
the public rights-of-way, including, without limitation, failure to take
reasonable safety precautions to alert the public of work at the work site, or
to restore any public rights-of-way;
      (2)   Misrepresentation or fraud by the franchisee;
      (3)   Failure to have a valid franchise; and/or
      (4)   Failure to relocate or to remove facilities as may be required by
the city.
   (B)   After the suspension or denial of a permit pursuant to this section,
the city shall provide notice of the reason to the franchisee. Upon correction
of any grounds that gave rise to a permit suspension or denial, the city may
lift the suspension or denial.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.18 CONSTRUCTION BOND.
   (A)   Prior to any construction, upgrade, rebuild or other significant work
in the public rights-of-way, a franchisee shall establish in the city's favor a
construction bond in an amount specified in the franchise agreement, permit, or
other authorization as necessary to ensure the franchisee's faithful
performance of the construction, upgrade, rebuild, or other work. The amount of
the construction bond shall be based on the nature of the construction to be
performed.
   (B)   In the event a franchisee subject to such a construction bond fails to
complete the construction in a safe, timely, and competent manner in accord
with the provisions of the franchise agreement, permit, or other requirement of
the city, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal
and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result,
including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of
removal or abandonment of any property of the franchisee, or the cost of
completing or repairing the construction, plus a reasonable allowance for
attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. The city may also recover
against the bond any amount recoverable against the security fund pursuant to §
112.23, where such amount exceeds that available under the security fund.
   (C)   The franchise agreement, permit, or other authorization from the city
may specify that upon completion of the system construction, upgrade, rebuild,
or other work in the streets and payment of all construction obligations of the
cable system to the satisfaction of the city, the city may eliminate the bond
or reduce its amount. However, the city may subsequently require an increase in
the bond amount for any subsequent construction, upgrade, or other work.
   (D)   The construction bond shall be issued by a surety having a minimum
rating of A-1 in “Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition”; shall be
subject to the approval of the City Attorney; and shall provide that:
      "This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until 60 days after
receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written
notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew."
   (E)   The rights reserved by the city with respect to any construction bond
established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and
remedies the city may have under this subchapter, the franchise agreement, or
at law or equity.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.19 MINIMUM FACILITIES AND SERVICES.
   (A)   Unless prohibited by applicable law, the following minimum
requirements for facilities and services apply to all franchisees operating a
cable system within the city. The city may require in a franchise agreement
that a franchisee exceed these minimum requirements including, but not limited
to, compliance with state-of-the-art obligations incorporated within a
franchise agreement, where it determines, under circumstances existing at the
time of the application, that the additional requirements are necessary to meet
the city's future cable related needs and interests or to serve the public
interest.
      (1)   Any cable system lawfully providing service to subscribers within
the city as of the effective date hereof shall have a minimum channel capacity
of 72 active channels no later than 2 years from the effective date of this
subchapter.
      (2)   No later than the fifth anniversary of the effective date hereof
any such franchisee shall reach agreement with the city to upgrade or rebuild
its system to comply with the state of the art, as defined in §
112.03, and the terms and conditions of a franchise agreement. The upgrade or
rebuild shall be completed by the deadline established in such agreement.
      (3)   As an alternative to division (1) above, any franchisee providing
cable service to subscribers within the city as of the effective date hereof
may elect to upgrade or rebuild the system to 750 MHz within 18 months of the
grant of the franchise, and shall reach agreement with the city no later than
the fifth anniversary of the completion of the said upgrade or rebuild of the
system to upgrade or rebuild the system to comply with state of the art, as
defined in §
112.03, and with the terms and conditions of a franchise agreement.
   (B)   A franchisee shall provide access channels, facilities and other
support for public, educational and/or governmental use as required in a
franchise agreement and this subchapter. A franchisee shall provide access
channels dedicated to the exclusive use of the city and such other support for
public, educational and/or governmental use as required in a franchise
agreement.
   (C)   A cable system shall provide commercial leased channels as required by
law.
   (D)   The franchisee located closest to every local government building,
public school (K-12), private school (K-12), and public library shall, upon
request, provide at least one cable service outlet and to each floor of the
aforementioned buildings within 200 feet of its cable system within its
franchise area at no cost to the city or school involved, and shall charge no
more than its time and material costs for any additional outlets to such
facilities. Cable service and on-line access may be provided to certain local
government buildings via alternate means, as set forth in a franchise
agreement.
   (E)   At a minimum, the franchisee will provide a free modem and free
unlimited cable internet service to one computer in all connected schools
within a year after the franchisee makes personal computer-based internet
access service via cable commercially available to any residential subscribers
within the city. At a minimum, basic and enhanced basic service and service
offered on migrated and new product tiers will be provided to all connected
public and private schools free of charge. The franchisee will provide a free
monthly educational program listing to each connected school to the extent such
program listing is available. The franchisee will sponsor local workshops on
use of the cable modem service.
   (F)   A franchisee shall design its system to allow the city to interrupt
cable service in an emergency to deliver necessary information to subscribers
consistent with FCC rules.
   (G)   A franchisee shall make available to its subscribers equipment capable
of decoding closed circuit captioning information for the hearing impaired, to
the extent not inconsistent with FCC regulations. A franchisee may impose a
reasonable charge for such equipment.
   (H)   Standard installation shall consist of a drop, not exceeding 125 feet,
from the cable plant to the nearest entry point of a subscriber's residence or
commercial building. A franchisee may charge for subscriber drops in excess of
125 feet according to the franchisee's rate schedule.
   (I)   (1)   All cable systems and open video systems operating in the city
shall be required to interconnect with every other cable or open video system
within the city on fair and reasonable terms for the purpose of allowing
subscribers to view access channels and for the city to utilize services
provided over an institutional network.
      (2)   Applications for initial or renewed franchises shall include a plan
for interconnection of the cable system or OVS to any or all other cable
systems or open video systems operating within the city. Franchisees may apply
to the city for relief from the requirement for interconnection.
   (J)   (1)   Applications for an initial or renewed franchise may, and at the
city's request shall, include a plan for the provision of an institutional
network interconnecting city facilities, educational institutions, and/or other
public facilities.
      (2)   The city will determine the technical specifications of the I-NET
as may be negotiated.
      (3)   At a minimum, the I-NET will have the capability of transmitting
voice, video and data signals between facilities connected to the I-NET.
   (K)   A franchise agreement may specify the construction schedule that will
apply to any required construction, upgrade or rebuild. The schedule shall
provide for prompt completion of the project, considering the amount and type
of construction required, as well as for liquidated damages if the schedule is
not met.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.20 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Any cable system within the city shall at minimum meet the technical
standards of the FCC or other applicable federal or state technical standards,
including any such standards as hereinafter may be amended or adopted.
Specifically, all cable systems shall satisfy the FCC's technical standards
contained in 47 CFR 76.605, as such standards may be amended. All television
signals transmitted on a cable system shall include any closed circuit
captioning information as available for the hearing impaired. Antennas,
supporting structures, and outside plant used in the system shall be designed
to comply with all generally accepted industry practices and standards and with
all federal, state, county, city, and/or utility laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations. Upon the city's request, a franchisee shall provide information to
the city showing its compliance with this section.
   (B)   All construction, installation and maintenance shall comply with the
National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electric Code, and all laws and
accepted industry practices, and as hereinafter may be amended or changed.
   (C)   At the times specified in the franchise agreement or as required by
FCC rules, the franchisee shall perform at its expense proof of performance
tests designed to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter, the franchise agreement, and FCC requirements. The franchisee shall
provide, upon written request, the proof of performance test results to the
city within 30 days after completion. The city shall have the right to inspect
the cable system facilities and a franchisee's records during reasonable
business hours to ensure compliance with the requirements of the franchise
agreement, this subchapter, FCC and other applicable standards.
   (D)   The city may require any other tests as specified in a franchise
agreement or applicable law to be performed at the expense of the franchisee.
The franchisee shall provide the test results to the city within 30 days of
completion of such other tests.
   (E)   The franchisee shall provide the city ten days advance written notice
when a proof of performance or test required in divisions (C) and (D) above is
scheduled so that the city may have an observer present.
   (F)   A franchisee shall not design, install or operate its facilities in a
manner that will interfere with the signals of any broadcast station, the
facilities of any public utility, the cable system of another franchisee, or
individual or master antennas used for receiving television or other broadcast
signals.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.21 ACCESS CHANNELS AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   (1) At a minimum, all franchisees operating in the city shall provide
at least one access channel for the city's sole use capable of showing City
Commission meetings to subscribers within the city and public and educational
access programming, within 90 days of the effective date of this subchapter.
      (2)   Applications for an initial or renewed franchise may, and at the
city's request, shall include proposals for the provision of at least two
access channels, which shall contain programming as authorized solely by the
city.
      (3)   At any time the initial access channels provided to the city by a
franchisee are programmed during at least eight hours per day with non-
duplicative programming (i.e., bulletin messages will not be considered
programming for purposes of this section), Monday through Friday, for six
consecutive weeks, the franchisee shall, without charge, at the request of the
city, provide the city with a third access channel. If at any time the first,
second and third access channels provided to the city by a franchisee are
programmed with non-duplicative programming during at least eight hours per
day, Monday through Friday, for six consecutive weeks, the franchisee shall,
without charge, at the written request of the city, provide the city with a
fourth access channel at no charge. In the event the programming on the access
channels falls below the amount specified above, then a franchisee shall have
the right to deactivate the subsequently provided access channels. The city may
by resolution adopt rules and regulations concerning use of the access channels
that are not inconsistent with federal law.
      (4)   The city may require in a franchise agreement that a franchisee
provide live cablecasting of City Commission meetings in their entirety to all
of the franchisee's subscribers located within the city. The city may require
the replay of such meetings at times specified by the city.
   (B)   (1)   A franchise agreement may provide for the use of the
franchisee's studio facilities, equipment, and personnel for the production of
live and videotaped city programs, subject to reasonable availability and to
scheduling requirements of the franchisee.
      (2)   A franchisee shall provide, at the request of the city, use of the
franchisee's studio equipment and technical services for character generation
and cablecasting of such character generation on the access channels, subject
to reasonable availability and scheduling requirements of the franchisee.
      (3)   A franchise agreement may provide that upon the city's request, the
franchisee shall provide, at its cost, trained personnel and necessary
equipment for:
         (a)   Live cablecasting of events at the location of City Hall and
other specific locations within the city; and
         (b)   The production of videotapes of civic and government programs
and events that take place at locations other than the locations capable of
offering live programming. Such videotapes shall be played and replayed on the
access channels at times specified by the city.
         (c)   Live cablecasting may be facilitated with the interconnection
among franchisees pursuant to this subchapter. At the time of the city's
request for live cablecasting of city Commission meetings, the franchisee
serving the largest number of subscribers at the location of city hall shall be
responsible for live cablecasting production of professional quality, including
all necessary equipment and trained personnel. If requested by the franchisee
so responsible, all other franchisees shall share in the cost of producing and
delivering the live cablecasting to all subscribers on a pro-rata per
subscriber basis.
         (d)   In the event that the city changes the location of City
Commission meetings and desires to change the location where live cablecasting
occurs, the city may extend a franchisee's franchise agreement to allow the
franchisee to recover the incremental costs of the construction of the
additional plant required to provide the live cablecasting from the new
location, or in the alternative, the city may agree to reimburse the franchisee
the costs of construction.
   (C)   At the city's discretion, a franchise agreement may provide for a
financial grant in lieu of some or all of the facilities, equipment, and
services referenced in this subchapter.
   (D)   The city may establish an annual budget for capital expenses
associated with producing programming for the access channels. If the city
establishes such a budget, the city shall notify all existing franchisees of
the amount of such budget to be assessed to the franchisees and, subject to the
terms of existing franchise agreements, the franchisees shall be required to
pay the city the assessed amount based on each franchisee's subscriber base in
the city, within 90 days of the city's notice.
   (E)   All facilities, equipment, services, and all other support to be
provided by a franchisee pursuant to this subchapter or a franchise agreement
shall constitute capital costs which are required to be incurred by the
franchisee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities within
the meaning of Section 622(g)(2)(c) of the Cable Act, 47 USC 542(g)(2)(c). Such
support grants do not constitute a franchise fee or tax within the meaning of
the Cable Act, state law, this subchapter, or any franchise agreement.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.22 INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   A franchisee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of a franchise
specifically agrees that it will maintain, throughout the entire term of the
franchise including any renewals thereof, the following liability insurance
coverage insuring the franchisee and naming the city as an additional insured:
worker's compensation and employer liability insurance to meet all requirements
of state law, automobile liability insurance, and general comprehensive
liability insurance with respect to the construction, operation and maintenance
of the cable system or OVS, and the conduct of the franchisee's business in the
city, in the minimum amounts of:
      (1)   $1 million for properly damage in any one accident;
      (2)   $1 million for personal bodily injury to any one person; and
      (3)   $3 million for personal bodily injury in any one accident.
   (B)   All insurance policies shall be with sureties qualified to do business
in the state and shall be with sureties with a minimum rating of A in “Best's
Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition.” The city may require coverage and
amounts in excess of the above minimums where necessary to reflect changing
liability exposure and limits or where required by law.
   (C)   A franchisee shall keep on file with the city certificates of
insurance, which certificates shall indicate evidence of payment of the
required premiums and shall indicate that the city, its officers, boards,
commissions, City Commission members, agents, and employees are listed as
additional insureds. In the event of a potential claim such that the city
claims insurance coverage, the franchisee shall immediately respond to all
reasonable requests by the city for information with respect to the scope of
the insurance coverage.
   (D)   All insurance policies shall further provide that any cancellation or
reduction in coverage shall not be effective unless 30 days prior written
notice thereof has been given to the city. A franchisee shall not cancel any
required insurance policy without submission of proof that the franchisee has
obtained alternative insurance satisfactory to the city that complies with this
subchapter.
   (E)   A franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold
harmless, and defend the city, its officials, boards, commissions, City
Commission members, agents, and employees against any and all claims, suits,
causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and
costs and expenses arising out of the construction, maintenance, or operation
of its cable system or open video system, the conduct of the franchisee's
business in the city or in any way arising out of the franchisee's enjoyment or
exercise of a franchise, regardless of whether the act or omission complained
of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this subchapter or a franchise
agreement. In addition, and notwithstanding anything to the contrary, any
franchisee granted a renewal of a franchise on or after the effective date of
this subchapter shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officials,
boards, commissions, City Commission members, and agents or employees from any
claim arising under federal or state law. This provision includes, but is not
limited to, the city's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against
any such claim, suit, or proceedings; and claims arising out of copyright
infringements or a failure by the franchisee to secure consents from the
owners, authorized distributors, or providers of programs to be delivered by
the cable system or open video system, claims arising out of Section 638 of the
Cable Act, 47 USC 558, and claims against the franchisee for invasion of the
right of privacy, defamation of any person, or the violation or infringement of
any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other
right of any person. The city agrees to notify the franchisee, in writing,
within ten days of the city receiving notice of any issue it determines may
require indemnification. Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the city
from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel and at
its own cost.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.23 SECURITY FUND.
   (A)   The city shall require in a franchise agreement that the franchisee
post with the city a security fund. The fund may be in the form of a cash
deposit, letter of credit, or bond as agreed to in the franchise agreement. The
security fund will be used to ensure the franchisee's faithful performance of
and compliance with all provisions of this subchapter, the franchise agreement,
and other applicable law, and the payment by the franchisee of any claims,
liens, fees or taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction,
operation or maintenance of the cable system or OVS. The amount of the security
fund shall be the amount that the city determines, under circumstances existing
at the time, that is necessary to protect the public, to provide adequate
incentive to the franchisee to comply with this subchapter and the franchise
agreement, and to enable the city to enforce effectively compliance therewith,
and, based on the city's prior experience in needing to draw on the security
fund submitted by a franchisee, the city finds that with respect to a franchise
agreement granted after the effective date of this subchapter, in no event
shall such fund be less than $200,000. The franchise agreement shall provide
for the procedures to be followed with respect to the security fund. Neither
the posting of the cash deposit or filing of an indemnity bond or any form of
surety bond with the city, nor the receipt of any damages recovered by the city
thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the franchisee
or limit the liability of the franchisee under the terms of its franchise for
damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise.
   (B)   The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are
in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this
subchapter or authorized by other law or the franchise agreement, and no
action, proceeding, or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund
will affect any other right the city may have.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.24 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   No later than June 30 of each year, and, for items that are to be
submitted upon request of the city, no later than 30 days following such
request, a franchisee shall provide the city an annual report concerning the
previous calendar year that includes, at a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   A summary, including all reasonably available information, of the
previous calendar (January 1 through December 31) year's activities in
development of the state of the art of cable systems and activities in
development of the system serving the city, including, but not limited to,
services and products initiated or discontinued, new technologies, number of
subscribers for each tier or type of service (including gains and losses),
homes passed, and miles of cable distribution plant in service. The summary
shall also include a comparison of any construction, including system upgrades,
during the year with any projections previously provided to the city, as well
as rate adjustments . It is the obligation of the franchisee to include within
this report any and all information necessary to evaluate the franchisee's
system as compared to the state of the art, as defined in §
112.03;
      (2)   A financial statement of the previous calendar year, including a
statement of income and sources of revenues. The statement shall be audited if
the franchisee has audited statements performed in its normal course of
business. If not, the franchisee's chief financial officer or other duly
authorized financial officer shall certify the statement. The statement shall
include notes that specify all significant accounting policies and practices
upon which it is based. Upon request, a franchisee shall provide a summary
comparing the current year with previous years of the franchise;
      (3)   Upon request, a summary of subscriber or resident complaints,
identifying the number and nature of complaints and their disposition. Where
complaints involve recurrent problems, the nature of each problem and the
corrective measures taken shall be identified. More detailed information
concerning complaints shall be submitted upon request of the city;
      (4)   Upon request, a summary of customer satisfaction with respect to
the products, services, and channel capacity provided by the cable system or
OVS, including customer service;
      (5)   Upon request, the number and duration of outages, number of planned
outages, and number of outages during prime viewing hours (8:00 p.m. to 11:00
p.m. daily);
      (6)   Upon request, if the franchisee is a corporation, a list of
officers and members of the board of directors and the officers and members of
the board of directors of any parent corporation;
      (7)   Upon request, if the franchisee is a partnership, a list of the
partners, including any limited partners, and their addresses; and where the
general partner or its parent corporation's ownership interests are publicly
traded, a copy of its most recent annual report;
      (8)   Upon request, a list of all persons who at the time of filing
control or hold 5% or more ownership or otherwise cognizable interest in the
franchisee pursuant to 47 CFR 76.501;
      (9)   A copy of the franchisee's rules and regulations applicable to
subscribers of the cable system or OVS;
      (10)   Upon request, a report on the number of senior citizens,
economically disadvantaged, or handicapped subscribers receiving any rate
discounts, the number of multiple dwelling buildings and property owners'
associations and units therein receiving any discount and the amount of any
such discounts for specific services if the franchisee offers separate rates or
discounts for those categories of subscribers;
      (11)   A full schedule and description of services, office and telephone
hours, and location of the franchisee's customer service offices available to
subscribers, and a schedule of all rates, fees, and charges for all services;
and
      (12)   A report on the number of total subscribers served by the
franchisee in the city, with a breakdown by the types of services received by
the subscribers.
   (B)   A franchisee shall provide, on an annual basis, the following
documents to the city as received or filed, without regard to whether the
documents are filed by the franchisee or an affiliate:
      (1)   Annual report of the franchisee or any affiliate of the franchisee
that controls the franchisee and issues an annual report;
      (2)   Upon the city's request, copyright filings reflecting the operation
of the system;
      (3)   Upon the city's request, FCC Forms 325 and 395A for the system, or
their successor forms;
      (4)   Any and all pleadings, petitions, applications, communications,
reports, and documents (collectively referred to as "filings") submitted by or
on behalf of the franchisee to any state or federal agency, court, or
regulatory board, which filings may impact the franchisee's operations in the
city or that may impact the city's rights or obligations under this subchapter
or a franchise agreement and any and all responses, if any, to the above
mentioned filings;
      (5)   Any and all notices of deficiency, forfeiture, or documents
instituting any investigation or civil or criminal proceeding issued by any
state or federal agency regarding the franchisee, or any affiliate of the
franchisee, provided, however, that any such notice or documents relating to an
affiliate of the franchisee need be provided only to the extent the same may
directly or indirectly affect the franchisee's operations in the city. For
example, a notice that an affiliate, which has a management contract for the
system in the city, was not in compliance with FCC EEO requirements would be
deemed to affect operations in the city;
      (6)   Any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment
related to a declaration of bankruptcy; and
      (7)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, a franchisee shall
provide the city, within 30 days of filing or receipt of such, any document
that may adversely impact the construction, operation, or maintenance of the
franchisee's cable system or OVS.
   (C)   A franchisee shall make a complete set of books and records available
for inspection and audit by the city within the county, for purposes of
ascertaining compliance with requirements of this subchapter and the franchise
agreement. Such inspection and audit shall be upon reasonable notice and during
normal business hours.
   (D)   Franchisees shall at all times maintain records that the city may
obtain upon request to demonstrate compliance with the customer service
standards contained in this subchapter.
   (E)   Upon written request by the franchisee, any materials submitted to the
city that a franchisee deems proprietary and confidential shall not be made
publicly available to the extent permitted by applicable law, including, but
not limited to, the state public records law. The city may inspect such
proprietary materials, but not copy or remove such materials, to the extent
permitted by law.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.25 COMPLIANCE WITH CONSUMER PROTECTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   To provide franchisees a reasonable opportunity to make necessary
changes to their operations, the consumer protection standards contained within
this subchapter will be enforced beginning 90 days after the effective date of
this subchapter.
   (B)   A franchisee shall comply with the consumer protection standards
contained in this subchapter during normal operating conditions. "Normal
operating conditions" means those service conditions that are within the
control of the franchisee. Those conditions that are not within the control of
the franchisee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual
weather conditions. Those conditions that are ordinarily within the control of
the franchisee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-
view events, rate increases, regular peak and seasonal demand periods, and
maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.
   (C)   A franchisee shall satisfy other consumer protection standards
established by the city from time to time by ordinance or by resolution. In
addition, a franchisee shall at all times comply with any additional or
stricter requirements established by applicable law including, without
limitation, FCC customer service standards and state and federal consumer
protection laws.
   (D)   The consumer protection standards contained in this subchapter shall
apply to open video systems to the extent permissible by applicable law. A
franchisee providing cable service via an open video system, or a cable
franchisee operator that complies with the consumer protection standards
applicable to cable systems may be certified by the city as "consumer friendly"
if the city determines that the franchisee is complying with the requirements
contained herein. The city may revoke the certification for failure to comply
with the standards, or if the city is unable to determine whether the
franchisee is in compliance.
   (E)   A franchisee shall maintain all parts of its system in good condition
and in accordance with standards generally observed by the cable television
industry. Sufficient employees shall be retained to provide safe, adequate, and
prompt service for all of its customers and facilities.
   (F)   (1)   A franchisee shall maintain designated representatives
responsible for resolving customer issues received by the city from residents.
A franchisee shall provide the city with current direct telephone numbers,
direct facsimile numbers and email addresses of representatives and their
supervisors designated to resolve customer issues received by the city for
referral to the franchisee. A franchisee shall provide the city with current
direct contact telephone numbers, facsimile numbers, and email addresses for
the general manager or equivalent employee with responsibility for operations
within the city and for management level personnel with responsibility for
customer installation, repair, and billing. Such telephone numbers shall
generally be answered by a live person capable of resolving customer issues
referred by the city.
      (2)   If the franchisee does not comply with divisions (C), (E) and F(1)
above, the franchisee shall have 30 days to cure such violation from the day
the franchisee receives notice of the violation. If the franchisee has not
cured the violation within 30 days, the city shall fine the franchisee for
violation of this section $100 per day for each day that the violation
continues. If there is a second violation of divisions (C), (E), or (F)(1)
within one year of a previous violation, and the franchisee does not cure such
violation within 30 days of the notice, the city shall fine the franchisee $250
per day for each day that the violation continues. The fines shall begin to
accrue on the first business day after the 30 day cure period has terminated.
      (3)   A franchisee shall respond to customer issues referred by the city
within 24 hours, and shall notify the city of the resolution or of its efforts
to resolve the customer issue referred by the city within five business days.
The city may develop a form for use by a franchisee in responding to customer
issues referred to a franchisee.
      (4)   If the franchisee does not comply with division (F)(3) above, the
franchisee shall have five business days to cure such violation from the day
the franchisee receives notice of such violation. If the franchisee has not
cured the violation within five days from such notice date, the city shall fine
a franchisee for violation of Subsection (F)(3) $100 per day for each day that
the violation continues. If there is a second violation of division (F)(3)
above within one year of a previous violation, and the franchisee does not cure
such violation within five days of the notice, the city shall fine the
franchisee $250 per day for each day that the violation continues. The fines
shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the five day cure period
has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.26 BUSINESS OFFICE.
   (A)   A franchisee shall maintain at least one conveniently located business
office and service center within the city limits under the name in which it
does business within the city. Consumers may make payments, obtain information,
return, pick up and exchange equipment, or conduct other business regarding
cable service at the business office. This business office shall be open at
minimum from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and at least four
weekend and four evening hours. The city may waive temporarily a franchisee's
obligation to have an office within the city if the franchisee provides other
methods for providing convenient services to its customers. As an alternative
to maintaining an office within the city, a franchisee may maintain an office
within five miles of the city provided the franchisee maintains a location
within the city where subscribers may make payments without additional charge,
and the city determines that the franchisee is otherwise able to respond
conveniently to consumers' requests.
   (B)   If the franchisee does not comply with this section, the franchisee
shall have 30 days to cure the violation from the day the franchisee receives
notice of the violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation within
30 days from such notice date, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation
of this section $500 per day for each day that the violation continues. The
fines shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the 30 day cure
period has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.27 TOLL-FREE TELEPHONE NUMBER; ANSWERING TIME STANDARDS.
   (A)   Franchisees or their affiliates shall maintain a listed, toll-free
telephone number under the business name familiar to consumers and employ a
sufficient number of telephone lines, personnel, and answering equipment or
service to allow reasonable access by subscribers and members of the public to
contact the franchisee on a full-time basis, 24 hours per day, 7 days per week,
including holidays. Knowledgeable, qualified franchisee representatives will be
available to respond to customer telephone inquiries, 24 hours per day, 7 days
per week, including holidays.
   (B)   If the franchisee does not comply with this section, the franchisee
shall have 30 days to cure such violation from the day the franchisee receives
notice of such violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation within
30 days from such notice date, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation
of this section $500 per day for each day that the violation continues. The
fine shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the 30 day cure
period has terminated.
   (C)   A franchisee shall answer all customer service and repair telephone
calls made under normal operating conditions within 30 seconds, including wait
time and within an additional 30 seconds to transfer the call. Customers shall
receive a busy signal less than 3% of the time. To the extent technically
feasible, these standards should be measured with respect to telephone calls
coming from residents of the city. The phrase "of the time" refers to the
percentage of calls to a franchisee. As an example, if 100 customers call a
franchisee, fewer than 3 callers should receive a busy signal. These standards
shall be met no less than 90% of the time under normal operating conditions,
measured on a quarterly basis.
   (D)   If a franchisee fails to meet these standards on a quarterly basis,
the franchisee shall track the telephone answer time standards on a daily
basis, beginning with the first day following the end of the quarter for which
the franchisee fails to satisfy these standards. The franchisee shall submit to
the city data measuring its compliance with the standards set forth herein.
Quarterly results will be submitted to the city no later than the 25th day of
the month following the end of the preceding quarter. If a franchisee has
satisfied the telephone answering standards set forth herein for a continuous
period of one year, upon the franchisee's request, the city may relieve a
franchisee of its obligation to provide such data measuring compliance with
these standards and provide that the franchisee will provide such data upon the
city's request. If a franchisee must track results on a daily basis, the
franchisee shall provide such daily results to the city on every Friday for the
preceding week until resolved to the city's satisfaction.
   (E)   (1)   If a franchisee violates the telephone answering standards
contained herein for any quarter, the city may require the franchisee to
provide the city with a communication traffic study within 30 days of notice or
longer reasonable time period required by the city. The study will be conducted
on all customer service trunk lines and must include information on the
efficiency of the communications system measured from the telephone company's
central office, as well as other performance information available from the
franchisee's communication equipment. The study must provide information that
confirms the franchisee's communications system is properly trunked and staffed
to meet the requirements of this section using generally accepted telephonic
engineering standards.
      (2)   Based upon the findings of the traffic study that additional
personnel or equipment is needed and other relevant considerations, the city
may require the franchisee to staff a minimum specified number of customer
service representatives or to add particular equipment to handle telephone
calls to the extent permitted by applicable law. If the city requires staffing
or additional equipment, the city and the franchisee shall determine the
minimum number of customer service representatives and equipment necessary to
allow the franchisee to meet the telephone answer standards contained in this
section. For purposes of this calculation, the number of calls received daily
shall be the median number of calls received on a daily basis for the quarter
during which the standards were not met.
      (3)   In addition to other remedies specified in this section, the city
shall fine a franchisee for violation of the standards set forth in this
section. If the telephone standards in division (C) above are not satisfied for
any one quarter, the franchisee shall have 30 days to cure such violation from
the first business day after receipt of a notice of violation from the city. If
the franchisee fails to cure its violation of the telephone standards in
subsection A 30 days from such date, based on the franchisee's daily
measurement as required by subsection B, the city shall fine a franchisee $250
per day for each day that the violation continues. If a franchisee has a
subsequent violation of division (C) above within one year of a violation that
resulted in a fine, and the franchisee fails to cure the violation within the
time period required herein, the city shall fine the franchisee $500 per day
for each day that the violation continues. If the franchisee does not comply
with divisions (D) and (E) above, the franchisee shall have five days to cure
such violation from the day the franchisee receives notice of such violation.
If the franchisee has not cured the violation within five business days from
such notice date, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation of this
section $500 per day for each day that the violation continues. The fine shall
begin to accrue on the first business day after the 5-day cure period has
terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.28 INSTALLATION AND SERVICE STANDARDS.
   (A)   A franchisee shall employ and maintain sufficient qualified personnel
and equipment to be available:
      (1)   To accept payments and exchange or accept equipment;
      (2)   To receive subscriber complaints or requests for service or repairs
on a full-time basis, 24 hours per day, seven days per week;
      (3)   To initiate service installations, undertake normal repairs, and
initiate action with respect to any subscriber service complaint within 24
hours; and/or
      (4)   To enable a technician to respond to service calls 24 hours per
day, seven days a week, including holidays, when 50 or more subscribers served
from the same active electronic device, such as an amplifier or node, call with
a complaint.
   (B)   The franchisee must meet each of the following standards no less than
95% percent of the time under normal operating conditions as measured on a
quarterly basis:
      (1)   Standard installation work shall be performed within seven calendar
days after an order has been placed, except in those instances where a
subscriber specifically requests an installation date beyond the 7 calendar day
period. "Standard" installations are up to 125 feet from the existing
distribution system. Installation requests shall be completed within 120 days
of a request where an extension of over 125 feet and up to one-half mile is
required and within 180 days where an extension of over one-half mile is
required. If scheduled installation is neither started nor completed as
scheduled, unless due to the customer's fault, an employee of the franchisee
will telephone the subscriber the same day. Evening personnel shall also
attempt to call subscribers at their homes between the hours of 5:30 and 8:00
p.m. If the call to the subscriber is not answered, an employee of the
franchisee shall telephone the subscriber the next day.
      (2)   The franchisee will respond to service interruptions promptly and
in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. Other
requests for service will be responded to promptly and in no event later than
48 hours after the initial request. All service interruptions and service
problems within the control of the franchisee will be corrected within 72 hours
after a complaint.
      (3)   The appointment window alternatives made available for
installations, service calls, repairs, and other installation activities will
be either a specific time, a four-hour or less block of time during normal
business hours, or if requested by the subscriber, "all day." The franchisee's
scheduling options shall be clearly explained to subscribers at the time of the
scheduling.
      (4)   The franchisee may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber
after 5:00 pm on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
   (C)   If at any time an installer or technician is running late for a
scheduled appointment, an attempt to contact the customer will be made and the
appointment rescheduled as necessary at a time which is convenient for the
customer. Subscribers who have experienced one missed installation or service
appointment due to the franchisee's fault shall receive standard installation
free of charge. If the installation was to have been provided free of charge or
if the appointment was for service or repair, the subscriber shall receive a
credit of not less than $20.
   (D)   With regard to subscribers with disabilities, upon a subscriber's
request, a franchisee will arrange for pickup and/or replacement of converters
or other equipment at the subscriber's address or by a satisfactory equivalent
(such as the provision of a postage-prepaid mailer), without a special charge.
   (E)   If the standards of divisions (A) or (B) above are not met, the
franchisee shall have 30 days to cure such violation from the first business
day after receipt of a notice of violation by the city. In addition, a
franchisee shall begin to measure the standards of division (B) above on a
daily basis following the last day of the quarter during which the standards
were not satisfied. If the franchisee is not in compliance 30 days from such
date as required herein, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation of
divisions (A) and (B) above a maximum of $500 per day for each day that the
violation continues. The city shall fine a franchisee for violation of
divisions (C) and (D) above $250 per day for each day that the violation
continues. The fines shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the
30 day cure period has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.29 DISCONNECTION AND DOWNGRADES.
   (A)   (1) A subscriber may terminate or downgrade service at any time. No
charges for service may be made after the subscriber requests disconnection or
downgrade. No period of notice before voluntary termination or downgrade of
cable service may be required of subscribers. There will be no charge for
disconnection, except for a collection fee authorized by applicable law, and
any downgrade charges will conform to applicable law. This section does not
apply to promotional contracts or bulk contracts where a subscriber received an
actual discount from standard rates for a multi-month contract, so long as:
         (a)   The disconnect fee plus the amount paid by the customer is no
higher than the amount the customer would have paid for service actually
received before the disconnect request at the franchisee's prevailing rates for
the service;
         (b)   The disconnect fee was stated prominently and in writing, and
provided to the customer before the customer began taking service; and
         (c)   The subscriber was given the option of disconnecting without a
disconnect fee within the first 15 days after subscriber began receiving the
discounted service.
      (2)   Any security deposit and/or other funds, including interest, due a
subscriber that disconnects or downgrades service will be returned to the
subscriber within 45 days from the date disconnection or downgrade was
requested, except in cases where the subscriber does not permit the franchisee
to recover its equipment, in which case the amounts owed will be paid to
subscribers within 45 days of the date the equipment was recovered.
      (3)   A subscriber that requests to terminate a promotional offer or
requests to return to the prior level of service after the promotion ends shall
be able to do so without paying any additional charges or being required to
obtain additional equipment at the subscriber's cost.
   (B)   (1)   A franchisee may disconnect a subscriber's service for non-
payment if:
         (a)   The subscriber is delinquent in payment for cable service;
         (b)   A written notice of impending disconnection, postage prepaid,
has been sent to the subscriber after the due date of the bill, and at least
ten days before the date on which service may be disconnected, at the premises
where the subscriber requests billing, which notice must identify the name and
address of the subscriber whose account is delinquent, state the date by which
disconnection may occur if payment is not made, and the amount the subscriber
must pay to avoid disconnection, and a telephone number of a representative of
the franchisee who can provide additional information concerning and handle
complaints or initiate an investigation concerning the services and charges in
question;
         (c)   The subscriber fails to pay the amounts owed to avoid
disconnection by the date of disconnection which must be at least 35 days after
the due date of the subscriber's monthly bill or other charge; and
         (d)   No pending inquiry exists regarding the bill that the subscriber
has failed to pay to which the franchisee has not responded in writing, if the
subscriber inquiry was in writing, or via telephone or in writing if the
subscriber inquiry was via telephone.
      (2)   A subscriber is not delinquent in payment for a bill until after
the date a late fee could be imposed on that bill.
      (3)   Service may only be disconnected on days in which the subscriber
can reach a representative of the franchisee either in person or by telephone
to make a payment on the account.
      (4)   After disconnection, upon payment by the subscriber in full of all
proper fees or charges, including the payment of the reconnection charge, if
any, the franchisee will reinstate service within five business days, except as
otherwise provided in this subchapter below.
   (C)   A franchisee may immediately disconnect a subscriber if:
      (1)   The subscriber is damaging, destroying or unlawfully tampering with
or has damaged or destroyed or unlawfully tampered with the franchisee's cable
system;
      (2)   The subscriber is not authorized to receive service and is
receiving and/or is facilitating, aiding or abetting the unauthorized receipt
of service by others; or
      (3)   Subscriber-installed or attached equipment is resulting in signal
leakage in violation of FCC rules.
   (D)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the
franchisee from removing its property from a subscriber's premises upon the
termination of service consistent with FCC rules and any other applicable Law.
At the subscriber's request, a franchisee shall remove all of its facilities
and equipment from the subscriber's premises within 30 calendar days of the
subscriber's request. Where removal is impractical, such as with buried cable
or internal wiring, facilities and equipment may be disconnected and abandoned
rather than removed, unless there is a written agreement stating otherwise,
provided, however, that the agreement must be consistent with applicable law
and FCC rules. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, a franchisee shall
comply with all FCC rules as now or hereafter may be amended with respect to
subscribers' rights and interests including, but not limited to, right to
purchase and determination of ownership of cable wiring and equipment.
   (E)   If a franchisee does not comply with this section, the franchisee
shall have 30 days to cure such violation from the day the franchisee receives
notice of such violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation within
30 days from such notice date, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation
of this section $100 per day for each day that the violation continues. If a
franchisee has a subsequent violation of this section within one year of a
violation that resulted in a fine, and the franchisee fails to cure the
violation within the time period required herein, the city shall fine the
franchisee $500 per day for each day that the violation continues. Fines shall
begin to accrue on the first business day after the 30 day cure period has
terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.30 SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS.
   (A)   The franchisee shall intentionally interrupt service only for good
cause and for the shortest time possible. The franchisee shall use its best
efforts to ensure that the interruptions shall occur during the least
inconvenient times for subscribers that shall be the period between 1:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m., if practicable. The franchisee shall maintain and make available
to the city a written log for all intentional service interruptions.
   (B)   The franchisee shall notify the city immediately if a service
interruption is major, i.e., affects 50 or more subscribers for a time period
greater than four hours. The city may establish procedures for such
notification after normal business hours.
   (C)   If the franchisee does not comply with this section, the franchisee
shall have 30 days to cure the violation from the day the franchisee receives
notice of the violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation within
30 days from such notice date, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation
of this section $500 per day for each day that the violation continues. The
fines shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the 30 day cure
period has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.31 FRANCHISEE IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   The franchisee shall cause all its field employees and field contract
workers to wear a picture identification badge indicating that they work for
the franchisee. This badge shall be clearly visible to the public. Upon
request, employees must provide a supervisor's name and telephone number for
members of the public to contact.
   (B)   All company vehicles shall prominently display the name under which
the franchisee is doing business, and logo, if any, in a manner clearly visible
to the public. Contractor vehicles shall prominently display the contractor
name, contractor local business tax receipt number, if applicable, and the
franchisee's name. There must be a listed toll-free telephone number for the
names displayed.
   (C)   When any work is performed by or on behalf of the franchisee in the
public rights-of-way where the work involves cutting or trenching, or requires
more than one hour to perform, each franchisee will post a sign that
prominently displays the name under which the franchisee is doing business in
the city, and the franchisee's telephone number.
   (D)   The telephone number posted must be a local or toll free number. The
phone must connect to persons trained to receive and respond to calls regarding
employees, construction and problems (including repair problems) associated
with construction.
   (E)   If the franchisee does not comply with this section, the franchisee
shall have 30 days to cure such violation from the day the franchisee receives
notice of such violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation within
30 days from the notice date, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation of
this section $250 per day for each day that the violation continues. The fines
shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the 30 day cure period
has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 112.32 COMPLAINT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   A franchisee shall develop written procedures for the investigation
and resolution of all subscriber or city resident complaints, including, but
not limited to, those regarding the quality of service and equipment
malfunction, which procedures shall be subject to the review and approval by
the city. A subscriber or city resident who has not been satisfied by following
the franchisee's procedures may file a written complaint with the city, which
will investigate the matter and, in consultation with the franchisee as
appropriate, attempt to resolve the matter. The city shall consider a
franchisee's good faith or lack thereof in attempting to resolve subscriber and
resident complaints in a fair and equitable manner in connection with the
franchisee's renewal application.
   (B)   The franchisee shall maintain a complete list of all complaints not
resolved within seven days of receipt and the measures taken to resolve them.
This list shall be compiled in a form to be approved by the city. It shall be
compiled on a monthly basis. The list for each calendar month shall be supplied
to the city no later than the 15th day of the next month. The franchisee shall
also maintain a list of all complaints received for a period of 24 months,
which list will be available to the city.
   (C)   A subscriber or other person with a claim in law or equity against a
franchisee may also file an appropriate action in a court of competent
jurisdiction. A franchisee's policies and procedures with respect to customers'
complaints shall not have the effect of prohibiting a subscriber or other
person from pursuing any claim for relief in law or equity in a court of
competent jurisdiction. This code, including this subchapter, state and
applicable federal law, shall govern a franchisee's customer service policies
and procedures. Nothing herein shall prohibit a franchisee from defending to
the full extent allowed by applicable law any claim brought by any person.
   (D)   If a franchisee does not comply with divisions (B) or (C) above, the
franchisee shall have 30 days to cure the violation from the day the franchisee
receives notice of the violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation
within 30 days from the notice date, the city shall fine a franchisee for
violation of this section $250 per day for each day that the violation
continues. The fines shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the
30 day cure period has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.33 COMMUNICATIONS WITH CUSTOMERS AND BILLING.
   The franchisee shall abide by the following requirements governing
communications with customers, bills, and refunds:
   (A)   Each franchisee shall provide to subscribers written information about
each of the following at the time of installation, at least once annually, and
thereafter at any future time upon request of a subscriber:
      (1)   How to use the cable service;
      (2)   Installation and service maintenance policies;
      (3)   The products and services offered;
      (4)   Prices and service options;
      (5)   Channel positions of programming carried on the system;
      (6)   The franchisee's procedures for the receipt and resolution of
complaints;
      (7)   The franchisee's address of all business offices within the city
and telephone number to which complaints may be reported, and the hours of
operation;
      (8)   The telephone number and address of the city's office and the
city's office designated to handle cable television complaints and inquiries
shall be printed on the bill;
      (9)   The availability of a parental control device and services or
specialized equipment available to subscribers with disabilities, and the
conditions and costs to obtain such devices and/or services; and/or
      (10)   Franchisee's information collection and disclosure policies for
the protection of subscribers' privacy.
   (B)   At the request of the city, a franchisee shall provide written notice
to all subscribers of any city meeting regarding the franchisee's renewal,
transfer, or modification of its franchise. The city shall make such a request
in writing, no less than 30 days prior to the mailing of any billing by the
franchisee. Said notices shall be made at the franchisee's expense, and said
expense shall not be considered part of the franchise fee assessed pursuant to
this subchapter and shall not be regarded as a franchise fee, as the term is
defined in Section 622 of the Cable Act, 47 USC 542.
   (C)   The franchisee's bills to subscribers will be clear, concise, and
understandable. All charges shall be separately itemized on the bill.
   (D)   Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than the earlier
of 30 days or the subscriber's next billing cycle following the resolution of a
refund request, or the return of the equipment supplied by the franchisee if
service is terminated.
   (E)   Credits for service will be issued no later than the subscriber's next
billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted.
   (F)   A franchisee shall provide subscribers and the city with at least 30
days advance written notice of any changes in rates, charges, channel lineup,
change in subscriber procedures and policies, or initiations or
discontinuations or changes of service or services offered over the cable
system within the control of the franchisee. Notice to subscribers and the city
of such changes not within the control of the franchisee shall be provided as
quickly as practicable.
   (G)   (1)   The franchisee's first billing statement after a new
installation or service change shall be pro- rated as appropriate, and shall
reflect any security deposit.
      (2)   The franchisee's billing statement must be fully itemized, with
itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges
and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during
the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits.
      (3)   The franchisee's billing statement must show a specific due date
not earlier than ten days after the date the statement is mailed or ten days
after the beginning of the service period. If the franchisee charges a late fee
or administrative fee, the bill must show the date after which the fees will be
imposed and the amount. Any balance not received within 15 days after the due
date may be assessed an administrative charge as a late fee. Any administrative
charge imposed as a "late fee" must be reasonable and must be limited to a fair
approximation of the actual cost of handling and collecting the customer bill.
Franchisees shall use late fees for cost recovery only and not as a tool of
profit for the collection of additional revenues, or as a penalty or deterrent.
Any late fee charged to subscribers in excess of $5 per billing period is
presumed to be unreasonable, and the franchisee shall bear the burden of
proving that any such late fee is reasonable, consistent with applicable law.
         (a)   Any administrative charge applied to unpaid bills shall be
subject to regulation by the city consistent with applicable law.
         (b)   Subscribers shall not be charged an administrative fee or a late
fee, or be otherwise penalized for any failure by the franchisee, its
employees, or contractors, to bill the subscriber timely and correctly or to
credit properly the subscriber for a payment timely made.
         (c)   With respect to the majority of cases in which late fees are
imposed, the calendar day prior to the date a late fee is imposed must be a day
on which the franchisee's local business office is scheduled to be open and on
which mail will be delivered.
         (d)   In the event of a billing dispute, the franchisee shall not
charge a late fee while the dispute is pending.
      (4)   The franchisee must notify the subscriber that he or she can remit
payment in person at the franchisee's office and must inform the subscriber of
the address of that office.
   (H)   If the franchisee does not comply with this section, the franchisee
shall have 30 days to cure such violation from the day the franchisee receives
notice of such violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation within
30 days from such notice date, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation
of this section $250 per day for each day that the violation continues. If a
franchisee has a subsequent violation of this section within one year of a
violation that resulted in a fine, and the franchisee fails to cure the
violation within the time period required herein, the city shall fine the
franchisee $500 per day for each day that the violation continues. The fines
shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the 30 day cure period
has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.34 SERVICE CREDITS FOR OUTAGES.
   (A)   A franchisee shall credit a subscriber's account a minimum of 1/30 of
the monthly charge for service upon request if a subscriber is without service
or if service is substantially impaired for any reason, except caused by the
subscriber, for a minimum of 3 to less than 24 hours. In the event of a service
interruption for 24 hours or longer, upon a subscriber's request, a franchisee
shall credit the subscriber's account a minimum of 10% of a subscriber's
monthly bill. Service interruption includes the loss of picture or sound on one
or more channels or, to the extent not inconsistent with applicable law, the
loss of cable modem internet service provided by a franchisee.
   (B)   A subscriber shall be deemed to have requested a credit if the
subscriber requests a credit or complains about a service interruption within
45 days of the outage.
   (C)   A subscriber shall also be deemed to have requested a credit unless at
least quarterly the franchisee provides each subscriber a notice with the
following text, prominently displayed:
   "WE ARE REQUIRED TO GIVE YOU A CREDIT IF YOUR SERVICE WAS OUT OR IMPAIRED
FOR THREE HOURS OR MORE DURING ANY DAY. YOU MUST CALL OR WRITE US TO REQUEST
THIS CREDIT WITHIN 45 DAYS OF THE DATE OF THE SERVICE OUTAGE OR IMPAIRMENT."
   (D)   For subscribers who do not receive an individual bill and receive
service pursuant to a contract with a home owners or condominium association, a
franchisee shall provide credit, as required in this subchapter, to the
association, provided such credit does not conflict with the provisions of any
such contract or applicable law. The credit provided to such association shall
be based on the number of subscribers entitled to the credit. By way of
example, if a 3 hour outage affects 50 individual subscribers within a home
owners association, the franchisee shall provide the association with a credit
of, at a minimum, 1/30 of the monthly charge to all 50 subscribers. In
providing such a credit to an association, the franchisee shall provide the
association with the names and addresses of the subscribers for whom the credit
was issued.
   (E)   If a franchisee does not comply with this section, the franchisee
shall have 30 days to cure the violation from the day the franchisee receives
notice of the violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation within
30 days from such notice date, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation
of this section $250 per day for each day that the violation continues. If a
franchisee has a subsequent violation of this section within one year of a
violation that resulted in a fine, and the franchisee fails to cure the
violation within the time period required herein, the city shall fine the
franchisee $500 per day for each day that the violation continues. The fines
shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the 30 day cure period
has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.35 ALTERATION OF SERVICE.
   A franchisee may not substantially alter the service being provided to a
subscriber (including by re- tiering, restructuring a tier, or otherwise)
without the express permission of such subscriber, unless it complies with this
section.
   (A)   Any time a franchisee intends to alter the service being provided to a
subscriber (including by re- tiering, restructuring a tier, or otherwise) in
such a way that the subscriber will no longer be able to obtain the same
package of services in the same manner and at the same cost, the franchisee
must provide the subscriber with 30 days written notice of the alteration. The
notice shall explain the substance and the full effect of the alteration and
provide the subscriber the right, within the 30-day period following notice, to
opt to receive any combination of services offered by the franchisee. A
subscriber that requests to terminate a promotional offer or requests to return
to the prior level of service after the promotion ends shall be able to do so
without paying any additional charges or being required to obtain additional
equipment at the subscriber's cost.
   (B)   Except as provided herein or under applicable law, no charge may be
made for any service or product which the subscriber has not requested
affirmatively by name, in a manner separate and apart from payment of the
regular monthly bill, that the subscriber wishes to receive. A subscriber's
request may be made orally or in writing, but it is the franchisee's burden to
show that an affirmative request was made.
   (C)   Within seven days of a subscriber's request, a franchisee shall fully
block or scramble any channel that is not included within the services
purchased by the subscriber so as to prevent signal bleed, at no cost to the
subscriber.
   (D)   If the franchisee does not comply with this section, the franchisee
shall have 30 days to cure such violation from the day the franchisee receives
notice of such violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation within
30 days from such notice date, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation
of this section $500 per day for each day that the violation continues. The
fines shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the 30 day period
has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.36 DUTY OF FRANCHISEE TO MAINTAIN ADEQUATE STAFF AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The failure of the franchisee to hire sufficient staff or to train
properly its staff will not justify a franchisee's failure to comply with any
provision hereof.
   (B)   The franchisee must have sufficient trucks, tools, testing equipment,
monitoring devices and other equipment and facilities and the trained and
skilled personnel required so that the franchisee complies with each and every
requirement of applicable law, including applicable customer service
requirements, technical standards, maintenance standards and requirements for
responding to outages. This includes the facilities, equipment and staff
required to:
      (1)   Properly test the system and conduct an ongoing and active program
of preventive maintenance and quality control; and
      (2)   Be able to quickly respond to customer complaints and resolve
problems.
   (C)   The franchisee must install and maintain equipment necessary to
measure its performance with applicable consumer protection standards that the
city may adopt from time to time after providing the franchisee the opportunity
to comment; except that the franchisee may obtain relief temporarily from this
requirement if it shows that:
      (1)   It has a high level of subscriber satisfaction;
      (2)   There are alternative, adequate ways to review its performance; or
      (3)   For other good cause shown.
   (D)   Knowledgeable, qualified representatives shall be available to respond
to customer telephone inquiries, in, at a minimum, English and Spanish
languages. Any automated answering equipment will provide at least English and
Spanish language alternatives. When a customer speaking Spanish schedules
service calls, the franchisee shall offer to have the service call made by a
representative speaking Spanish.
   (E)   If the franchisee does not comply with this section, the franchisee
shall have 30 days to cure the violation from the day the franchisee receives
notice of the violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation within
30 days from such notice date, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation
of this section $100 per day for each day that the violation continues. The
fines shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the 30 day cure
period has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.37 SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.
   (A)   A franchisee shall at all times protect the privacy of all subscribers
to the full extent required by Section 631 of the Cable Act, 47 USC 551, and
applicable law. The franchisee shall comply with all applicable law regarding
collecting, storing and disseminating of individual subscriber information, and
shall operate the system in a manner that protects against invasions of any
person's privacy and protects the privacy of data services and data signals
distributed over the system. Unless otherwise permitted by applicable law, a
franchisee shall not sell or otherwise make available for commercial purposes
the name, address, and telephone number of any subscriber, or any information
that identifies the individual viewing habits of the subscriber, without the
involved subscriber's written consent.
   (B)   If the franchisee does not comply with this section, the franchisee
shall have 30 days to cure the violation from the day the franchisee receives
notice of such violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation within
30 days from such notice date, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation
of this section $500 per day for each day that the violation continues. The
fines shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the 30 day cure
period has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.38 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A franchisee operating a cable system or OVS shall not deny service
nor discriminate in its rates or charges or in the availability of the service
or facilities of its system, or in any other respect, or make or grant undue
preferences or advantages to any subscriber, potential subscriber, or group of
subscribers or potential subscribers, nor subject any such persons or group of
persons to any undue prejudice or any disadvantage. A franchisee shall not
deny, delay, or otherwise burden service or discriminate against subscribers or
users on the basis of age, race, creed, religion, color, sex, sexual
orientation, handicap, national origin, marital status, or political
affiliation, except for discounts for senior citizens, the economically
disadvantaged, or handicapped that are applied in a uniform and consistent
manner. A franchisee may also offer promotional discounts to subscribers and
bulk discounts to multiple dwelling buildings and property owners' associations
to the extent such discounts are otherwise permissible by law.
   (B)   A franchisee shall not deny cable service, offer different services,
or charge different rates to any potential subscribers because of the income of
the residents of the local area in which such subscribers reside.
   (C)   A franchisee shall not refuse to employ, nor discharge from
employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms,
conditions, or privileges of employment because of age, race, creed, religion,
color, sex, sexual orientation, disability, national origin, marital status, or
political affiliation. The franchisee shall comply with applicable law
governing equal employment opportunities, as the same may be from time to time
amended.
   (D)   If the franchisee does not comply with this section, the franchisee
shall have 30 days to cure the violation from the day the franchisee receives
notice of the violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation within
30 days from such notice date, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation
of this section $500 per day for each day that the violation continues. The
fines shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the 30 day cure
period has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.39 CONTINUATION OF SERVICE MANDATORY.
   (A)   It is the right of all subscribers obtaining cable service legally to
receive all available services requested from the franchisee as long as their
financial and other obligations to the franchisee are satisfied.
   (B)   In the event of a termination of a franchise for whatever reason, the
franchisee shall ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted
service regardless of the circumstances. The franchisee shall cooperate with
the city to continue the operation of the system for a period following
termination as necessary to maintain continuity of service to all subscribers.
The period shall not exceed six months without the franchisee's written
consent. During such period, the cable system shall be operated under such
terms and conditions as the city and the franchisee may agree, or such other
terms and conditions that will continue, to the extent possible, the same level
of service to subscribers and that will provide reasonable compensation to the
cable operator.
   (C)   In the event a franchisee fails to operate the system for seven
consecutive days without prior approval of the city or without just cause, the
city may, at its option, operate the system or designate another person to
operate the system until such time as the franchisee restores service under
conditions acceptable to the city or until a permanent new franchisee is
selected. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for the
franchisee, the franchisee shall reimburse the city for all costs or damages
resulting from the franchisee's failure to perform that are in excess of the
revenues from the system received by the city. Additionally, the franchisee
will cooperate with the city to allow city employees and/or city agents access
to the franchisees' facilities and premises for purposes of continuing system
operations as described herein.
   (D)   If the franchisee does not comply with this section, the franchisee
shall have 30 days to cure such violation from the day the franchisee receives
notice of such violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation within
30 days from such notice date, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation
of this section $500 per day for each day that the violation continues. The
fines shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the 30 day cure
period has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.40 RATES.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the city from regulating
rates for cable services to the full extent permitted by applicable law.
   (B)   Any rate or charge established for cable service, equipment, repair,
and installation shall comply with applicable law. Upon written request from
the city or its agent, the franchisee shall provide all requested data, records
and documentation to show the compliance of the rates with applicable law.
Where such information is designated proprietary and confidential, it shall not
be copied or removed or otherwise subject to public inspection, to the extent
the city is permitted to protect such information from public inspection under
applicable law.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.41 EXCLUSIVE CONTRACTS.
   (A)   The franchisee shall not require a subscriber, property owner, or
property manager to enter into an exclusive contract as a condition of
obtaining or continuing cable service. Notwithstanding this section, a
franchisee may enter into an exclusive contract with a subscriber, property
owner, or property manager, provided such contract is mutually desired and not
prohibited under applicable law.
   (B)   A franchisee's contract for service shall not provide that the length
of the term of the contract shall be the length of a franchise agreement or for
as long as the franchisee has the legal authority to provide service in the
city.
   (C)   If the franchisee does not comply with this section, the franchisee
shall have 30 days to cure such violation from the day the franchisee receives
notice of such violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation by
voiding such contract within 30 days from such notice, the city shall fine a
franchisee for violation of this section $250 per day for each day that the
violation continues. The fines shall begin to accrue on the first business day
after the 30 day cure period has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.42 CUSTOMER SERVICE PLANNING.
   (A)   A franchisee shall develop an affirmative plan for measuring customer
satisfaction; identifying best practices in delivery of customer service;
internally assessing the franchisee's response to customer demands; and
translating those assessments into customer-driven quality improvements. Each
franchisee holding a franchise as of the effective date of this subchapter
shall provide the plan to the city within 90 days of the effective date of this
subchapter. A person who receives a franchise after the effective date of this
subchapter shall provide a plan within 90 days of the effective date of its
franchise.
   (B)   The city may cooperate with franchisees to assist in the development
of the customer service plan.
   (C)   If the franchisee does not comply with this section, the franchisee
shall have 30 days to cure such violation from the day the franchisee receives
notice of such violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation within
30 days from such notice, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation of
this section a maximum of $100 per day for each day that the violation
continues. The fines shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the
30 day cure period has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.43 CERTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   A franchisee shall certify in writing to the city on February 1 and
August 1 of each year that, based upon internal due diligence by the franchisee
and to the best of the franchisee's knowledge, it is in substantial compliance
with the consumer protection standards set forth in this subchapter. At the
request of the city, the franchisee shall submit such documentation as may be
required to demonstrate the franchisee's compliance with this subchapter. This
documentation shall be submitted within 30 days of the franchisee's receipt of
the city's request.
   (B)   If the franchisee does not comply with this section, the franchisee
shall have 30 days to cure such violation from the day the franchisee receives
notice of such violation. If the franchisee has not cured the violation within
30 days from such notice, the city shall fine a franchisee for violation of
this section $500 per day for each day that the violation continues. The fines
shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the 30 day cure period
has terminated.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.44 ADMINISTRATION OF CONSUMER PROTECTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   The City Manager or designee (when used herein "City Manager" shall
mean the City Manager or designee) shall have the responsibility for the
administration of the consumer protection standards contained in this
subchapter. Such responsibility shall include the resolution of all complaints
against a franchisee regarding the quality of service, billing matters,
equipment malfunctions, and all other customer matters. The City Manager's
authority includes the authority to order refunds or fines. The city manager
may settle or compromise any controversy arising from operations of the
franchisee, either on behalf of the city, the franchisee, or any subscriber, in
accordance with the best interests of the public.
   (B)   Any decision made by the City Manager shall be provided to the
franchisee in writing. The franchisee shall have ten days from receipt of such
written decision to respond in writing to such decision.
   (C)   In cases where requests for service have been ignored or where the
service provided is unsatisfactory for any reason, the City Manager shall have
the power to require the franchisee to provide service if in the opinion of the
City Manager, such request for service is reasonable.
   (D)   A franchisee shall cooperate with the City Manager to provide the City
Manager with access to subscriber complaints or other matters received by the
franchisee from residents of the city. If technically feasible and not
inconsistent with applicable law, the franchisee shall provide the city with
technology that allows the City Manager to access subscriber records from a
computer within the City Manager's Office. If a franchisee establishes a web
site through which customers can send complaints and receive responses to the
franchisee, the franchisee shall cooperate with the city to provide the City
Manager technology to have access to such complaints.
   (E)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the City Manager, including the
franchisee, may appeal the matter to the City Commission. The aggrieved person
shall have ten days from receiving the written decision of the City Manager to
file a written appeal to the City Commission. No interest or late charge shall
accrue during the pendency of such appeal. The City Commission may accept,
reject, or modify the decision of the City Manager, based upon a review of the
information provided. No adjustment, settlement, or compromise, whether
instituted by the City Manager or by the Commission, shall be contrary to the
provisions of this subchapter or any franchise agreement issued pursuant to
this subchapter, and neither the City Manager nor the Commission, in the
adjustment, settlement, or compromise of any controversy, shall have the right
or authority to add to, modify, or delete any provision of this subchapter or
of the franchise agreement, or to interfere with any rights of subscribers or
any franchisee under applicable law or private contract. Any person aggrieved
by a decision of the City Commission, including a franchisee or a subscriber,
may appeal the matter to a court of competent jurisdiction within the county.
In addition, nothing herein shall prohibit a person from pursuing any claim for
relief against a franchisee in a court of competent jurisdiction and the
remedies available to a subscriber herein are in addition to any other
remedies, at law or equity, a subscriber may have.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.45 ENFORCEMENT OF CONSUMER PROTECTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking action to protect
the health, safety or welfare of the public or to prevent eminent danger of
damage to property.
   (B)   Enforcement of the consumer protection standards contained herein
shall be governed by the following:
      (1)   In addition to the powers delegated in §
112.44, the City Manager shall have the authority to order refunds from a
franchisee to individual subscribers who have submitted a written complaint to
the city and to assess fines against a franchisee for any violation of this
subchapter or any franchise agreement, which fines will be paid to the city.
      (2)   In ordering refunds to subscribers, the City Manager shall be
governed by the schedule set out below in which the refund indicated is
expressed as a percentage of the subscriber’s monthly bill. The refunds listed
are to be made on a per violation basis with each day of a continuing violation
constituting a separate violation. The refund ordered by the City Manager
pursuant to this section shall not exceed 100% of a subscriber’s monthly bill,
unless a violation has continued at least 30 days.
 
Schedule of Refunds to Subscribers
Single Violation of:                             Maximum Refund (Percent of Subscriber’s Monthly
                                                 Bill)
Failure to provide a local business office - §  10%
112.26
Failure to satisfy telephone standards - §      10%
112.27
Repair and installation standards                50%
 
      (3)   In assessing fines against a franchisee, the City Manager shall be
governed by the amount set forth in each section of §§
112.25 through 112.45. Fines are to be assessed on a per violation basis, with
each day of a continuing violation constituting a separate violation, or each
occurrence of a violation constituting a separate violation, whichever is
appropriate given the nature of the violation. The fines shall begin to accrue
on the first business day after the 30 day cure period has terminated. Where a
specific consumer protection provision does not contain a specific amount of a
fine, the City Manager may assess a fine up to $250 per violation.
      (4)   Prior to ordering a refund or assessing a fine, the City Manager
shall provide the franchisee with notice of the city's intention to assess a
refund and/or fine, which notice shall contain a description of the alleged
violation. Following receipt of such notice, the franchisee shall cure or
commence to cure such violation. Final cure of a violation shall toll the
accrual of assessed fines and refunds. Where a specific consumer protection
provision does not contain a specific amount of time for a franchisee to cure a
violation, the franchisee shall have 30 calendar days from the date of receipt
of the written notice to file a written response with the City Manager. The
city and the franchisee shall make good faith reasonable efforts to resolve the
dispute in question. A management level employee of the franchisee shall sign
the franchisee's written response and all statements contained therein will be
regarded as material representations to the city.
      (5)   Prior to ordering a refund and/or assessing a fine, the City
Manager shall consider any justification or mitigating factor advanced in the
franchisee's written response, including, but not limited to, rebates or
credits to the subscriber or the franchisee's good faith efforts to cure the
violation. The City Manager may, after consideration of the response of the
franchisee, waive or reduce any proposed refund or fine. In the case of a
violation of this subchapter or any franchise agreement, the City Manager shall
not assess any fine if the franchisee has reasonably resolved the complaint or
cured the violation within a reasonable time frame not to exceed ten days. Such
time period may be extended for good cause shown. If the City Manager
determines ultimately to impose a fine, the fine shall begin to accrue from the
date the franchisee received the written notice of violation. Each day of a
continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation for purposes of
imposing fines. However, an affected subscriber may be entitled to a credit or
refund as provided herein. It is the intent of the city to determine refunds
and/or fines as a reasonable estimate of the damages suffered by the city and/
or the subscribers.
      (6)   Subsequent to the notice of proposed refund and/or fine to the
franchisee and consideration of the franchisee's response, if any, the City
Manager may issue an assessment of refund or fine. The refund and/or fine shall
be paid within 30 days of written notice to the franchisee. The City may
enforce payment of the refund or fine in any court having jurisdiction or by
drawing down any security fund submitted by the franchisee.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.46 WRITTEN APPLICATIONS FOR OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS.
   A written application shall be filed with the city for grant of an initial
OVS franchise; renewal of an OVS franchise; or for a transfer.
   (A)   (1)   Any person may file an application for an open video system
franchise on its own initiative, or in response to a request for proposals.
      (2)   To be accepted for filing, an original and seven copies of a
complete application must be submitted to the city. All applications shall be
available for public inspection.
      (3)   Every application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in
amounts established from time to time by the City Commission by resolution.
      (4)   An applicant that is awarded a franchise shall pay to the city a
sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all expenses incurred by it in
connection with the granting of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter. Such payment shall be made within 30 calendar days after the city
furnishes the franchisee with a written statement of such expenses.
   (B)   An application for an initial or renewal open video system franchise
must contain the following information, and such information as the city may
from time to time require:
      (1)   Identity of the applicant; the persons who exercise working control
over the applicant and the persons who control those persons, to the ultimate
parent;
      (2)   A proposal for construction of the open video system that sets
forth at least the following:
         (a)   A description of the services that are to be provided over the
OVS;
         (b)   The location of proposed facility and facility design, including
a description of the miles of plant to be installed, where it is to be located,
and the size of facilities and equipment that will be located in the public
rights-of-way; and
         (c)   Identification of the area of the city to be served by the
proposed system, including a description of the proposed franchise area's
boundaries.
      (3)   A description of the manner in which the system will be installed,
and the time required to construct the OVS, and the expected effect on usage of
the public rights-of-way, including information on the ability of the public
rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed system, including, as appropriate
given the system proposed, an estimate of the availability of space in conduits
and an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing
facilities;
      (4)   A description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted
from existing facilities to new facilities, and what will be done with existing
facilities;
      (5)   Proof in the form of financial statements, attested to by a
certified public accountant, that the applicant has the financial resources to
complete the proposed project, and to construct, operate and repair the
proposed facility over the term of the franchise. It is not the intent of the
city to require an applicant to prove that the services it proposed to offer
will succeed in the marketplace;
      (6)   Proof that the applicant is technically qualified to construct,
operate and maintain the proposed system. At a minimum, the applicant must show
that it has experience or resources to ensure that work is to be performed
adequately, and can respond to emergencies during and after construction is
complete;
      (7)   Proof that the applicant is legally qualified, which proof shall
include that the applicant:
         (a)   Has received, or is in a position to receive, necessary
authorizations from state and federal authorities;
         (b)   Has not engaged in conduct (fraud, racketeering, violation of
antitrust, consumer protection or similar laws) that allows the city to
conclude the applicant cannot be relied upon to comply with requirements of a
franchise, or provisions of this subchapter;
         (c)   Is not a convicted vendor 36 months or fewer prior to the date
of the application pursuant to F.S. Chapter 287, or was removed from the
convicted vendor list pursuant to F.S. § 287.133;
         (d)   Is willing to enter into a franchise, to pay required
compensation and to abide by the provisions of applicable law, including those
relating to the construction, operation or maintenance of its facilities, and
has not entered into any agreement that would prevent it from doing so;
         (e)   Does not hold a cable franchise and does not have a pending
application for an initial or renewal cable franchise;
         (f)   Did not have a request for an initial or renewal OVS franchise
denied within 36 months of the application (or, where the applicant challenged
the denial, the applicant must show more than 36 months has passed since the
final adjudication of that challenge); and
         (g)   Did not have a request for an initial or renewal cable system
franchise denied based upon past performance, or because the applicant failed
to propose a franchise that reasonably met the cable- related needs and
interests of the community, in light of the costs thereof within 36 months of
the application (or, where the applicant challenged the denial, the applicant
must show more than 36 months has passed since the final adjudication of that
challenge).
      (8)   To the extent that the applicant is in any respect relying on the
financial or technical resources of another person, including an affiliate, the
proofs required by this section should be provided for that person.
   (C)   An application for a transfer of a franchise must contain the same
information required in this section as to the transferee, except that, if the
transferor submitted a franchise application pursuant to this subchapter, to
the extent information provided by the transferor remains accurate, the
transferee may simply cross-reference the earlier application.
   (D)   The city may request such additional information as it finds
necessary, and require such modifications to the application as may be
necessary in the exercise of the city's authority over open video systems. Once
the information required by the city has been provided, the city shall promptly
review the application and the City Commission shall grant the application if
it finds the following:
      (1)   The applicant has the qualifications to construct, operate and
maintain the system proposed in conformity with applicable law. The city shall
provide a reasonable opportunity to an applicant to show that it would be
inappropriate to deny it a franchise on the grounds that it is not legally
qualified, by virtue of the particular circumstances surrounding the matter and
the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing there from and
prevent their recurrence, the lack of involvement of the applicant’s
principals, or the remoteness of the matter from the operation of an open video
system. An application for a franchise area shall not be granted if the
applicant has no plans to construct a system within the entire area for which
the franchise is sought;
      (2)   The applicant accepts the modifications required by the city to its
proposed system, to the extent applicable law does not prohibit such
modifications;
      (3)   The applicant is willing to enter into a franchise agreement that
the city determines complies with the requirements of this subchapter and
applicable law; and
      (4)   Whether issuance of a franchise is in the public interest
considering the immediate and future effect on the public rights-of-way and
private property that would be used by the open video system, including the
extent to which installation or maintenance as planned would require
replacement of property or involve disruption of property, public services, or
use of the public rights-of-way; and the comparative superiority or inferiority
of competing applications.
   (E)   In the case of a transfer, the city must also determine that:
      (1)   There will be no adverse effect on the public interest or the
city's interest in the franchise;
      (2)   The transferee agrees to be bound by all the conditions of the
franchise and to assume all the obligations of its predecessor; and
      (3)   Any outstanding compliance and compensation issues are resolved or
preserved to the satisfaction of the city.
   (F)   The city shall not award an applicant a franchise if the applicant
files, or in the previous three years filed, materially misleading information
in a franchise application, or intentionally withheld information that the
applicant lawfully is required to provide.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.47 MINIMUM OVS REQUIREMENTS FOR EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENT USE OF SYSTEM.
   (A)   A franchise agreement for an open video system franchisee may provide
that the OVS franchisee shall pay to the city, at a time directed by the city,
an amount equal to the highest amount contributed by a cable franchisee under
its franchise for and in support of public, educational and government use
(including use of the system for an institutional network) of its cable system.
   (B)   To the extent that a cable franchisee is providing other in-kind
support, whether in the form of facilities, equipment, or services, a franchise
agreement for an OVS may contain the equivalent support within a time and in a
manner directed by the city, or provide a cash equivalent acceptable to the
city.
   (C)   In applying this section, the city shall ensure that the obligations
borne by the open video system operator in a franchise agreement are no greater
or lesser than the obligation imposed upon cable franchisees, taken as a whole,
as the city determines will provide the greatest benefits to the community.
   (D)   The city may increase the support required under this section or
specified in a franchise agreement with an open video system operator as the
support that cable franchisees are required to provide increases.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.48 ADMINISTRATION AND APPEALS.
   (A)   The City Manager, either directly or through his or her designee,
shall have the responsibility for overseeing the day-to-day administration of
this subchapter and franchise agreements. The City Manager shall be empowered
to take all administrative actions on behalf of the city, except for those
actions specified in this subchapter that are reserved to the City Commission.
The City Manager may recommend that the City Commission take certain actions
with respect to a franchisee. The City Manager shall keep the City Commission
apprised of developments in cable systems and provide the City Commission with
assistance, advice, and recommendations as appropriate.
   (B)   Final decisions of the City Manager or designee pursuant to this
subchapter are subject to appeal to the City Commission. A person, including a
franchisee, desiring to appeal any such decision must file a written appeal
with the city within ten days of the date of the final decision to be appealed.
Any appeal not timely filed, as set forth herein, shall be waived. The City
Commission shall hear or appoint a hearing officer to consider the appeal. The
hearing shall occur within 60 days of the receipt of the appeal, unless waived
by the franchisee, and a written decision shall be rendered within 30 days of
the hearing. Costs of the appeal shall be paid by the franchisee.
   (C)   Subject to applicable law, the City Commission shall have the sole
authority to grant a franchise, authorize the entering into of a franchise
agreement, modify a franchise agreement, renew or deny renewal of a franchise,
revoke a franchise, and authorize the transfer of a franchise.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.49 PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS; NOTICES; FORCE MAJEURE.
   (A)   The city may conduct periodic performance evaluations of a franchisee
as the city determines to be necessary. A franchisee shall cooperate with these
evaluations reasonably and in good faith. If the city implements a survey of
cable subscribers in connection with a performance evaluation, the city may
require a franchisee to distribute the city's questionnaire to its subscribers.
Upon reimbursement of the city's copying costs, the franchisee may receive
copies of all responses.
   (B)   All written correspondence required by this subchapter between the
city and a franchisee shall be delivered via hand delivery via overnight
courier, or certified mail. Notice to the franchisee shall be deemed effective
upon receipt. Notice to the city shall be effective upon receipt by the City
Manager and the Mayor of the city.
   (C)   In the event a franchisee's performance of or compliance with any of
the provisions of this subchapter or a franchise agreement is prevented by a
cause or event not within the franchisee's control, such inability to perform
or comply shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be
imposed as a result thereof, provided, however, that the franchisee uses all
practicable means to cure or correct expeditiously any such inability to
perform or comply. For purposes of this subchapter and any franchise agreement,
causes or events not within a franchisee's control shall include, without
limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes, fires and
other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil disturbances,
sabotage, and strikes and restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency
or court. Causes or events within the franchisee's control, and thus not
falling within this section, shall include, without limitation, the
franchisee's financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship, and
misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance by any of the franchisee's directors,
officers, employees, contractors, or agents.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.50 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city may fine any person who files intentionally a false complaint
against a franchisee in the amount of $50 for the first violation and $100 for
each subsequent violation.
   (B)   Intentional misrepresentation by a franchisee in any response to a
notice of proposed refund or fine, or to the city's request for other
information shall be grounds for franchise revocation or other action by the
city.
   (C)   The city expressly reserves the right to consider violations of
consumer protection standards or submitting any false information in evaluating
any application for renewal, modification, or transfer of any franchise
agreement.
   (D)   (1) In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity or
provided in this subchapter, or in any franchise agreement, the city may impose
a fine in the amount of $500 per violation per day or part thereof for any
violation of this subchapter.
      (2)   Before imposing a fine pursuant to this section, the city shall
give the franchisee written notice of the violation and its intention to assess
such fine, which notice shall contain a description of the alleged violation.
Whenever practicable, the franchisee shall have 20 calendar days after notice
to cure the violation and the city shall make good faith reasonable efforts to
assist the franchisee in resolving the violation. If the violation is not cured
within that 20 day period, the city may collect all fines owed, beginning with
the first day of the violation, either by removing such amount from the
security fund or through any other means allowed by law.
      (3)   In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity or
provided in this subchapter or in any franchise agreement, the city may apply
any one or combination of the following remedies in the event a franchisee
violates this subchapter, its franchise agreement, or applicable law:
         (a)   The franchisee's failure to comply with §
112.19, regarding minimum facilities and services, may result in imposition of
fines to be paid by the franchisee to the city in an amount of up to $2,000 per
day or part thereof that the violation continues.
         (b)   The city may revoke a franchise pursuant to the procedures
specified in this subchapter.
         (c)   In addition to or in lieu of any other remedy, the city may seek
legal or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction.
      (4)   In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the city
shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the persons bearing
the impact of the violation and the effect of such violation, the nature of the
remedy required to prevent further violations, and such other matters as the
city determines are appropriate to the public interest.
      (5)   Failure of the city to enforce any requirements of a franchise
agreement or this subchapter shall not constitute a waiver of the city's rights
under a franchise agreement or this subchapter, and shall not constitute a
waiver of the city's right under a franchise agreement or this subchapter to
pursue remedies with respect to a violation or subsequent violations of the
same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies.
      (6)   In any proceeding wherein there exists an issue with respect to a
franchisee's performance of its obligations pursuant to this subchapter or a
franchise agreement, the franchisee has, throughout any such proceedings and
appeals thereof, the burden of proving that said franchisee is in compliance
with the terms of this subchapter or a franchise agreement. The City Commission
may find a franchisee that does not demonstrate compliance with the terms and
conditions of this subchapter in default and apply any one or combination of
the remedies otherwise authorized by this subchapter.
      (7)   Nothing in this subchapter shall affect or limit the remedies the
city has available under applicable law.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.51 REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   In the event the use of any part of a cable system or OVS is
discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of 12 months, or in the
event such system or facilities have been installed in any public rights-of-way
without complying with the requirements of this subchapter or a franchise
agreement, or the franchise has been terminated, canceled, or expired, the
franchisee, within 30 days after written notice by the city, shall commence
removal from the public rights-of- way of all such facilities as the city may
require.
   (B)   The city may extend the time for the removal of franchisee's equipment
and facilities for a period not to exceed 180 days, and thereafter such
equipment and facilities may be deemed abandoned.
   (C)   In the event of such removal or abandonment, the franchisee shall
restore the area to at least as good a condition as prior to such removal or
abandonment.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
§ 112.52 MUNICIPAL CABLE SYSTEM OWNERSHIP AND ACQUISITION.
   (A)   If a renewal of a franchise is denied and the city acquires ownership
of a cable system or requires a transfer of ownership of the cable system or
OVS to another person, any such acquisition or transfer shall be:
      (1)   At fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system
valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise, to the
extent not inconsistent with federal law. Factors to be considered in
determining the fair market value include, but are not limited to, system cash
flow, existing and potential good will, and existing arrangements with
programmers and subscribers; or
      (2)   At a price determined in accordance with the franchise agreement if
such franchise agreement contains provisions applicable to such an acquisition
or transfer.
   (B)   If a franchise is revoked for cause and the city acquires ownership of
the cable system or OVS or requires a transfer of ownership to another person,
any such acquisition or transfer shall be:
      (1)   At an equitable price. To the extent not inconsistent with federal
law, factors to be considered in determining equitable price include, but are
not limited to, harm to the community resulting from the franchisee's breach of
the franchise; or
      (2)   In the case of any franchise existing on the effective date of this
subchapter, at a price determined in accordance with the franchise agreement if
such franchise agreement contains provisions applicable to such an acquisition
or transfer.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the price of the cable system
(whether fair market value or equitable price) from being affected by related
matters subject to local control.
(Ord. 1406, passed 5-15-02)
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
§ 112.55 TITLE OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter shall be cited as the "City Solid Waste Franchise
Subchapter."
(Ord. 975, passed 11-6-91)
§ 112.56 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning, provided,
however, that excluded from the definitions contained herein are UNACCEPTABLE
WASTE such as white goods and hazardous or toxic materials as defined in the
Solid Waste Disposal Agreement which is more particularly described in § 94.22.
   COMMERCIAL TRASH. Every waste accumulation of dust, paper, paper cartons,
cardboard cartons, excelsior, rags or other accumulations which are usually
attendant to the operations of a business commercial establishment.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS. All waste, garbage, refuse, and debris
resulting from the construction or demolition of buildings, and which includes
such materials as sand, stone, brick, wood, concrete, or plaster block, paving,
roofing, pipe shingles, lawn renovating debris, sod, dead sod, and tree stumps.
   CUSTOMER. Any person, firm, corporation, association, or other entity which
contracts with a hauler for the collection and disposal of solid waste from any
real property located within the city.
   FRANCHISE AUTHORITY. The City of Pembroke Pines, Florida, a municipal
corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Florida.
   FRANCHISE FEE. The fee charged by the franchise authority to haulers
operating within the city for the privilege of operating and conducting
business in the city.
   GARBAGE. Every waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter which
attends the  preparation, use, handling or storage of meats, fish, fowl,
fruits, vegetables or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay,
putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gasses or odors, or
which during or after decay may serve as breeding or feeding material for
flies, insects, or animals.
   HAULERS. Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity which is engaged in
the business of collecting and/or disposing of solid waste.
   RESIDENTIAL TRASH. Every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags,
bottles, cans or other material of any kind which is usually attendant to
housekeeping.
   SOLID WASTE. All waste accumulations consisting of garbage, residential/
household trash, commercial/business trash and construction and demolition
debris.
(Ord. 975, passed 11-6-91)
§ 112.57 FRANCHISE REQUIRED TO OPERATE; RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATING IN THE CITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to commence or engage in the business of
collecting and disposing of solid waste originating in the city without a
franchise issued by the franchising authority in accordance with the provisions
of this subchapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any hauler operating in the city to dispose
of solid waste collected in the city at any location other than to the Resource
Recovery System transfer station or facilities designated in the plan of
operation under the Solid Waste Disposal Agreement, as defined in § 94.22, the
City's Flow Control Ordinance.
   (C)   All haulers operating in the city on the effective date of this
subchapter shall be permitted to continue to operate in the city, provided the
hauler pays the franchise fee as required by this subchapter, delivers to the
city the necessary customer account information (more particularly described in
§
112.58) and complies with the City's Flow Control Ordinance (§ 94.22).
   (D)   The franchise authority may award a franchise to any hauler, whether
operating under an existing franchise or not, which complies with the terms and
conditions of this subchapter, provided, however, any provision to the contrary
notwithstanding, nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to require the
grant of a franchise to any particular hauler or to prohibit the franchise
authority from restricting the number of grantees. The franchise authority has
by virtue of Resolution 1210, as amended form time to time, has heretofore
determined that such a restriction is in the public interest.
(Ord. 975, passed 11-6-91) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.58 FRANCHISE APPLICATION AND FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   On and after the date of this subchapter all haulers operating in the
city shall pay the following franchise fee to city for the privilege of
conducting and operating solid waste collection and disposal services on the
public streets, roads, alleys, and other thoroughfares of the city. This fee
shall be based on the below stated percentage of the hauler's annual gross
receipts for all customers located within the city, as reflected in the
hauler’s financial books and records, and in the agreements between the hauler
and all of its customers in the city. This fee shall be paid to the city in
monthly installments, by the 15th day of the month.
 
Type of Hauling                    Percentage
Commercial trash                   20
Residential trash                  20
Construction and demolition debris 20
 
   (B)   Annually on the 30th business day of the calendar year each hauler
operating in the city shall file with the City Manager, or his designee, an
application, in the form provided by the city, which shall set forth all of the
hauler’s gross receipts for the previous year for collection and disposal of
solid waste originating in the city, and permits the city to inspect and audit
the financial books and records of the hauler to ensure proper payment of the
franchise fee amount to the city. Any shortfall or overage discovered by the
city during any inspection of the hauler’s records shall be paid by the party
owing same within 30 days of written notice from the city.
(Ord. 975, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 1394, passed 1-16-02; Am. Ord. 1749, passed
3-6-13) Penalty, see §
112.99
PRIVATE COLLECTION SERVICES FOR RECOVERED MATERIALS AT COMMERCIAL
ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 112.60 INTENT.
   It is the intent of the city and the purpose of this subsection to promote
the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens and residents of
the city by authorizing a registration program within the city for the
collection of recovered materials.
(Ord. 1400, passed 3-20-02)
§ 112.61 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CERTIFIED RECOVERED MATERIALS DEALER.  A dealer certified pursuant to F.S. §
403.7046, as may be amended from time to time.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS. A property or properties zoned or used for
commercial or industrial uses, or used by an entity exempt from  taxation
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and excludes
property or properties zoned or used for single-family residential or
multifamily residential uses.
   FISCAL YEAR. October 1 through September 30.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm or association, partnership, joint venture or other entity of
any kind, type, or description engaging in the conduct or activity with which
this subchapter is concerned.
   RECOVERED MATERIALS. Metal, paper, glass, plastic, textile, or rubber
materials that have known recycling potential, can be feasibly recycled and
have been diverted and source separated or have been removed from the solid
waste stream for sale, use or reuse as raw materials, whether or not the
materials require subsequent processing or separation from each other, but does
not include materials destined for any use that constitutes disposal. Recovered
materials as described above are not solid waste.
   REGISTRANT. A certified recovered materials dealer who has registered with
the city in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter.
   SOURCE-SEPARATED. The recovered materials that are separated from solid
waste where the recovered materials and solid waste are generated. This term
does not require that various types of recovered materials be separated from
each other and recognizes de minimis solid waste, in accordance with industry
standards and practices, may be included in recovered materials. Materials  are
not considered source separated when two or more types of recovered materials
are deposited in combination with each other in a commercial collection
container located where the materials are generated, and such materials contain
more than 10% solid waste by volume or weight. For purposes of this subsection
the term "various types of recovered materials" means metals, paper, glass,
plastic, textiles, and rubber.
(Ord. 1400, passed 3-20-02; Am. Ord. 1437, passed 3-5-03)
§ 112.62 REGISTRATION AND APPLICATION.
   (A)   Registration and Application. Any person who engages in the
purchasing, transporting and processing of recovered materials at commercial
establishments shall register with the city in accordance with the requirements
of this section. The registrant shall submit an original and one copy of all
required information to the Local Business Tax Receipt Division of the City
Clerk's Office. The registration required by this section shall be in addition
to and not satisfied by any local business tax receipt which may be required.
Applications for registration required by this section shall be made to the
city upon such form and in such manner as prescribed by the city. The
application shall be in such form to elicit the following information and such
other information as may be required from time to time:
      (1)   To be acceptable for filing, an application for registration shall
be accompanied by a registration fee in the following amount, as appropriate:
         (a)   A fee of $200 for initial registration application or re-
application;
         (b)   A fee of $200 for annual renewal of registration; or
         (c)   A fee of $100 for transfer of registration.
      (2)   Name and address of the dealer/ registrant, including the
identification of the owner or operator for the dealer; if the applicant is a
business entity, its general partner or limited partners, its corporate
officers and directors. Any applicant that operates under a fictitious name
shall submit information that such fictitious name is registered in the State
of Florida and held by the applicant;
      (3)   Its permanent place of business, and mailing address, if different;
      (4)   A copy of the registrant's recovered materials certification
pursuant to F.S. § 403.7046; and
      (5)   Certification that the recovered materials will be processed at a
recovered materials processing facility satisfying the requirements of F.S. §
403.7046, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   Signatures; submission.
      (1)   The registration and application for hauling recovered materials
shall be signed by the individual submitting the application or, in the case of
a corporation, by a corporate officer thereof or, in the case of a partnership
or other association, by a member of the partnership or association. Provided,
however, that for a publicly held corporation which has 25 or more
shareholders, the signatures of the local managing officer shall be sufficient.
The completed registration shall be submitted to the Local Business Tax Receipt
Division of the City Clerk's Office.
      (2)   An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer
certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application,
acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying
that the application meets all federal, state, and local law requirements.
   (C)   Once it has been determined by the Local Business Tax Receipt Division
of the City Clerk's Office, or his or her designee, that the registration
application is complete, upon approval of the registration, registrants shall
be entitled to operate for a period of up to one year from the date of
issuance; provided, however, the registration shall be for the period of
October 1 through September 30 of each fiscal year.
   (D)   In addition to the above, the registrant shall:
      (1)   Simultaneously provide to the city a copy of the recovered
materials reporting forms, as submitted to the State Department of
Environmental Protection. The reporting format and reporting frequency shall be
established by the city pursuant to § 403.7046, Florida Statutes, which shall,
at a minimum, include requiring the dealer to identify the types and
approximate amount of recovered materials collected, recycled or reused during
the reporting period, the approximate percentage of recovered materials reused,
stored, or delivered to a recovered materials processing facility or disposed
of in a solid waste disposal facility; and the locations where any recovered
materials were disposed of as solid waste. Information reported under this
subsection which, if disclosed, would reveal a trade secret, as defined in §
      (2)   Source-separate all recovered material, provided, however, that
containers of recovered materials which contain more than 10% solid waste shall
not be deemed to be source separated.
   (E)   Additional regulations.
      (1)   Vehicles used to transport recovered materials shall meet all
applicable regulations of the State Department of Transportation and shall be
capable of preventing spillage or accidental release of recovered materials
during transport.
      (2)   The registrant shall provide service to any commercial property
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
      (3)   The registrant shall comply with all applicable federal, state and
local laws, regulations and ordinances.
      (4)   The registrant shall conduct all collection handling and processing
of recovered materials in accordance with the requirements of § 403.0746,
Florida Statutes, this section and the certification issued pursuant to Rule
62-722, State Administrative Code, as amended from time to time.
      (5)   In no event shall the registrant perform commercial solid waste
services under the guise of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing
of recovered materials.
      (6)   The registrant shall not deliver recovered materials to a facility
which is permitted as a solid waste management facility unless the registrant
has given prior notification to the Local Business Tax Receipt Division of the
City Clerk's Office, and the registrant has received authorization to utilize
such facility.
      (7)   The registrant shall provide a copy of its certification and
registration to any commercial generator of recovered materials, the
registrant's agents and contractors or to customers who request the proof of
registration.
   (F)   If any of the registration information submitted by the registrant
changes during the term of the registration, the registrant shall report those
changes to the city within 30 calendar days of the change.
   (G)   The registrant shall pay the city the required annual renewal of the
registration fee between September 1 and October 1 of each fiscal year.
   (H)   No registration issued pursuant to this section may be assigned or
transferred without the prior written approval of the city.
(Ord. 1400, passed 3-20-02; Am. Ord. 1437, passed 3-5-03; Am. Ord. 1576, passed
4-18-07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.63 INSPECTION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   The city shall have the right, at all times upon reasonable notice, to
inspect the relevant books and records of the registrant. The inspection shall
be for the purpose of verifying that the registrant is in compliance with the
requirements of this subchapter. The books and records of a holder of a
franchise shall be maintained at a location within the county, or produced at
such location upon request of the city.
(Ord. 1400, passed 3-20-02)
§ 112.64 EXEMPTIONS.
   The registration requirements required of this subchapter shall not be
required by persons exempt pursuant to Rule Chapter 62-722, State
Administrative Code, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 1400, passed 3-20-02)
§ 112.65 IMMEDIATE REGISTRATION REQUIRED; GRACE PERIOD.
   Immediately upon passage and adoption, and approved registration as
described herein must be held by all haulers who provide collection services
for recovered materials within the city. A grace period of 30 calender days
shall be allowed prior to the enforcement of these regulations in order to
provide adequate notice to all haulers.
(Ord. 1400, passed 3-20-02)
§ 112.66 VIOLATIONS; CIVIL PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation. Each violation of this subchapter is deemed a separate and
distinct infraction of this code; however, for the first violation of operating
without a registration, the hauler or dealer shall be given a written warning
and allowed ten calendar days to apply for and receive the required
registration.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter
shall be punished as provided herein:
      (1)   Each violation of this subchapter shall be punishable by a minimum
civil penalty of $250. A maximum civil penalty of $500 may be assessed plus the
costs associated with investigation and prosecution, together with any
equitable remedies deemed reasonable and proper by the court.
      (2)   The occasion of three violations by a hauler of the terms and
conditions of this section in any given calendar year shall be cause for
revocation of the registration. A registration shall be revoked for a violation
as and shall be immediately and automatically declared null and void, and, upon
such declaration, the hauler issued the registration shall immediately cease
all operations and shall be considered to have forfeited such registration and
the rights acquired thereunder.
Should a registration be so revoked, the city shall provide the hauler with
notice of such revocation and the reasons therefore. Such notice shall be sent
certified mail, return recent requested. Upon receipt of such notice, the
hauler may appeal such revocation to the city commission, and the appeal and
hearing thereon shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures:
         (a)   Should a hauler seek appeal from the revocation of the
registration, the applicant shall furnish notice of such request for appeal to
the city clerk no later than 20 calendar days after the date of receipt of the
certified letter advising the applicant of revocation of the registration.
         (b)   Upon receipt of a request for appeal, the city clerk shall
thereupon fix the date and time at which the City Commission shall hear the
appeal, such hearing to be held not less than 10 nor more than 60 calendar days
subsequent to the date upon which such request for appeal was filed with the
City Clerk. Upon setting the matter for hearing, the City Clerk shall notify
the applicant of the date and time of the hearing. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the City Commission shall either sustain the decision of the City
Manager or direct the City Manager to issue a registration.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from enforcing this
subchapter by any other means available.
(Ord. 1400, passed 3-20-02)
AMBULANCE SERVICES
§ 112.70 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of the city and the purpose of this subchapter to promote
the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the grant of one
or more franchises for the operation of ambulances within the city; to provide
for the regulation, to the extent permitted by law, of each private ambulance
service provider operating in the city in the public interest, to provide for
the payment of fees and other valuable consideration by a franchisee to the
city for the use of the streets by its ambulances; and to promote the safe and
efficient use of the streets. Under no circumstances, should the intent and
purpose of this subchapter be construed to regulate the standards and/or
requirements for the provision of ambulance services or emergency medical
services.
(Ord. 1160, passed 5-15-96; Am. Ord. 1181, passed 9-4-96)
§ 112.71 GRANT OF AUTHORITY; FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The city may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this
subchapter and Chapter 3 ½ of the Broward County Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the city's fire and rescue department, no person may
operate private ambulances on public streets in the city without a franchise
granted by the city unless otherwise authorized by law.
(Ord. 1160, passed 5-15-96)
§ 112.72 FRANCHISE CHARACTERISTICS.
   A franchise authorizes the use of city streets for the operation of private
ambulance services within the city. A franchise is non-exclusive, and will not
expressly or implicitly preclude the issuance of other franchises within the
city, or affect the city's right to authorize use of city streets by the city
or other persons to operate private ambulance services or for other purposes it
deems appropriate. A franchise shall be a privilege which is in the public
trust and is personal to the original franchisee. No transfer of a franchise
shall occur without the prior consent of the city and unless application is
made by the franchisee.
(Ord. 1160, passed 5-15-96; Am. Ord. 1181, passed 9-4-96)
§ 112.73 FRANCHISEE SUBJECT TO OTHER LAWS; POLICE POWER.
   A franchisee shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all
applicable federal, state, county and city laws. A franchisee shall at all
times be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the city. The
failure of the city, upon one or more occasions, to exercise a right or to
require compliance or performance under this subchapter shall not be deemed to
constitute a waiver of such right or a waiver of compliance or performance.
(Ord. 1160, passed 5-15-96)
§ 112.74 APPLICATION FOR GRANT, RENEWAL OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   A written application shall be filed with the city for:
      (1)   Grant of a new franchise;
      (2)   Renewal of a franchise;
      (3)   A transfer of a franchise; or
      (4)   Any other relief from the city pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application
shall be submitted together with five copies, be accompanied by the required
application filing fee as set forth in §
112.74(G) hereof, conform to any applicable request for proposals, and contain
all required information. All applications shall include the names and
addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect
to the application.
   (C)   All applications accepted for filing shall be made available by the
city for public inspection.
   (D)   An application for the grant, renewal or transfer of a franchise shall
contain, at minimum, the following information, if applicable:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant and identification of the
ownership and control of the applicant, including: the names and addresses of
all persons with 10% or more ownership interest in the applicant, including the
names and addresses of parents or subsidiaries holding such ownership interests
directly or indirectly; the persons who control the applicant; all officers and
directors of the applicant; and any other ambulance services ownership interest
of each named person;
      (2)   Identification of the area of the city to be served if less than
the entire city boundaries;
      (3)   For informational purposes, the proposed rate structure;
      (4)   Any other information as may be reasonably necessary and/or
relevant to the city's consideration of the application; and
      (5)   An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer
certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application,
acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying
that the application meets all federal, state and local law requirements.
   (E)   An application for renewal of a franchise shall comply with the
requirements of §
112.74 hereof.
   (F)   An application for approval of a transfer of a franchise shall comply
with the requirements of §
112.74 hereof.
   (G)   To be acceptable for filing, an application shall be accompanied by a
filing fee in the following amount, as appropriate:
      (1)   For a new or initial franchise:   $500
      (2)   For renewal of a franchise:   $500
      (3)   For a transfer of a franchise (other than a pro forma transfer):
   $500
      (4)   For a pro forma transfer of a franchise:   $ 100
      (5)   For any other relief:   $ 100
   The purpose of the filing fee is to defray a portion of the city's cost in
processing an application. The filing fee is therefore intended to be a charge
incidental to the awarding or enforcing of a franchise.
(Ord. 1160, passed 5-15-96; Am. Ord. 1181, passed 9-4-96; Am. Ord. 1576, passed
4-18-07)
§ 112.75 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   The city shall grant a franchise on an annual basis to ambulance
service providers, which have paid the application fee and have presented the
city with proof of licensure from the state and Broward County, to serve all or
a specified area of the city.
   (B)   In evaluating an application for a franchise, the city shall consider,
among other things, the applicant's legal qualifications to operate the
proposed ambulance service in particular whether the applicant is authorized
pursuant to Chapter 3 ½ of the Broward County Code of Ordinances to operate
within the city emergency call zone.
(Ord. 1160, passed 5-15-96; Am. Ord. 1181, passed 9-4-96)
§ 112.76 INDEMNIFICATION.
   A franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless,
and defend the city, its officials, boards, commissions, commissioners, agents,
and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action,
proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses
arising out of the maintenance or operation of its ambulance service, the
conduct of franchisee's business in the city, or in any way arising out of the
franchisee's enjoyment or exercise of a franchise granted hereunder, regardless
of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this subchapter, provided, however, that franchisee's obligation
hereunder shall not extend to any claims caused by the misconduct or sole gross
negligence of the city, its officials, boards, commissioners, agents or
employees. This provision includes, but is not limited to, the city's
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit
or proceedings. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from
participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel and obtaining
indemnification of the reasonable costs associated therewith.
(Ord. 1160, passed 5-15-96; Am. Ord. 1181, passed 9-4-96)
§ 112.77 FRANCHISE FEE.
   (A)   A franchisee, as compensation for the privilege granted under a
franchise for the use of the city's streets to operate a private ambulance
service in the city, shall pay to the city a franchise fee in an amount of $10
per trip, either originating or terminating in the city.
   (B)   A franchisee shall pay the franchise fee due to the city on a
quarterly basis. Payment for each quarter shall be made to the city not later
than 30 calendar days after the end of each calendar quarter.
   (C)   The franchise fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any other tax,
fee or assessment.
   (D)   In the event that a franchise fee payment is not received by the city
on or before the due date set forth in subsection (B) above, or is underpaid,
the franchisee will be charged interest from the due date of 1 ½ % per month or
part thereof of the amount of the unpaid or underpaid franchise fee payment,
includes previous interest charges or the maximum amount allowed under Florida
law, whichever is greater.
(Ord. 1160, passed 5-15-96)
§ 112.78 USE OF PUBLIC STREETS.
   Use of public streets by franchisee shall be done in such manner as to give
the least inconvenience to the inhabitants of the city.
(Ord. 1160, passed 5-15-96)
§ 112.79 REVOCATION OF A FRANCHISE.
   (A)   A franchise may be revoked by the City Commission for a franchisee's
failure to pay the applicable application and/or franchise fees. To invoke the
provisions of this subsection (A), the city shall give the franchisee written
notice, by certified mail at the last known address, that franchise is in
material violation of this subchapter and describing the nature of the alleged
violation or breach. If within 30 calendar days following receipt of such
written notice from the city to the franchisee, the franchisee has not cured
such violation or breach, or has not commenced corrective action and such
corrective action is not being actively and expeditiously pursued, the city may
give written notice to the franchisee of its intent to revoke the franchise,
stating its reasons.
   (B)   Prior to revoking a franchise under subsection (A) hereof, the City
Commission shall hold a public hearing, upon 30 calendar days notice, at which
time the franchisee and the public shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
Following the public hearing the City Commission may determine whether to
revoke the franchise based on the evidence presented at the hearing, and other
evidence of record. If the City Commission determines to revoke a franchise, it
shall issue a written decision setting forth the reasons for its decision. A
copy of such decision shall be transmitted to the franchisee.
(Ord. 1160, passed 5-15-96; Am. Ord. 1181, passed 9-4-96)
§ 112.80 APPLICABILITY AND RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be applicable to all ambulance service
franchises granted or renewed after the date of adoption of this subchapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to limit in any way the
ability or authority of the city to acquire, and/or operate ambulance services
within the city.
(Ord. 1160, passed 5-15-96)
FRANCHISE SERVICE FEE INCREASES
§ 112.90 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COST OF LIVING INCREASE. The cost of living increase-all cities average, for
utilities only, as published by the Department of Labor. Should the index not
be available, the substituted index provided by the federal government shall be
utilized for the purpose of this subchapter.
(Ord. 661, passed 6-15-83)
§ 112.91 BASIS FOR INCREASE IN RATES.
   (A)   In considering any application to change rates by any grantees of
current and future franchise service ordinances within the city for franchise
activities not regulated by the Public Service Commission, the franchising
authority may consider the following in determining the proper basis for the
increases in rates:
      (1)   Cost of living increases as evidenced by the cost of living index
for utilities published by the United States Department of Labor, or if the
Department ceases to publish an index, by any successor regularly accepted and
established federal index.
      (2)   The return on equity capital authorized by regulatory bodies for
regulated utilities; the price- earnings ratios of regulated utilities; the
grantee's cost of service, including any cost efficiencies by reason of economy
of scale; and the predominant rates charged in other jurisdictions within
grantee's Dade/Broward system.
   (B)   In the event the cost of living increase index is not available at the
time that a requested rate increase is made, the most recently available figure
shall be utilized for the purpose of establishing the revised rate.
(Ord. 661, passed 6-15-83; Am. Ord. 678, passed 1-4-83)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Any hauler who violates any provision of §§
112.55 through 112.58 shall be punishable as provided for in §
10.99. Additionally violators will be responsible for the city's attorney's
fees, if any, which are imposed.
(Ord. 975, passed 11-6-91)
CHAPTER 113: COMMERCIAL AND CHARITABLE SOLICITATION
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Charitable solicitation requirements
   
113.03   Solicitor or canvasser to have local business tax receipt, permit
   
113.04   Local business tax receipt, permit application
   
113.05   Investigation of applicant
   
113.06   Exhibition of local business tax receipt upon request
   
113.07   Time, place and manner regulations for solicitation
   
113.08   Enforcement
   
113.09   Right-of-way solicitors and canvassers
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANVASSER or SOLICITOR. Any individual, whether resident of the city or not,
traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of
conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street,
taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise,
and personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for
services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not the
individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of the
sale, or whether he is collecting advance payments on the sales or not.
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR shall include any person, who, for himself or for
another person, firm, or corporation, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any
building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house,
apartment, shop, or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of
exhibiting and taking orders for future delivery. CANVASSER or SOLICITOR shall
not include representatives of established and recognized newspapers making
regular house to house deliveries. For purposes of this section, NEWSPAPERS
shall include newspapers, community newspapers, shoppers newsletters and
magazines.
('69 Code, § 12-111)
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. A group which is or holds itself out to be
benevolent, educational, voluntary health, philanthropic, humane, patriotic,
religious, or eleemosynary organization, or any person who solicits or obtains
contributions solicited from the public for charitable purposes. CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATION shall not be deemed  to include a duly constituted religious
organization or any group affiliated with and forming an integral part of that
organization.
('69 Code, § 12-112) (Ord. 254, passed 4-19-71; Am. Ord. 1729, passed 8-1-12)
§ 113.02 CHARITABLE SOLICITATION REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to solicit for
charitable organizations as hereinabove defined unless the charitable
organization is located within the corporate limits of the city, or, unless the
organization is registered and has a permit from the Department of State under
the provisions of F.S. Chapter 496.
('69 Code, § 12-113) (Ord. 254, passed 4-19-71) Penalty, see §
10.99
Editor's note:
   F.S. Chapter 496 will be repealed effective October 1, 1994
§ 113.03 SOLICITOR OR CANVASSER TO HAVE LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT, PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser, as defined in this
chapter, to engage in that business within the corporate limits of the city
without first obtaining a permit and local business tax receipt therefor in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances.
('69 Code, § 12-114) (Ord. 254, passed 4-19-71; Am. Ord. 1304, passed 5-19-99;
Am. Ord. 1465, passed 10-15-03; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.04 LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT, PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applicants for a permit and local business tax receipt under this
chapter as a canvasser or solicitor must file with the City Clerk, a sworn
application in writing, and in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the City
Clerk, which shall give the following information:
      (1)   Name and description of the applicant.
      (2)   Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant;
address of applicant for past five years.
      (3)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold.
      (4)   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
      (5)   A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately
prior to the date of filing of the application, which shall be at least two
inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a
clear and distinguishing manner, and fingerprints of the applicant.
   (B)   At the time of filing the application, a fee of $20 shall be paid to
the City Clerk to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein.
This section shall not apply to solicitors for charitable organizations nor
shall any fee be charged to those solicitors.
('69 Code, § 12-115) (Ord. 254, passed 4-19-71; Am. Ord. 929, passed 8-1-90;
Am. Ord. 1032, passed 5-19-93; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 113.05 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the application provided for in §
113.04, the City Clerk shall submit the necessary data to the Florida
Department of Law Enforcement to obtain a criminal background report.
   (B)   If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the City Clerk shall
endorse on the application his disapproval and his reasons therefor, and shall
notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit and
local business tax receipt will be issued.
   (C)   Should the City Clerk find that the character of the applicant is
satisfactory, he or she shall notify the applicant that a permit for solicitor
or canvasser shall be issued upon payment of the prescribed applicable local
business tax receipt fees.
('69 Code, § 12-116) (Ord. 254, passed 4-19-71; Am. Ord. 929, passed 8-1-90;
Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 113.06 EXHIBITION OF LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT UPON REQUEST.
   Solicitors and canvassers are required to exhibit their local business tax
receipts at the request of any citizen.
('69 Code, § 12-118) (Ord. 254, passed 4-19-71; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.07 TIME, PLACE AND MANNER REGULATIONS FOR SOLICITATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to canvass or solicit for commercial or
charitable organizations between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of the
following forenoon within the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   No person shall solicit or canvass at any location where there is a
conspicuous sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents,"
"No Advertisements," "No Solicitation," or any other similar notice except
where express authorization is provided. However, it shall not be unlawful if
the recipient is willing to receive the same. The term "No Solicitation" shall
be deemed to include and be synonymous with "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or
Agents" and "No Advertisements" and are included in the definitional
terminology hereof. Any person, business, group, organization or entity that
distributes handbills in conjunction with such solicitation activities
undertaken hereunder shall comply with all other pertinent provisions of the
City Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to the provisions of §
94.49 regulating the distribution of handbills.
('69 Code, § 12-117) (Ord. 254, passed 4-19-71; Am. Ord. 1176, passed 9-4-96;
Am. Ord. 1304, passed 5-19-99; Am. Ord. 1465, passed 10-15-03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any person
seen soliciting or canvassing and who is not known by the officer to be duly
licensed, to produce his solicitor's or canvasser's local business tax receipt,
and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to in
violation thereof.
('69 Code, § 12-119) (Ord. 254, passed 4-19-71; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 113.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY CANVASSER OR SOLICITOR. Any person who sells or offers for
sale any thing or service of any kind, or who seeks any donation of any kind,
or who personally hands to or seeks to transmit by hand or receive by hand any
thing or service of any kind, whether or not payment in exchange is reguired or
requested, to any person who operates or occupies a motor vehicle of any kind,
which vehicle is engaged in travel on or within any portion of any of the
streets or roadways in the city, whether or not such vehicle is temporarily
stopped in the travel lanes of the road. The term shall not apply to any person
who merely holds or displays a sign lawfully permitted to be displayed by a
person as long as there is no entry by such person or sign into any portion of
the roadway or its median. Further, this term shall not apply to official
citations or notices provided pursuant to governmental authority.
   (B)   Prohibition of right-of-way canvassers and solicitors .
      (1)   Findings; purpose; intent.
         (a)   The City Commission of the City of Pembroke Pines desires to
adopt an ordinance restricting right-of-way canvassers and solicitors to
certain streets and roadways located in the city because such canvassers and
solicitors pose a danger to themselves and the public at large by interfering
with the safe movement of normal vehicular traffic; and
         (b)   According to the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor
Vehicles 2007 Florida Traffic Crash Statistics Report, 530 pedestrians were
killed on Florida roadways in 2007; 65 of those pedestrians were killed on
roadways in Broward County; and
         (c)   As reported in the USDOT National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration's June 2008 National Pedestrian Crash Report, the City of
Pembroke Pines experienced two pedestrian crash deaths in 2006 alone;
         (d)   Based upon statistics collected by the Surface Transportation
Policy Project, the Miami-Fort Lauderdale area is one of the most dangerous
areas in the United States for pedestrians; and
         (e)   Numerous types of right-of-way canvassers and solicitors may
seek to operate within the City of Pembroke Pines, including, but not limited
to, children, adolescents and adults who seek to collect money for school and
community activities; vendors who sell flowers, newspapers and other products;
and people who seek donations or distribute written information; and
         (f)   Right-of-way canvassers and solicitors approach motorists and
passengers in motor vehicles engaged in travel on roads, and are particularly
susceptible and vulnerable to serious injury, or death due to the speed and
number of motorists who operate vehicles on busy roads within the city; and
         (g)   Roads are primarily designed for vehicular traffic and are not
suited to safely accommodate right-of way canvassers and solicitors; and
         (h)   According to a local newspaper article published in 2003, 29
right-of-way canvassers/solicitors have been seriously injured and at least 14
more have been killed by motor vehicles during a 15-year period; many of those
deaths occurred while the canvasser/solicitor was sitting or standing in a
median or on the side of the street (including a Sun-Sentinel newspaper vendor
who was struck by a car while carrying papers on U.S. 1 and Broward Boulevard
in Fort Lauderdale on July 30, 2000; a Miami Herald newspaper vendor who was
standing on the median at Federal Highway and Stirling Road on May 23. 2002;
and a Miami Herald newspaper vendor who was selling papers on the side of the
street at Stirling Road and U.S. 441 on August 7, 2002); and
         (i)   The presence of right-of-way canvassers and solicitors
interferes with the safe movement of normal vehicular traffic; and
         (j)   The road network in the city is substantially burdened by a high
volume of traffic, and road design frequently includes complex vehicle turn
movements that demand a driver's strict attention; and
         (k)   It is the intention of the City Commission to use the least
restrictive means to advance the significant governmental interests of traffic
safety and public safety and, consequently, the city staff analyzed each of the
major roads within the city and determined that the roads listed in division
(C) below present an increased and significant danger for use by distracted
drivers, pedestrians and right-of-way canvassers and solicitors and pose the
greatest threat to traffic and public safety in reference to activities and use
by right-of-way canvassers and solicitors, and therefore the City Commission
has determined that such activities and use by right-of way vendors and
solicitors shall be prohibited on the roads listed in division (C) below; and
         (l)   It is the finding of the City Commission that many other
alternative channels of communication (other than right-of-way canvassing and
solicitation on the prohibited roadways) exist for persons who seek to exercise
their First Amendment freedoms, such as, but by no means limited to,
solicitation of funds or distribution of literature through the mail or at
alternate locations (such as houses of worship, shopping areas and special
events); the sale and/or distribution of newspapers through home or office
delivery, vending machines and retail stores; and the sale of goods and
services at retail stores, through the internet and from vending machines; and
         (m)   The City Commission desires to preserve and protect the personal
safety and quality of life of its residents and of those who use streets within
the city, both pedestrians and motorists alike; and
         (n)   The City Commission has reviewed the proposed regulations
provided by this section and finds that such regulations accomplish the
purposes intended while utilizing the least restrictive means; and
         (o)   The City Commission finds that it is in the best interests of
the residents of the city to adopt this section.
   (C)   Prohibited roadways. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a
right-of-way canvasser or solicitor on Pines Boulevard, Pembroke Road,
University Drive, Sheridan Street, Dykes Road and Flamingo Road or within 200
feet from the lateral curb or boundary line of any intersection located on the
roadways identified in this division.
   (D)   F.S. Chapter 316. The enforcement of this section shall not, in any
way, preclude the enforcement of F.S. § 316.130(5), as applicable.
   (E)   Enforcement and penalties.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require
any person seen soliciting or canvassing and who is not known by the officer to
be duly permitted, to produce his solicitor's or canvasser's permit, and to
enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found in violation
thereof.
      (2)   Except for violations of §
94.49 of the City Code, any person who violates any terms or provisions of this
section shall be prosecuted before a court of competent jurisdiction and, upon
conviction of such violation before the judge of the county court, shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed by the county judge. Each day of violation
of any term or provision of this article shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
      (3)   Any person who violates §
94.49 of the City Code shall be subject to the code enforcement provisions of
Chapter 32 of the City Code, and the penalties set forth in §
32.066 of the City Code.
(Ord. 1734, passed 9-5-12)
CHAPTER 114: FOOD SALES
Section
Hygiene
   
114.01   Minimum standards of hygiene for food establishments; county ordinance
to govern
Unfair Pricing Practices
   
114.25   Declaration of legislative findings and intent
   
114.26   Definitions
   
114.27   Relabeling and remarking
   
114.28   Marking and labeling previously unmarked, unlabeled merchandise
   
114.29   Remarking after sale at reduced prices
   
114.30   Enforcement
Statutory reference:
   Florida Food Act, see F.S. Ch. 500
HYGIENE
§ 114.01 MINIMUM STANDARDS OF HYGIENE FOR FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS; COUNTY ORDINANCE
TO GOVERN.
   Broward County Ordinance No. 75-43, establishing standards of hygiene for
food establishments, shall be in full force and effect within the city.
('69 Code, § 8A-11) (Ord. 419, passed 4-5-76)
UNFAIR PRICING PRACTICES
§ 114.25 DECLARATION OF LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   The City Commission finds and determines that the present inflationary
spiral has had and is having a deleterious effect on the consumers of food in
the city. Specifically, the City Commission is cognizant of the widespread
emotional distress caused by the practice of repricing and remarking certain
commodities offered to the public for retail sale merely because the retailer
has become aware of a new and higher wholesale price, the cost of which is not
related to the cost of existing goods. The adverse impact on consumers appears
to be the greatest in the area of retail sale of foods.
   (B)   It is the desire of the City Commission to reduce the psychological
harm to consumers who are the victims of arbitrary repricing where it is
possible to do so and thereby to contribute to the stabilization of food
prices. The City Commission also finds that preventing this consumer abuse will
have the effect of enhancing the good will and public image of the city retail
food merchant. Further, by preventing unfair repricing practices, consumers
will also be informed as to the relative age of food products offered for sale
and thereby have the opportunity to make an intelligent choice.
   (C)   The City Commission realizes that this subchapter will not cure the
national inflation, but regards its requirements as a valuable method of
lessening the inflation's impact on the people of the city.
('69 Code, § 8A-32) (Ord. 395, passed 3-17-75)
§ 114.26 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COST OF SELLING. Any cost of doing business applicable to marked or labeled
merchandise other than the cost of the same or similar merchandise.
   LABEL or MARK. Any visible sign on or in close proximity to the merchandise,
that indicates the price of merchandise offered for public retail sale in the
city, including samples of merchandise, pictures,  or drawings.
   LIMITED DURATIONAL SALE. Those special and limited time offerings of
merchandise at prices which are lower than those offered in the general course
of business. Such a sale shall not exceed 30 days.
   MERCHANDISE. Food or other commodity sold at retail for human or animal
nourishment. MERCHANDISE shall not include any commodity imported into the
state, as long as it remains in its original shipping package or form, is not
sold by the importer, or is not incorporated and commingled with similar
commodities and irrevocably committed to retail sale in the city.
   MERCHANT. Any person who buys and sells merchandise, grows and sells,
manufactures and sells, processes and sells, or any other person who sells
merchandise for profit in the city.
   PREVIOUSLY BEEN OFFERED FOR SALE. Only such merchandise as has actually been
physically available for retail purchase, and not merchandise of the same class
which has not been actually placed on the shelves or otherwise actually been
made available for purchase. Merchandise not offered for sale within a six-
month period shall not be construed to have been PREVIOUSLY OFFERED FOR SALE.
   RETAIL or RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. The direct sale of merchandise to the
ultimate consumer or to the public generally.
   SALE. Includes barter and exchange.
   WHOLESALE. The sale of commodities in bulk to a retailer who, in turn, will
offer the commodities to the ultimate consumer or to the public generally.
('69 Code, § 8A-33) (Ord. 395, passed 3-17-75)
§ 114.27 RELABELING AND REMARKING.
   No merchant shall relabel or remark merchandise, as defined in this
subchapter, that is offered for sale in a retail establishment, to reflect a
price higher than that price at which the merchandise has previously been
offered for sale to the public, where the price change is intended to reflect a
new and higher wholesale price for the same type of merchandise. Reductions in
the price of merchandise may be made without regard to the provisions of this
subchapter.
('69 Code, § 8A-34) (Ord. 395, passed 3-17-75) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.28 MARKING AND LABELING PREVIOUSLY UNMARKED, UNLABELED MERCHANDISE.
   (A)   It is recognized that from time to time it may be necessary for a
merchant to increase the price of new merchandise while older or similar
merchandise remains on the merchant's shelf, displayed and offered for sale at
a marked or labeled price lower than the increased price of the new
merchandise. In such circumstances the merchant may mark or label the new and
previously unmarked and unlabeled merchandise at the increased price and place
such new merchandise on display, provided the merchant notes both the old and
the new price (or prices) legibly and distinctly at a place on or in close
proximity to the shelf on which said merchandise is displayed.
   (B)   No product previously labeled or marked may be remarked in violation
of §
114.27.
('69 Code, § 8A-35) (Ord. 395, passed 3-17-75) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.29 REMARKING AFTER SALE AT REDUCED PRICES.
   It is recognized that from time to time the merchant may offer certain
merchandise for sale at a reduced price for a limited time in a limited
durational sale. After such a sale, the merchant may, by remarking sale
merchandise, return the price of the merchandise to any amount not higher than
that marked thereon immediately prior to the limited durational sale.
('69 Code, § 8A-36) (Ord. 395, passed 3-17-75) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.30 ENFORCEMENT.
   This subchapter shall be enforced by the City Manager or his delegate, who
may be the Code Enforcement Officer. That person is authorized to apply to any
court of competent jurisdiction for, and the court, upon hearing and for good
cause shown may grant, a temporary or permanent injunction restraining any
person from violating any provision of this subchapter, and thereafter enforce
the terms of the injunction.
('69 Code, § 8A-37) (Ord. 395, passed 3-17-75)
CHAPTER 115: LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPTS
Section
General Provisions
   
115.01   Short title
   
115.02   Scope of regulations
   
115.03   Definitions
   
115.04   Responsibility of officers and agents for compliance
Local Business Tax Receipts
   
115.10   Local business tax receipt required; exemptions
   
115.11   Advertising as evidence of conducting business
   
115.12   Separate local business tax receipt for branch establishments
   
115.13   No local business tax receipt required for deliveries only
   
115.14   Special permits for non-profit organizations
   
115.15   Application for local business tax receipt; fee
   
115.16   Processing of local business tax receipt application
   
115.17   Approval of business location required
   
115.18   Local business tax receipt to be issued in real name of applicant
   
115.19   Insignia or decal issued along with local business tax receipt; fee
   
115.20   Denial of local business tax receipt application; appeal
   
115.21   Term of local business tax receipt
   
115.22   Renewal of local business tax receipt
   
115.23   Lost or stolen local business tax receipt; issuance of duplicate local
business tax receipt
   
115.24   Transfer of local business tax receipt; change of location or
ownership
   
115.25   Posting of local business tax receipt or insignia for inspection
   
115.26   Obtaining local business tax receipt by false statements
   
115.27   Local business tax receipt obtained illegally no protection in court
action
   
115.28   Local business tax receipt does not permit illegal activity
   
115.29   Local business tax receipts revocation; guidelines; review criteria;
hearing and appeal procedures
Local Business Tax
   
115.35   Local business tax receipt fee schedule
   
115.36   Business falling under more than one classification; highest fee to be
paid
   
115.37   Tax to be paid annually; when tax for one-half year to be paid
   
115.38   Rebate of tax prohibited; exception
   
115.39   Delinquency of payment; penalty
Administration and Enforcement
   
115.45   Local Business Tax Receipt Inspector; powers and duties
   
115.46   Inspection of businesses, books
   
115.47   Written notice of violations
 
   
115.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to level local business taxes, see F.S. § 205.042
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "General Local Business
Tax Receipt Regulations of the City."
('69 Code, § 11-1) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.02 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way
impair or interfere with other provisions of this code. Where this chapter
imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, or personal property than
is imposed or required by such other provisions of this code, or by law,
contract, or deed, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
('69 Code, § 11-2) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67)
§ 115.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. All kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises,
establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with
all devices, machines, vehicles, and appurtenances used therein, any of which
are conducted for private profit, or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on
any premises in the city, or anywhere else within its jurisdiction.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person who orders or is engaged in the business of accepting
orders or contracts on a cost plus fixed fee, stated sum, percentage basis, or
any combination thereof, or for compensation other than wages for doing work on
or in any building or structure requiring the use of paint, stone, brick,
mortar, cement, wood, structure, steel, iron, sheet iron, metallic piping, tin,
lead, or any other building material or equipment; any paving or curbing on
sidewalks or streets or on public or private property, using asphalt, brick,
stone, cement, wood, or any combination; any excavating for foundations or any
other purpose; constructing sewers, septic tanks, or docks; driving piling or
constructing bridges, seawalls, or bulkheads of any description; or who is
engaged in the business of building, remodeling, repairing, air conditioning or
heating, razing or moving, whether by contract, fixed fee, subcontract,
percentage, or any combination thereof, or for compensation other than wages.
   LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT. A local business tax receipt issued by the city
for the purpose of maintaining and conducting a business, service, or
profession.
   MERCHANDISE or GOODS. Any goods, wares, commodities or services sold,
leased, or exchanged during the usual course of business.
   NEW LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT. The initial local business tax receipt which
is issued for a business, person, or any premises which has not been previously
licensed during the past local business tax receipt year. This shall not
include the transfer of location or transfer of ownership licenses.
   PERSON. Includes any person as described in §
10.04 of this Code, or any officer, agent, employee, factor, or any personal
representative thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself, or for any
other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any permanent location where the business firm keeps any
of its business records, or which is used as an operational site at which a
customer or interested person may have direct contact in person with the
merchant of the business or his duly authorized representative during the
normal business hours of the day. PLACE OF BUSINESS shall be deemed to include
parent companies, and any branch outlet or office of a parent company.
('69 Code, § 11-3) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 634, passed 11-3-82;
Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.04 RESPONSIBILITY OF OFFICERS AND AGENTS FOR COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The agents or other representatives of principals who are doing
business in the city shall be personally responsible for the compliance with
this chapter of their principals and of the businesses they represent.
('69 Code, § 11-10)
   (B)   It shall be the duty of all officers and agents of any corporate
licensee under this chapter to see that their corporations comply with the
provisions of this chapter. All officers or agents of any corporation required
by this chapter to be licensed, which shall do business without having paid the
local business tax receipt tax imposed and procured such local business tax
receipt, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to
the penalties prescribed for the violation hereof.
('69 Code, § 11-30) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
Penalty, see §
115.99
LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT
§ 115.10 LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to
conduct any business or nonprofit enterprise, or to use in connection therewith
any vehicle, premises, machine, or device, in whole or in part, for which a
local business tax receipt or permit is required by this chapter or any other
chapter of this code, without a local business tax receipt or permit therefor
being first procured and kept in effect at all such times as required by this
chapter and other provisions of this code, and paying the required tax or fee
therefor.
('69 Code, § 11-4)
   (B)   Exemption from the payment of the local business tax set forth in this
chapter shall be allowed in such cases as are provided for in this chapter, and
in the following cases as provided for by the laws of this state:
      (1)   Disabled veterans of the Spanish- American War, World War I, or
World War II, and widows of those deceased veterans.
      (2)   Confirmed disabled persons, deaf and dumb persons, invalids
physically incapable of manual labor, widows with minor dependents, and persons
65 years of age or older.
      (3)   Growers of farm and grove products, in connection with the growth
and sale of those products, when sold by the grower.
('69 Code, § 11-8)
   (C)   The City Clerk shall require each applicant who wishes to seek the
benefits of the exemptions from local business taxes, to make an affidavit
setting out his disability, his financial condition, and the source of his
income before the local business tax receipt shall be issued. Any person making
a false affidavit and procuring a free privilege local business tax receipt
thereby shall be guilty of perjury and punished under the law.
('69 Code, § 11-9)
(Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 777, passed 2-5-86; Am. Ord. 1576, passed
4-18-07) Penalty, see §
115.99
Statutory reference:
   Exemptions allowed disabled persons, see F.S. § 205.162
   Exemptions allowed disabled veterans, see F.S. § 205.171
§ 115.11 ADVERTISING AS EVIDENCE OF CONDUCTING BUSINESS.
   A local business tax receipt shall be required to cover every business
advertised by sign, newspaper, magazine, or otherwise. Any such advertisement
shall be considered evidence of conducting the business advertised and shall be
a sufficient predicate for conviction by the court.
('69 Code, § 11-6) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.12 SEPARATE LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT FOR BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS.
   A local business tax receipt shall be obtained in the manner prescribed
herein for each branch establishment, outlet, or any other office or location
of the business engaged in, as if each branch establishment, outlet, or other
office or location were a separate business.
('69 Code, § 11-11) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 634, passed 11-3-82;
Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07) Penalty, see §
115.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to levy business tax on branch establishments, see F.S. § 205.042
§ 115.13 NO LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT REQUIRED FOR DELIVERIES ONLY.
   No local business tax receipt shall be required of any person for any mere
delivery in the city of any property purchased or acquired in good faith from
that person at his regular place of business outside the city, where no intent
to evade the provisions of this chapter by that person is shown to exist.
('69 Code, § 11-12) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.14 SPECIAL PERMITS FOR NON- PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall issue special permits, without the payment of any
local business tax receipt fees or other charges therefor, to any person or
organization for the conduct or operation of a nonprofit enterprise, either
regularly or temporarily, when he finds that the applicant operates without
private profit, for a public, charitable, educational, literary, fraternal, or
religious purpose.
   (B)   An applicant for a special permit shall submit an application therefor
to the City Clerk upon forms provided by the City Clerk, and shall furnish such
information and make such affidavits as the City Clerk shall require.
   (C)   A person or organization operating under a special permit shall
operate his nonprofit enterprise in compliance with this chapter and all other
applicable rules and regulations, except as provided herein.
('69 Code, § 11-13) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.15 APPLICATION FOR LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT; FEE.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of any local business tax receipt, a written
application therefor, signed by an officer, partner, or owner of the proposed
business, occupation, or profession, shall be filed with the City Clerk upon
forms prescribed by him.
('69 Code, § 11-14)
   (B)   The forms for application for a local business tax receipt shall
include an affidavit, to be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public of
this state. It shall set forth, in addition to any other pertinent information
required by the City Clerk, the following:
      (1)   The name of the owner; if a firm, the names of all members of the
firm; and if a corporation, the names of all officers of the corporation.
      (2)   The date proposed to commence business and its location.
      (3)   The full nature of the business.
      (4)   Where the local business tax is based thereon, the value of stock
carried, or the number of seats, machines, employees, gasoline pumps, rooms, or
vehicles, and so forth, used, as the case may be.
      (5)   The Federal Employer Identification Number or Social Security
Number.
('69 Code, § 11-15)
   (C)   All applications for local business tax receipts shall be accompanied
by the full amount of the fees chargeable for the local business tax receipt.
('69 Code, § 11-16)
   (D)   FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME means an occupied residence in which child care
is regularly provided for children from at least two unrelated families and
which receives a payment, fee, or grant for any of the children receiving care,
whether or not operated for profit. A family day-care home shall be allowed to
provide care for one of the following groups of children, which shall include
those children under 13 years of age who are related to the caregiver: a
maximum of four children from birth to 12 months of age; a maximum of three
children from birth to 12 months of age, and other children, for a maximum
total of six children; a maximum of six preschool children if all are older
than 12 months of age; a maximum of ten children if no more than five are
preschool age and, of those five, no more than two are under 12 months of age.
TOWNHOME or CONDOMINIUM are defined as any multi-family residential dwelling
unit, including but not limited to, townhouses, apartments, townhomes and
condominiums. Family day-care homes may be open seven days a week, 24-hours a
day. Provided, however, children shall not be outside the home before 8:00 a.m.
or after 5:00 p.m. during Eastern Standard Time and after 7:00 p.m. during
Daylight Savings Time. No family day care home shall be operated without the
operator first obtaining a local business tax receipt from the city. All
applications for local business tax receipts for the operation of family day
care homes shall be accompanied by a $50 fee chargeable for the local  business
tax receipt. No local business tax receipt for the operation of a family day
care home shall be granted until:
      (1)   The city, at the applicant's expense, has notified, by certified
mail, surrounding property owners that an application is pending for the
issuance of a local business tax receipt for a family day care home. The
notification shall state the location of the proposed family day care home, the
name of the operator of the family day care home, the name of the owner of the
real property on which the family day care home is located, and the proposed
hours of operation of the family day care home. For the purpose of this section
SURROUNDING PROPERTY OWNERS shall mean 100 feet of any proposed family day care
home when the proposed family day care home is in a townhome or condominium,
and in the caase of a single-family home it shall mean those property owners
who reside next to, behind, or directly across the road or right-of-way of the
single-family home. In the case of a cul-de-sac, all homeowners in the cul-de-
sac will be notified.
      (2)   Following notice, if 30% of the surrounding townhome or condominium
property owners or one contiguous owner, if single-family, objects to the
proposed application, the City Administration shall evaluate the objection. The
Administration shall presume the appropriateness of all applications for family
day care homes and the burden shall be on an opponent to establish sufficient
grounds for the imposition of conditions or the denial of an application. In
reviewing objections the City Administration shall consider the effect of the
proposed use on existing and future dwellings in the vicinity, the proposed
site, the traffic safety, and the general health and safety of the community.
In the event the objections are found invalid, the City Administration shall
continue processing the application for a local business tax receipt. Objectors
shall be interviewed by the Administration. In the event the objections are
found to be valid, the application shall be denied or granted subject to such
conditions as are deemed necessary to offset the objections.
      (3)   An application for a local business tax receipt for a family day
care home may be granted conditioned on the faithful adherence to and the
fulfillment of such restrictions and conditions as shall be determined to be
necessary for the protection of the surrounding areas and the general welfare
of the citizens. Subsequent failure by a local business tax receipt holder to
comply with the conditions established by the city's administration or failure
to comply with applicable state or county regulations for the operation of
family day care homes shall constitute a forfeiture of the local business tax
receipt. No local business tax receipt shall be forfeited as provided for in
this section except after affirmative finding by the city's Code Enforcement
Board that a violation has occurred. All hearings before the Code Enforcement
Board on alleged violations of the conditions shall be brought in accordance
with the rules and regulations governing Code Enforcement Board hearings.
      (4)   An applicant whose application is denied or made conditional by the
City Administration based upon an objection by a third party shall be entitled
to appeal the denial or the imposition of conditions to the City Commission.
Such appeal shall be made in writing within ten days of notification that the
application has been denied. The decision of the Commission, following hearing,
shall be binding on the applicant.
      (5)   Prior to the issuance of a local business tax receipt for a family
day care home, the applicant shall;
         (a)   Demonstrate proof of compliance with all applicable federal,
state, county and local statutes, laws, regulations or ordinances; and
         (b)   If not the owner of the property in which he/she resides and
intends to operate a family day-care home shall submit a notarized written
statement from the property owner which specifically authorizes and grants
permission for the applicant to operate from the premises.
      (6)   The application process as set forth herein shall be supplemental
to the application and processing requirements set forth in Ch. 115. Provided,
further, that if at any time, during the year, the owner or operator of the
family day-care home is found not to be in compliance with all regulatory
standards set forth in F.S. Chapter 402, such local business tax receipt shall
be revoked in accordance with F.S. § 402.310. This revocation procedure shall
be supplemental to the revocation procedures set forth in this chapter.
      (7)   The City Administration shall promulgate a form of application
consistent herewith which shall be approved by the City Attorney and amended
from time to time to comply with all state, county, and local regulations of
family day care homes.
   (E)   All applications for local business tax receipts shall be accompanied
by a copy of the contract between the business that is applying for the local
business tax receipt and the company that is providing garbage services to the
business.
(Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 831, passed 4-22-87; Am. Ord. 1003, passed
9-2-92; Am. Ord. 1063, passed 12-19-93; Am. Ord. 1283, passed 9-16-98; Am. Ord.
1411, passed 6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1449, passed 6-18-03; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-
18-07)
§ 115.16 PROCESSING OF LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT APPLICATION.
   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to initiate the routing of the
application for a local business tax receipt for inspection, signed approval,
and date, by the following: the Building and Zoning Department, and the Local
Business Tax Receipt Inspector. From these offices they shall be returned to
the City Clerk. During the inspection of the application for a local business
tax receipt the following shall apply:
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of each office to conduct all necessary
inspections and route the application to the next department in an expedient
manner, so that the local business tax receipt may be properly processed.
   (B)   In the event the application is rejected by any office, the reason for
its rejection shall be indicated, along with the signature of the responsible
official and the date.
   (C)   After the application for a new local business tax receipt has been
inspected and approved by the appropriate offices and returned to the City
Clerk, the City Clerk shall interview the applicant, and when he deems it
necessary or desirable shall investigate all applicants and determine whether
or not it would be in the best interest of the city to issue a local business
tax receipt as applied for by the applicant. In making a determination, the
City Clerk shall evaluate the reputation of the applicant for honesty,
integrity, good character, and for this purpose shall consider the applicant's:
      (1)   Penal history. All convictions, the reasons therefor, and the
demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his release.
      (2)   Local business tax receipt history. The local business tax receipt
history of the applicant, whether that person in previously operating in this
or another state under a local business tax receipt has had the local business
tax receipt revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the demeanor of the
applicant subsequent to the action.
      (3)   General personal history. Such other facts relevant to the general
personal history of the applicant as the City Clerk shall find necessary to a
fair determination of the eligibility of the applicant.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall issue the local business tax receipt, subject to
any or all conditions stipulated thereon, to the applicant; unless, after
investigation and application of the standards described in this section, he
determines that it would not be in the best interest of the city to issue a
local business tax receipt.
('69 Code, § 11-17) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.17 APPROVAL OF BUSINESS LOCATION REQUIRED.
   No local business tax receipt shall be issued for any business, service,
occupation, or profession until the location of the business is first approved
by the Building and Zoning Department of the city as to its compliance with
zoning and other regulatory ordinances of the city.
('69 Code, § 11-18) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.18 LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT TO BE ISSUED IN REAL NAME OF APPLICANT.
   All local business tax receipts shall be applied for and issued in the real
name of the applicant. In cases where the applicant does or will do business
under a fictitious, trade, or firm name, the application, and the local
business tax receipt if issued, shall show the real name as well as the
fictitious, trade, or firm name of the applicant.
('69 Code, § 11-19) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.19 INSIGNIA OR DECAL ISSUED ALONG WITH LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT; FEE.
   One insignia or decal shall be delivered with each local business tax
receipt issued under this chapter free of charge. A fee of $.50 per insignia or
decal shall be charged for any additional insignia or decal issued.
('69 Code, § 11-33) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.20 DENIAL OF LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT APPLICATION; APPEAL.
   Any person whose application for a local business tax receipt has been
rejected as provided in this chapter, shall have a right to appeal the decision
of the City Clerk to the City Commission by appropriate written petition, and
shall be heard by the City Commission at its next regular meeting; provided,
however, that the petition is filed with the City Clerk at least ten days prior
to the regular meeting of the City Commission.
('69 Code, § 11-22) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.21 TERM OF LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT.
   Local business tax receipts shall expire on September 30 of each year. No
local business tax receipt shall be issued for more than one year.
('69 Code, § 11-7) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
Statutory reference:
   Local business tax receipts to be issued for no more than one year, see F.S.
§ 205.043(1)(c)
§ 115.22 RENEWAL OF LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT.
   (A)   Any current local business tax receipt may be renewed for each new
local business tax receipt year by the City Clerk without prior approval of any
other departments, provided the applicant signs the following certification:
   "I, the undersigned, hereby certify that the local business tax receipt
which I am applying for is renewal of the one now in force and effect and that
I have not changed the authorized use of the premises and do not plan to make
any physical or structural changes of the premises."
   (B)   Any renewal application in which the applicant changes the authorized
use of the premises or makes or proposes any physical or structural changes of
the premises shall be processed as set forth in §§
115.15 through 115.20.
   (C)   Any renewal application shall be accompanied by a copy of the contract
between the business who the applicant represents and the company that is
providing garbage collection services for the business indicated on the current
local business tax receipt.
('69 Code, § 11-25) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1411, passed 6-19-02;
Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.23 LOST OR STOLEN LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT; ISSUANCE OF DUPLICATE LOCAL
BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT.
   A duplicate local business tax receipt or special permit shall be issued by
the City Clerk to replace any local business tax receipt or special permit
previously issued, which has been lost, stolen, defaced, or destroyed without
any wilful conduct on the part of the licensee or otherwise requires
duplication for any other reason, upon the filing by the local business tax
receipt holder of an affidavit sworn to before a notary public of this state
attesting to that fact and the paying to the City Clerk a fee of up to 10% of
the annual license tax, but not less than $3 nor more than $25 to reimburse the
city for the expense incidental to executing and delivering each duplicate
license or special permit.
('69 Code, § 11-26) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1063, passed 12-19-93;
Am. Ord. 1365, passed 1-17-01; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.24 TRANSFER OF LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT; CHANGE OF LOCATION OR
OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Local business tax receipts granted under the provisions of this
chapter may be transferred from one location to another, provided:
      (1)   The local business tax receipt is presented to the City Clerk for
the approval of the transfer.
      (2)   No local business tax receipt shall be transferred without the
approval of the Building and Zoning Department of the city as to the
conformance of the proposed new location to zoning and building regulations of
the city.
      (3)   The local business tax receipt holder shall pay for the transfer a
fee in the amount of up to 10% of the annual local business tax receipt tax,
but not less than $3 nor more than $25 if the transfer is applied for before
the business is moved to a new location.
      (4)   A request for transfer of the local business tax receipt shall be
made within ten business days of the effective change in location of a business
or change in the business organization or structure. Failure to timely transfer
the local business tax receipt shall result in the revocation of the local
business tax receipt and a fine of $25. ('69 Code, § 11-27)
   (B)   A local business tax receipt issued by the city under this chapter may
be transferred with the approval of the City Clerk for the business for which
it was taken out, except as otherwise provided by law, when there is a bona
fide sale and transfer of the property used and employed in the business as
stock in trade, and not otherwise, subject, however, to the following
conditions:
      (1)   The seller of the business shall present the local business tax
receipt to the City Clerk, with an endorsement on the reverse side thereof,
assigning all right, title, and interest to the purchaser.
      (2)   The purchaser shall produce a properly executed instrument, showing
the transfer of stock of goods and of the lease or deed to the property.
      (3)   The purchaser shall file an application for the local business tax
receipt and shall qualify in all respects as provided by law and by this
chapter as an applicant for a local business tax receipt, as if he had applied
for the local business tax receipt in the first instance.
      (4)   A fee of up to 10% of the annual local business tax receipt tax,
but not less than $3 nor more than $25 shall be paid to the City Clerk in
connection with the transfer. However, where no new person in interest comes
into the business, the change of the business organization or structure, such
as from a corporation to an individual proprietorship or partnership or from an
individual proprietorship or partnership to a corporation, shall not be
considered a transfer of ownership for local business tax receipt purposes,
calling for payment of transfer fees above set forth.
      (5)   Where the local business tax receipt holder has been exempted from
the payment of all or any part of the local business tax receipt tax therefor,
any such local business tax receipt shall not be transferable under this
section.
      (6)   No local business tax receipt shall be transferred under this
section without the approval of the Building and Zoning Department.
      (7)   A request for the transfer of a local business tax receipt shall be
made within ten business days of the affective change in ownership of the
business or change in the business organization or structure.
('69 Code, § 11-28) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1063, passed 12-19-93;
Am. Ord. 1365, passed 1-17-01; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07) Penalty, see §
115.99
Statutory reference:
   Local business tax fees, see F.S. § 205.043
§ 115.25 POSTING OF LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT OR INSIGNIA FOR INSPECTION.
   (A)   It is the duty of any person exercising the privilege of conducting a
business, service, occupation, or profession for which a local business tax
receipt is required by this chapter, to post his local business tax receipt in
a conspicuous place in or about his place of business where it may be seen upon
inspection by any city official.
('69 Code, § 11-29)
   (B)   Every person holding a local business tax receipt under this chapter
shall:
      (1)   Premises. Post and maintain the local business tax receipt upon the
licensed premises as required in division (A) of this section.
      (2)   Motor vehicles. Affix any insignia delivered for use in connection
with a motor vehicle which is required by the terms of division (A) of this
section, and §
118.01 to have a sign displayed thereon on the inside of the windshield of the
motor vehicle or as otherwise prescribed by the Chief of Police.
      (3)   Persons. Carry the local business tax receipt on his person when he
has no licensed business premises.
      (4)   Machines. Affix any insignia delivered for use in connection
therewith upon the outside of any coin, vending, or other business machine or
device which is required to be licensed under this chapter, so that it may be
seen at all times.
('69 Code, § 11-32) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.26 OBTAINING LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT BY FALSE STATEMENTS.
   Any local business tax receipt obtained under the provisions of this chapter
upon a misrepresentation of a material fact shall be deemed null and void, and
the local business tax receipt holder who has thereafter engaged in any
business under such local business tax receipt shall be subject to prosecution
for doing business without a local business tax receipt, with the same effect
and degree as though no such local business tax receipt had ever been issued.
('69 Code, § 11-20) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.27 LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT OBTAINED ILLEGALLY NO PROTECTION IN COURT
ACTION.
   No local business tax receipt shall be granted until there has been full
compliance with the preceding conditions contained in this chapter, and no
local business tax receipt which may have been granted without full and
complete compliance with those conditions shall be a protection to the
applicant in any proceeding, civil or criminal.
('69 Code, § 11-21) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.28 LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT DOES NOT PERMIT ILLEGAL ACTIVITY.
   The issuance or possession of a valid local business tax receipt obtained
under the provisions of this chapter does not constitute an approval or
condonation of any offense, illegal activity, or any act prohibited by law.
('69 Code, § 11-40) (Ord. 244, passed 12-21-70; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.29 LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPTS REVOCATION; GUIDELINES; REVIEW CRITERIA;
HEARING AND APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any person engaging in or managing any business, occupation or
profession set forth in this chapter who has been granted an local business tax
receipt in accordance with the procedures set forth in this subchapter may be
revoked, by the city, in accordance with the guidelines and procedures set
forth herein: any action taken or permitted to exist which endangers or
threatens the health or safety of the public or becomes manifestly injurious to
the residents or citizens of the city or to the general public.
   (B)   In considering whether to revoke a local business tax receipt the
following matters shall be taken into consideration:
      (1)   The number, frequency and severity of complaints received from the
public;
      (2)   The number, frequency and severity of existing code violations;
      (3)   The number, frequency and severity of similar prior code violations
and/or complaints;
      (4)   The effects of such continued uses/operations on the surrounding
properties, including the effect on the occupants and tenants thereof;
      (5)   The effects of such continued uses/operations on the health and
safety of the residents and citizens of the city and of the general public; and
      (6)   Any additional factors or considerations which may be reasonably
calculated to materially affect public health, safety and welfare.
   (C)   The City Manager or his designee shall, on an on-going basis, monitor
compliance of this city's code. Upon being notified of a possible violation of
this section by the City Commission, the City Manager or his designee shall
proceed as follows:
      (1)   To collect and examine all pertinent information concerning the
alleged violation of this section;
      (2)   Interview, in person or by telephone, and memorialize in writing
any information received from any person with information about the alleged
violation;
      (3)   Upon determining that all pertinent information has been received
if the City Manager or his designee determines that it appears a violation of
this section has occurred he/she shall:
         (a)   Notify the alleged violator by first class mail, return receipt
requested, of the violation including the following matters:
            1.   A detailed description of the complaints, information and/or
other pertinent data the city has in its possession concerning the violation;
            2.   The name, address and telephone number of a contact person at
the city who can provide more detailed information and schedule the hearing
described below;
            3.   A reasonable time and date by which the alleged violator shall
respond to the city;
            4.   That he/she has a right to a hearing, more particularly
described herein below, prior to the city making a final determination and that
if he/she does not make arrangements for scheduling same within the time frame
set forth in the letter, that the city will schedule same and notify the
alleged violator of the location, time and date for the hearing in the same
manner as the original notice; and
            5.   The city will consider a proposal from the alleged violator as
to a date for curing the violation or an action plan to cure the violation.
         (b)   Upon the expiration of the time frame set forth in the notice if
a request for a hearing has not been received the City Manager or his designee
shall request and schedule a hearing before the city's Consumer Affairs
Advisory Board and provide a second notice to the alleged violator, in the same
manner the original notice was sent, setting forth the location, time, and date
for the hearing. This notice shall also advise the alleged violator that at the
hearing he/she has the right to be represented by legal counsel, to present
evidence, testimony and witnesses and to examine the city's evidence and cross-
examine the city's witnesses.
   (D)   The hearing before the city's Consumer Affairs Advisory Board shall
follow the procedures set forth in F.S. Chapter 162 and Chapter 32 of this code
of ordinances for the Code Enforcement Board, including the same formalities
and due process constraints placed on the Code Enforcement Board.
   (E)   The alleged violator shall have a right to appeal an adverse decision
from the city's Consumer Affairs Advisory Board to the City Commission within
30 days after the hearing before the Board. An appeal to the City Commission
shall be treated as an appeal of the Board decision and not as a trial de novo.
The alleged violator shall be permitted to make up to a 20 minute presentation.
(Ord. 1006, passed 9-2-92; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
LOCAL BUSINESS TAX
§ 115.35 LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT FEE SCHEDULE.
   The assessment and amount of annual local business taxes are classified and
fixed according to the schedule on file in the City Clerk's office.
('69 Code, § 11-39) (Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.36 BUSINESS FALLING UNDER MORE THAN ONE CLASSIFICATION; HIGHEST FEE TO BE
PAID.
   Each person engaged in a single business which might fall under two or more
classifications, shall pay the highest tax imposed by this chapter, but only
one tax. This provision shall not be construed to permit any person to exercise
two or more taxable privileges by the payment of only one tax.
('69 Code, § 11-5) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67)
§ 115.37 TAX TO BE PAID ANNUALLY; WHEN TAX FOR ONE-HALF YEAR TO BE PAID.
   Unless otherwise provided, for each local business tax receipt obtained
between October 1 and April 1, the full tax for one year shall be paid, and for
each local business tax receipt obtained from April 1 to September 30, one-half
the full tax for one year shall be paid.
('69 Code, § 11-7) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.38 REBATE OF TAX PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   No portion of any local business tax assessed in this chapter shall be
rebated, unless it clearly appears that the local business tax was collected by
mistake or error. Before making the rebate to a local business tax receipt
holder, all amounts payable under a proper local business tax receipt shall be
paid by the licensee.
('69 Code, § 11-24) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.39 DELINQUENCY OF PAYMENT; PENALTY.
   All local business tax receipts by this chapter shall be on sale beginning
August 1 of each year and shall be due and payable on or before September 30 of
each year and shall expire September 30 of the succeeding year. In the event
that September 30 falls on a weekend or a holiday, the fee shall be due and
payable on or before the first working day following September 30. Those local
business tax receipts not renewed when due and payable shall be considered
delinquent and subject to a delinquency payment of 10% for the month of
October, plus an additional 5% penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter
until paid. However, the total delinquency penalty may not exceed 25% of the
local business tax.
(Ord. 896, passed 6-21-89; Am. Ord. 1063, passed 12-19-93; Am. Ord. 1576,
passed 4-18-07)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 115.45 LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT INSPECTOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   It is the duty of the City Manager to appoint a Local Business Tax
Receipt Inspector of the city and such part-time or full-time assistants as he
may deem necessary.
('69 Code, § 11-34)
   (B)   Every place of business in the city shall be inspected at least twice
a year by the Local Business Tax Receipt Inspector or his assistant to see that
the proper local business tax receipt has been obtained for the conduct of all
business operated upon the premises.
   (C)   The Local Business Tax Receipt Inspector or assistant shall have the
authority to investigate all businesses, services, occupations, and professions
in the city; to make such inquiry as shall be necessary to determine whether or
not a local business tax receipt has been procured for the business or
occupation; and shall report to the City Manager and the City Clerk the names
of all persons refusing the Local Business Tax Receipt Inspector permission to
investigate and inquire for the purpose of determining whether that person has
a local business tax receipt. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse
such permission.
('69 Code, § 11-35) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.46 INSPECTION OF BUSINESSES, BOOKS.
   The holder of a local business tax receipt issued under the provisions of
this chapter shall permit all reasonable inspections of his business and
examinations of his books by public authorities so authorized by law.
('69 Code, § 11-31) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.47 WRITTEN NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall notify in writing all persons engaged in business
without a local business tax receipt that they are in violation of this
chapter, and shall order compliance within ten days of service of notice on
those persons.
   (B)   The notice of violation shall be personally served upon the person
affected, and service upon an agent or employee shall be deemed service on the
owner or operator. In the absence of the person affected or his agent or
employee, a copy of the notice shall be affixed to some structure on the
premises. In the event service in the above-described manner cannot be
accomplished, depositing the notice in the United States mail shall constitute
service thereof.
('69 Code, § 11-36) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter or of making
a fraudulent return, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $300, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. In addition, they shall be
penalized a sum equal to 25% of any local business tax receipt fee avoided or
evaded by and through the medium of the violation or fraudulent return. Any
person convicted of assisting, aiding, or participating with a person in the
violation of this chapter shall be likewise punished.
('69 Code, § 11-38) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
CHAPTER 116: (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 117: MASSAGE PARLORS
Section
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Prohibited acts
   
117.03   Posting of regulations within establishment
 
   
117.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Massage practice, see F.S. Ch. 480
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MASSAGE. A method of treating parts of the human body for comfort or the
general well-being of the body, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading,
tapping, or vibrating with the hand or any instrument.
   MASSAGE PARLOR. Any establishment having a fixed place of business where
massages are administered. This definition shall not be construed to include a
hospital, nursing home, medical clinic, or the office of a physician, surgeon,
physical therapist, chiropractor, or osteopath duly licensed by the state.
   SEXUAL OR GENITAL PARTS. The genitals, pubic area, anus, or perineum of any
person, or the vulva of a female.
('69 Code, § 12-130) (Ord. 383, passed 12-2-74)
§ 117.02 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor, to place his
or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle
in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital part of any other person, or
for the other person to request or permit such placing, touching, fondling, or
massaging.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, or managing a
massage parlor, knowingly to cause, allow, or permit in or about the massage
parlor, any agent, employee, or any other person under his control or
supervision to perform the acts prohibited in division (A) of this section.
('69 Code, § 12-131) (Ord. 383, passed 12-2-74) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.03 POSTING OF REGULATIONS WITHIN ESTABLISHMENT.
   Every person owning, operating, or managing a massage parlor shall post a
copy of this chapter in a conspicuous place in the massage parlor, so that it
may be readily seen by persons entering the premises.
('69 Code, § 12-132) (Ord. 383, passed 12-2-74) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or
both, in the discretion of the appropriate court.
('69 Code, § 12-133) (Ord. 383, passed 12-2-74)
CHAPTER 118: USE OF CITY FACILITIES BY DAY-CARE CENTERS; CHILD CARE CENTERS
Section
Use of City Facilities by Day-Care Centers
   
118.01   Scope
   
118.02   Definitions
   
118.03   Notice to city required
   
118.04   Insurance against third-party claims required
   
118.05   City not to be held liable
USE OF CITY FACILITIES BY DAY-CARE CENTERS
§ 118.01 SCOPE.
   This chapter is not to be read in conflict with pertinent state statutes or
city or county ordinances pertaining to the use of public parks in
municipalities.
(Ord. 714, passed 10-3-84)
§ 118.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DAY-CARE CENTER. Those organizations, persons, or corporate entities charged
with the care of minor children whose principal place of business is located
outside the city.
(Ord. 714, passed 10-3-84)
§ 118.03 NOTICE TO CITY REQUIRED.
   No day-care center shall be authorized to utilize the public parks or public
facilities of the city without first notifying the City Commission of its
intent to use the facilities as part of its day-care programs.
(Ord. 714, passed 10-3-84) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.04 INSURANCE AGAINST THIRD-PARTY CLAIMS REQUIRED.
   Day-care centers shall be required to provide the city with proof of
insurance against third-party claims of the type and in the amounts as the City
Commission shall from time to time and in its sole discretion deem necessary.
(Ord. 714, passed 10-3-84) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.05 CITY NOT TO BE HELD LIABLE.
   The City Commission shall, in its sole discretion, require day-care centers
to hold harmless, indemnify, and defend the city against any and all third-
party claims for injuries sustained on the premises of the public facilities
for any reason whatsoever.
(Ord. 714, passed 10-3-84)
CHAPTER 119: VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
   
119.01   Identification on side of commercial vehicles required
§ 119.01 IDENTIFICATION ON SIDE OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES REQUIRED.
   (A)   On vehicles used in the city for the purpose of solicitation of
business, or delivery or transpor-tation of merchandise, there shall be
prominently displayed, in letters at least three inches in height, upon each
side of each vehicle, the name of the owner and the character of business in
which the vehicle is engaged. The owner and the driver shall be responsible for
compliance with this section.
('69 Code, § 17-1)
   (B)   On vehicles used within the city for the transportation of equipment
or materials used in general contracting and building construction, there shall
be prominently displayed, in letters at least three inches in height, upon each
side of the vehicle, the name of the owner and the character of business in
which the vehicle is engaged. The owner and the driver shall be responsible for
compliance with this section.
('69 Code, § 17-2)
(Ord. 55, passed 4-16-62) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 120: OTHER BUSINESSES
Section
   
120.01   Contractor's local business tax receipt; certificate of competency
required
   
120.02   Home-based business
   
120.03   Casualty insurers; additional excise or local business tax
   
120.04   Property insurers; additional excise or local business tax
   
120.05   Garage and rummage sales; permit and fee requirements
   
120.06   Coin-operated laundries
   
120.07   Sales from motor vehicles
   
120.08   Sale of sparklers
   
120.09   Pain management clinics
   
120.10   Safe transaction zones
 
   
120.99   Penalty
§ 120.01 CONTRACTOR'S LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT; CERTIFICATE OF COMPETENCY
REQUIRED.
   Any person applying for a new or renewal contractor's local business tax
receipt shall be required to submit his new certificate of competency to the
City Clerk as part of the application of the local business tax receipt. Only
those certificates of competency issued by Broward County, Dade County, City of
Hollywood, Florida, or the City of Fort Lauderdale, Florida, shall be accepted
by the City Clerk for this purpose.
('69 Code, § 11-23) (Ord. 171, passed 11-13-67; Am. Ord. 196, passed 1-2-69;
Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.02 HOME-BASED BUSINESS.
   (A)   A home-based business that operates from a residential property may
operate in an area zoned for residential use in compliance with this section
and F.S. § 559.955, as amended. A business is considered a home- based business
if it operates, in whole or in part, from a residential property. All home-
based businesses shall comply with the following criteria as conditions of a
home-based business local business tax receipt:
      (1)   The employees of the business who work at the residential dwelling
must also reside in the residential dwelling, except that up to a total of two
employees or independent contractors who do not reside at the residential
dwelling may work at the business. The business may have additional remote
employees that do not work at the residential dwelling.
      (2)   Parking related to the business activities may not be greater in
volume than would normally be expected at a similar residence where no business
is conducted.
      (3)   The parking of commercial vehicles and trailers related to home-
based businesses shall be regulated in the same manner as any other commercial
vehicle or trailer parked or stored on residential property pursuant to
__________, and shall not be parked:
         (a)   Within the right-of-way;
         (b)   On or over a sidewalk; or,
         (c)   On any unpaved surfaces.
      (4)   Heavy equipment, which includes but is not limited to commercial,
industrial, or agricultural vehicles, equipment, or machinery shall not be
permitted to be parked or stored at any time on a residential property in
connection with any home-based business.
      (5)   All home-based businesses must obtain a local business tax receipt
before the business may begin to operate.
      (6)   The home-based business may not conduct retail transactions at a
structure other than the residential dwelling; however, incidental business
uses and activities may be conducted at the residential property.
      (7)   The activities of the home-based business are secondary and
ancillary to the property's use as a residential dwelling.
      (8)   The activities of the home-based business must comply with any and
all relevant local or state regulations.
      (9)   The home-based business shall be subject to all applicable codes,
laws, and ordinances of the zoning classification where the business is located
which regulate nuisances, noise, vibration, heat, smoke, dust, lighting, glare,
fumes, odors, and all other similar property maintenance standards and
requirements.
      (10)   As viewed from the street, the use of the residential property is
consistent with the uses of the residential areas that surround the property.
External modifications made to a residential dwelling to accommodate a home-
based business must conform to the residential character and architectural
aesthetics of the neighborhood.
      (11)   No commercial sign of any type may be posted or displayed on the
residence.
      (12)   No traffic shall be generated by such home-based business in
greater volume than would normally be expected in the neighborhood.
      (13)   There shall be no display of goods, machinery, equipment nor any
performance of work visible or audible from any street or adjoining property,
nor shall there be any sign or display identifying or providing any information
of any nature regarding the home-based business.
   (B)   The applicant acknowledges that upon the issuance of a home-based
business local business tax receipt to operate a home-based business, the city
shall have the right to inspect, at reasonable times, the premises upon which
the home-based business is conducted to insure compliance with the foregoing
standards and conditions, and investigate complaints, if any.
   (C)   Any violation of this section may result in a fine in accordance with
§
120.99 of the Code of Ordinances. Additionally, the city may revoke any home-
based local business tax receipt for non-compliance with this section, in
accordance with the provisions of §§
115.29 et seq. of the city's Code of Ordinances.
   (D)   No home-based business local business tax receipt issued pursuant to
this section shall be transferrable, assignable or otherwise alienable.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require a home-based
business local business tax receipt for an individual who, in the normal course
of business, brings work materials into the residence for review, preparation
dictation, or other routine process including, but not limited to jobs which
are all "take home" work from another business location or employment.
(‘69 Code, § 11-41) (Ord. 371, passed 8-19-74; Am. Ord. 1066, passed 3-2-94;
Am. Ord. 1186, passed 10-2-96; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07; Am. Ord. 1987,
passed 3-16-22) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.03 CASUALTY INSURERS; ADDITIONAL EXCISE OR LOCAL BUSINESS TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby assessed, imposed, and levied on every insurance
company, corporation, or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or which
shall hereafter engage in or carry on the business of insuring with respect to
casualty risks, as shown by the records of the Insurance Commissioner of the
state, an excise or local business tax in addition to any local business tax or
excise tax now levied by the city, which shall be in the amount of 1% of the
gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums
collected on casualty insurance policies, covering property within the
corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   The local business or excise tax herein levied shall be due and
payable annually on March 1 of each year hereafter.
('69 Code, § 11-42) (Ord. 375, passed 9-26-74; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.04 PROPERTY INSURERS; ADDITIONAL EXCISE OR LOCAL BUSINESS TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby assessed, imposed, and levied on every insurance
company, corporation, or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or which
shall hereafter engage in or carry on the business of property insurance, as
shown by the records of the Insurance Commissioner of the state, an excise or
local business tax in addition to any local business for excise tax now levied
by the city, which shall be in the amount of 2% of the gross amount of receipts
of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on property insurance
policies covering property within the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   The local business or excise tax herein levied shall be due and
payable annually on March 1 of each year hereafter.
('69 Code, § 11-43) (Ord. 376, passed 9-26-74; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.05 GARAGE AND RUMMAGE SALES; PERMIT AND FEE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   GARAGE SALE. Any sale of used merchandise owned by the person
conducting the sale or his immediate family, and sold at his place of
residence.
      (2)   RUMMAGE SALE. A sale of donated articles by a civic, charitable, or
religious organization in a shopping center or other public area serving the
public generally.
   (B)   No person or organization shall conduct a garage sale or rummage sale
as herein defined without first having obtained a permit from the city, and
paying the permit fee of $5.
   (C)   Any person conducting a garage sale shall be permitted to post only
three signs to advertise the sale. Signs shall be distributed by placing one
sign at the site of the garage sale and the other two signs may be placed at
the corners closest to the property. No signs may be placed which interfere
with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or on the property of others without the
permission of the property owner. Any signs which interfere with the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic may be removed by the city with any attendant
costs charged to the person conducting the sale. The signs shall not exceed
three square feet each. All signs must be removed within 24 hours of the
completion of the garage sale. Failure to remove signs within 24 hours shall
result in a $25 fine. The sign shall conform with the city's requirements for
residential “For Sale” signs (i.e. only one sign is permitted on the property;
this sign is not to exceed three square feet; an exempt sign permit is
required). All merchandise must be displayed in a garage, carport, or roofed
porch. Garage sales shall be limited to a total of three consecutive days
during any six-month period. No more than three rummage sales shall be
conducted by any organization in any 12-month period, where the rummage sale is
conducted in a public shopping center or other public area serving the public
generally.
('69 Code, § 11-44) (Ord. 410, passed 12-15-75; Am. Ord. 960, passed 9-4-91)
Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.06 COIN-OPERATED LAUNDRIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to operate any
coin-operated laundry within the city unless there is at least one person on
duty in the laundry during the hours when the laundry is open for business.
('69 Code, § 12-19.4) (Ord. 382, passed 12-2-74) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.07 SALES FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale from a motor
vehicle, motor-driven cycle, trailer, bicycle, tricycle, or on foot, upon the
public streets, food of any kind, goods, wares, or merchandise within 500 feet
of any property line of a public school located in the city, between the hours
of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. or other hours which correspond to the opening and
closing of the school day, on those days when the schools or their playgrounds
are in operation.
   (B)   The restriction contained in this section shall relate to measurement
from the edge of school property to the edge of any property line which is 500
feet from the edge of the school property.
('69 Code, § 13-3) (Ord. 522, passed 9-17-79) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.08 SALE OF SPARKLERS.
   (A)   Definitions.     For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FIREWORKS. Any combustible or explosive composition or substance or
combination of substances or, except as hereinafter provided, any article
prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation. FIREWORKS shall include
blank cartridges and toy cannons in which explosives are used, the type of
balloons which require fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes,
skyrockets, roman candles, dago bombs, bottle rockets, and another device
specifically described as FIREWORKS by F.S. § 791.01(4).
      SPARKLER. Any device which emits showers of sparks upon burning, does not
contain any explosive compounds, does not detonate or explode, is hand-held or
ground-based, cannot propel itself  through the air, and contains not more than
100 grams of the chemical compound which produces sparks upon burning. Any
SPARKLER which is not approved by the Division of the State Fire Marshal of the
Division of Insurance shall be classified as FIREWORKS.
   (B)   Sale prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation, partnership, business, or enterprise to sell, dispense, offer for
sale, or distribute any fireworks, sparklers, or other novelty noise makers
from temporary wayside stands, including but not limited to tents located in
parking lots or by the roadside. Subject to the conditions of division (C) of
this section, sparklers shall only be authorized to be sold in permanent, fixed
business establishments in an authorized zoning district. The sale of any type
of fireworks shall be strictly prohibited at all times.
   (C)   Conditional sale of sparklers. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, corporation, partnership, business, or enterprise to sell, dispense,
offer for sale, or distribute any sparklers until all of the following
requirements are satisfied:
      (1)   The applicant shall obtain an annual permit from the city for the
sale of sparklers, which shall be effective from October 1 to September 30 of
each fiscal year. The permit fee shall be $500 per year, or any portion of a
year.
      (2)   The applicant shall be subject to the payment of a local business
tax, pursuant to the terms and conditions of Ord. 543.
      (3)   Before any permit shall be issued, an applicant shall file with the
City Clerk a performance bond or similar security acceptable to the city naming
the city as beneficiary in the sum of $2,500 per site. Each bond document shall
be executed by the applicant, as principal, and a surety company authorized to
do business in the state on the list of the United Sates Treasury, which must
be approved by the city. The conditions on such security shall be that:
         (a)   The applicant shall comply fully with all provisions of this
code of ordinances, the Florida Building Code and the statutes of the state
regarding the sale of goods as permitted; and
         (b)   The applicant will pay all judgments rendered against said
applicant for any violation of applicable ordinances and statutes.
      (4)   Before any permit shall be issued, an applicant shall file with the
City Clerk proof of a comprehensive liability insurance policy, which must be
approved by the city's risk manager, to provide protection in the amount of
$500,000 per site location naming the city as an additional insured. The
insurance must be issued by a company authorized by the State Department of
Insurance and authorized to do business in the state.
      (5)   Each sale location must meet the approval of the city's Fire
Marshal for an annual inspection.
   (D)   A permit issued under this section shall be posted conspicuously in
the place of business named therein. In the event that such persons or persons
applying for said local business tax receipt shall desire to do business in
more than one location, separate local business tax receipts shall be issued
for each location of business and shall be posted conspicuously in each place
of business.
(Ord. 965, passed 9-19-91; Am. Ord. 994, passed 5-6-92; Am. Ord. 1207, passed
3-5-97; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07; Am. Ord. 1715, passed 5-2-12) Penalty,
see §
120.99
Statutory reference:
   Sale of fireworks prohibited, see F.S. § 791.02
§ 120.09 PAIN MANAGEMENT CLINICS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, PAIN MANAGEMENT CLINIC
shall mean any clinic or medical practitioner’s office which is not affiliated
with any hospital, hospice, or other facility for the treatment of the
terminally ill in Broward County, and the primary purpose of which is to
prescribe pain medication such as those controlled substances included in
Schedule II, Schedule III and Schedule IV of F.S. § 893.03, as may be amended
from time to time, as well as opioids, including but not limited to, fentanyl,
hydrocodone, morphine, and oxycodone to individuals; or which holds itself out
through advertising as being in business to prescribe such controlled
substances, and which may or may not provide dispensing of pharmaceuticals on
site.
   (B)   All medical directors and/or medical practitioners employed at pain
management clinics operating within the city shall be board certified in pain
medicine or anesthesia by a board approved by the American Board of Medical
Specialties or any other board-approved specialty organization approved by the
Board of Medicine/Board of Osteopathic Medicine and as set forth in Rule 64B8-
1100K8), F.A.C., and 64B15-14.001, F.A.C.. as may be amended from time to time;
recognized by the Florida Boards of Medicine and Osteopathic Medicine; or has
successfully completed a post-graduate training program in Pain Medicine/
Management accredited by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical
Education/American Osteopathic Association, College of Family Physicians of
Canada, or Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons in Canada.
   (C)   The primary practice of pain management clinics operating within the
city shall be to provide pain management treatment. Pain management treatment
under this section shall not include treatment for substance abuse.
   (D)   All pain management clinics operating in the city shall have a medical
director and/or medical practitioner on site during all hours of operation.
(Ord. 1657, passed 3-3-10)
§ 120.10 SAFE TRANSACTION ZONES.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. This section shall be known as the “Zacharv Finch
Memorial Safe Transaction Zone Ordinance.” The purpose and intent of this
section shall be:
      (1)   To promote personal and financial safety and consumer protection by
providing Safe Transaction Zones to protect customers and residents of the City
of Pembroke Pines from fraud, theft, and other crimes:
      (2)   To instill consumer confidence in residents within the City of
Pembroke Pines, knowing that Safe Transaction Zones are in place to protect
them against violent crimes, fraud, theft, and abuse, and to enhance their
quality of life and promote commerce;
      (3)   To deter criminals from committing violent crimes, fraud and theft
within the City of Pembroke Pines;
      (4)   To promote public awareness and crime prevention education to the
residents of the City of Pembroke Pines or other transient persons that
participate in e-commerce.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms
shall be defined, as follows:
      ONLINE CLASSIFIEDS. Classified advertisement websites and applications
which connect buyers and sellers of goods and services including, but not
limited to Craigslist, Facebook, LetGo, Close5, 5Miles, OfferUp, Kijiji,
Pinterest, Etsv, GunBroker, ArmsList, eBay and local classifieds.
      SAFE TRANSACTION ZONES. A location within the City of Pembroke Pines with
adequate lighting, as determined by the police department, where citizens and
residents may meet in order to complete Online Classified transactions.
   (C)   Designation of safe transaction zones.
      (1)   In an attempt to reduce the likelihood of citizens falling victim
to crimes, the City of Pembroke Pines hereby authorizes the City Manager, or
his designee, to create a safe transaction zone program. The City Manager may
enact administrative rules and policies as deemed necessary and prudent to
implement this section.
      (2)   The safe transaction zone program shall designate and maintain safe
transaction zones where consumers and residents can meet at locations in the
City of Pembroke Pines with adequate lighting in order to complete transactions
commencing on online classified advertisement websites.
      (3)   The safe transaction zones in the City of Pembroke Pines shall be
easily accessible to residents of both East and West Pembroke Pines, and the
City of Pembroke Pines Police Department shall establish, undertake, and
maintain an outreach effort to inform residents of the safety benefits
associated with using safe transaction zones.
      (4)   The City of Pembroke Pines may change the location of a safe
transaction zone or designate other safe transaction zones from time to time,
which shall be announced on the city's website.
      (5)   The safe transaction zone is designated to assist residents and
consumers who are conducting private business transactions by answering
newspaper advertisements or through online classifieds in order for residents
and consumers to finalize their business transactions in a safer place.
      (6)   Law enforcement officials shall not be involved in verification,
monitoring or facilitating private transactions. Safe transaction zones are
designed to provide a known, well-lit and more secure.
(Ord. 1889, passed 10-4-17)
§ 120.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of §§
120.01 through
120.05 or of making a fraudulent return, shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $300, or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the appropriate
court. In addition, they shall be penalized a sum equal to 25% of any local
business tax receipt fee avoided or evaded by and through the medium of the
violation or fraudulent return. Any person convicted of assisting, aiding, or
participating with a person in the violation of this chapter shall be likewise
punished.
(‘69 Code, § 11-38)
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating §§
120.06 or
120.07 shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07)
CHAPTER 121: COMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY
   Section
General
   
121.01   Title
   
121.02   Intent and purpose
   
121.03   Definitions
Administration
   
121.10   Registration for placing or maintaining communications facilities in
public rights-of-way
   
121.11   Transfer, sale or assignment of assets in public rights-of-way
   
121.12   Placement or maintenance of a communications facility or personal
wireless service facility in public rights-of-way
Enforcement
   
121.20   Suspension of permits
   
121.21   Appeals
   
121.22   Conditional use of public rights-of-way
   
121.23   Involuntary termination of registration
   
121.24   Existing communications facilities in public rights-of-way
   
121.25   Insurance
   
121.26   Indemnification
   
121.27   Construction bond
   
121.28   Reserved
   
121.29   Enforcement remedies
   
121.30   Abandonment of a communications or personal wireless service facility
   
121.31   Force majeure
   
121.32   Reports and records
   
121.33   Reservation of rights and remedies
Small and Micro Wireless Facilities
   
121.45   Small and micro wireless facilities
GENERAL
§ 121.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Pembroke Pines
Communications Rights-of-Way Ordinance.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 10-2-13)
§ 121.02 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of the city to promote the public health, safety,
aesthetics, and general welfare of the city by providing for the placement or
maintenance of communications facilities and personal wireless service
facilities in the public rights- of-way within city; adopting and administering
reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with state and federal law,
including F.S. § 337.401, as it may be amended, city's home-rule authority, and
in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996
and other federal and state law; establishing reasonable rules and regulations
necessary to manage the placement or maintenance of communications facilities
and personal wireless service facilities in the public rights-of-way by all
communications services providers; and minimizing disruption to the public
rights-of-way.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 10-2-13)
§ 121.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise expressly
stated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future tense; words in the plural number include the singular
number; and words in the singular number include the plural number; and the
masculine gender includes the feminine gender. “And” and “or” may be read
conjunctively or disjunctively. The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory, and
“may” is permissive. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words not defined in
this chapter shall be given the meaning set forth in Title 47 of the United
States Code (the “Communications Act”), as amended, and if not defined in the
Communications Act, as defined in Florida Statutes, and if not defined in
Florida Statutes, as defined in the City Code, and if not defined in the City
Code, shall be construed to mean and, if not defined therein, their common and
ordinary meaning. References to governmental entities (whether persons or
entities) refer to those entities or their successors in authority. If specific
provisions of law referred to herein are renumbered, then the reference shall
be read to refer to the renumbered provision. References to laws, ordinances or
regulations shall be interpreted broadly to cover government actions, however
nominated, and include laws, ordinances and regulations now in force or
hereinafter enacted or amended.
   The following definitions shall apply to the provisions contained in §§
121.03 through
121.33 of the City Code of Ordinances.
   ABANDONMENT. The permanent cessation of all uses of a communications
facility; provided that this term shall not include cessation of all use of a
facility within a physical structure where the physical structure continues to
be used. For example, cessation of all use of a cable within a conduit, where
the conduit continues to be used, shall not be ABANDONMENT of a facility in
public rights-of-way.
   CITY.  The City of Pembroke Pines, Florida.
   COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY or FACILITY or SYSTEM.  Any permanent or temporary
plant, equipment or property, including but not limited to cables, wires,
conduits, ducts, fiber optics, poles, antennae, converters, splice boxes,
cabinets, hand holes, manholes, vaults, drains, surface location markers,
appurtenances, and other equipment or pathway placed or maintained or to be
placed or maintained in the public rights-of-way of the city and used or
capable of being used to transmit, convey, route, receive, distribute, provide
or offer communications services.
   COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY PROVIDER. A person (other than a communications
services provider) operating one or more communications facilities located
within the city, who is engaged, directly or indirectly, in the business of
leasing, licensing, subleasing, subletting or hiring to one or more
communications service providers all or a portion of the tangible personal
property used in a communications facility. A pass-through provider may be a
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY PROVIDER.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.  The transmission, conveyance or routing of voice,
data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between
or among points, by or through any electronic, radio, satellite, cable,
optical, microwave, or other medium or method now in existence or hereafter
devised, regardless of the protocol used for such transmission or conveyance,
and as defined in F.S. § 202.11. Communications to remotely facilitate,
monitor, or control the distribution or transmission of electricity by an
electric utility are also not included in the definition of COMMUNICATIONS
SERVICES.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY or IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. In, on, over, under
or across the public rights-of-way.
   ORDINANCE. This ordinance and the provisions of this chapter.
   PASS-THROUGH PROVIDER. Has the meaning provided in F.S. § 337.401(6).
   PERSON. Any individual, children, firm, association, joint venture,
partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation,
organization or legal entity of any kind, successor, assignee, transferee,
personal representative, and all other groups or combinations, and shall
include the city to the extent the city acts as a communications services
provider.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES. Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless
services and common carrier wireless exchange access services, and shall
include “wireless service” as defined in F.S. § 365.172, as well as “personal
wireless services” defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(i), as they may be
amended from time to time. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for purposes of this
chapter, “video service,” as defined in F.S. § 202.11, as it may be amended, is
not included in the definition of PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES. PERSONAL WIRELESS
SERVICES shall not include any form of surveillance by photography, wireless
communication, or other form of transmission.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES. Facilities for the provision of
personal wireless services and, for the purposes of this chapter, shall include
all of those “wireless communication facilities” as defined in F.S. § 365.172,
as it may be amended, that are not also telecommunications towers as defined by
Chapter 155 of the city’s Code of Ordinances. Facilities used for
communications to remotely facilitate, monitor, or control the distribution or
transmission of electricity on electric infrastructure are not included in the
definition of PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE
FACILITIES shall not be used to provide for any form of surveillance or
photography through wireless communication or other form of transmission.
   PLACE OR MAINTAIN or PLACEMENT OR MAINTENANCE or PLACING OR MAINTAINING.  To
erect, construct, install, maintain, grade, excavate, place, repair, extend,
replace, expand, remove, occupy, locate or relocate. A communications services
provider that owns or exercises physical control over communications facilities
in public rights-of-way, such as the physical control to maintain and repair,
is PLACING OR MAINTAINING the facilities. A party providing service only
through resale or only through use of a third party's unbundled network
elements is not PLACING OR MAINTAINING the communications facilities through
which such service is provided. The transmission and receipt of radio frequency
signals through the airspace of the public rights-of-way does not constitute
PLACING OR MAINTAINING facilities in the public rights-of-way.
   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.  A public right- of-way, public utility easement,
public highway, street, lane, bridge, sidewalk, road, waterway, tunnel, alley,
or similar property for which the city is the authority that has jurisdiction
and control and  may lawfully grant access to such property pursuant to
applicable law, and includes the surface, the air space over the surface and
the area below the surface to the extent the city holds a property interest
therein. PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include private property. PUBLIC
RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include any real or personal city property except as
described above and shall not include city buildings, fixtures, poles,
conduits, facilities or other structures or improvements, regardless of whether
they are situated in the public rights-of-way. No reference herein, or in any
permit, to public rights-of-way shall be deemed to be a representation or
guarantee by the city that its interest or other right to control the use of
such property is sufficient to permit its use for such purposes, and a
registrant shall be deemed to gain only those rights to use as are properly in
the city and as the city may have the undisputed right and power to give.
   REGISTRANT.  A communications services provider or other person that has
registered with the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   REGISTRATION or REGISTER. The process described in this chapter whereby a
communications services provider provides certain information to the city.
   STEALTH FACILITY. Any communications facility which is designed to blend
into the surrounding environment. Examples of STEALTH FACILITIES include
architecturally screened roof- mounted antennas, antennas integrated into
architectural elements, poles in the rights-of-way that are designed to look
like light poles, and wireless designed to look like light poles, power poles,
or trees.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 10-2-13; Am. Ord. 1903, passed
8-1-18)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 121.10 REGISTRATION FOR PLACING OR MAINTAINING COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   A communications services provider, communications facility provider,
or pass-through provider that desires to place or maintain a communications
facility in public rights-of-way in the city shall first register with the city
in accordance with this section. Subject to the terms and conditions prescribed
in this section, a registrant may place or maintain a communications facility
in public rights-of-way.
   (B)    A registration shall not convey any title, equitable or legal, to the
registrant in the public rights-of-way. Registration under this section governs
only the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in public
rights-of- way. Registration does not excuse a communications services
provider, communications facility provider, or pass-through provider from
obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before locating its
facilities on the city’s or another person’s facilities. Registration does not
excuse a communications services provider, communications facility provider, or
pass-through provider from complying with all applicable city ordinances, codes
or regulations, including this chapter.
   (C)   Each communications services provider that desires to place or
maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the city shall
file a single registration with the city which shall include the following
information:
      (1)   Name of the applicant;
      (2)    Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's primary
contact person in connection with the registration and the person to contact in
case of an emergency;
      (3)   Evidence of the insurance coverage required under §
121.25 of this chapter and acknowledgment that registrant has received and
reviewed a copy of this chapter;
      (4)   A copy of the applicant’s certificate of authorization or local
business tax receipt to provide communications services issued by the Florida
Public Service Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, or other
federal or state authority, if any;
      (5)   For an applicant that does not provide a Florida Public Service
Commission certificate of authorization number, if the applicant is a
corporation, proof of authority to do business in the State of Florida,
including the number of the certificate of incorporation; and
   (D)   The City Manager, or his, or her designee shall review the information
submitted by the applicant. If the applicant submits information in accordance
with division (C) above, the registration shall be effective and the city shall
notify the applicant of the effectiveness of registration in writing. If the
city determines that the information has not been submitted in accordance with
division (C) above, the city shall notify the applicant of the non-
effectiveness of registration, and reasons for the non-effectiveness, in
writing. The city shall so reply to an applicant within 30 days after receipt
of registration information from the applicant.
   (E)   A registrant may cancel a registration upon written notice to the city
stating that it will no longer place or maintain any communications facilities
in public rights-of-way within the city and will no longer need to obtain
permits to perform work in public rights- of-way. A registrant cannot cancel a
registration if the registrant continues to place or maintain any
communications facilities in public rights-of-way.
   (F)   Registration shall not in itself establish any right to place or
maintain or priority for the placement or maintenance of a communications
facility in public rights-of-way within the city, but shall establish for the
registrant a right to apply for a permit, if permitting is required by the
city. Registrations are expressly subject to any future amendment to or
replacement of this chapter and further subject to any additional city's
ordinances, as well as any state or federal laws that may be enacted.
   (G)   A registrant shall renew its registration with the city by April 1 of
even numbered years in accordance with the registration requirements in this
chapter, except that a registrant that initially registers during the even
numbered year when renewal would be due or the odd numbered year immediately
preceding such even numbered year shall not be required to renew until the next
even numbered year. Within 30 days of any change in the information required to
be submitted pursuant to division (C), a registrant shall provide updated
information to the city. If no information in the then-existing registration
has changed, the renewal may state that no information has changed. Failure to
renew a registration may result in the city restricting the issuance of
additional permits until the communications services provider has complied with
the registration requirements of this section.
   (H)   In accordance with applicable city ordinances, codes or regulations
and this chapter, a permit shall be required of a communications services
provider, communications facility provider, or pass-through provider that
desires to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way.
An effective registration shall be a condition precedent to obtaining a permit.
Notwithstanding an effective registration, permitting requirements shall
continue to apply. A permit may be obtained by or on behalf of a registrant
having an effective registration if all permitting requirements are met.
   (I)   A registrant that places or maintains communications facilities in the
public rights-of-way and that pays communications services taxes shall not be
required to pay a permit fee since the city has elected to collect the
communications services tax pursuant to F.S. Ch. 202, as may be amended from
time to time. A pass-through provider that places or maintains a communications
facility in the city’s roads or rights-of-way shall pay the city an annual
amount not to exceed $500 per linear mile or portion thereof. The city’s roads
or rights-of-way do not include roads or rights-of-way that extend in or
through the municipality but are state, county, or another authority’s roads or
rights-of-way.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07; Am. Ord. 1760, passed
10-2-13; Am. Ord. 1903, passed 8-1-18)
§ 121.11 TRANSFER, SALE OR ASSIGNMENT OF ASSETS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
     (A)   If a registrant transfers, sells or assigns its assets located in
public rights-of-way incident to a transfer, sale or assignment of the
registrant's assets, the transferee, buyer or assignee shall be obligated to
comply with the terms of this chapter. Written notice of any such transfer,
sale or assignment shall be provided by such registrant to the city within 24
days after the closing date of the transfer, sale or assignment. If the
transferee, buyer or assignee is a current registrant, then the transferee,
buyer or assignee is not required to re-register. If the transferee, buyer or
assignee is not a current registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee
shall register as provided in §
121.10 of this chapter within 60 days of the transfer, sale or assignment. If
permit applications are pending in the registrant's name, the transferee, buyer
or assignee shall notify the Engineering Department that the transferee, buyer
or assignee is the new applicant.
   (B)   Any encumbrance on the communications facilities of the registrant in
the public rights-of-way shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the
city under this chapter and applicable law.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 10-2-13; Am. Ord. 1903, passed
8-1-18)
§ 121.12 PLACEMENT OR MAINTENANCE OF A COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY OR PERSONAL
WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   The provisions of this section shall not apply to small and micro wireless
facilities that are regulated pursuant to §
121.45 of the city’s code of ordinances.
   (A)   Registrant shall at all times comply with and abide by all applicable
provisions of state, federal and local law and city ordinances, codes and
regulations including but not limited to §
154.60 et seq. of this Code, as amended, in placing or maintaining a
communications facility or a personal wireless service facility in public
rights-of-way.
   (B)   To the extent not otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the
city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or
additional communications facilities and personal wireless service facilities
within a particular area of public rights- of-way. The city shall have the
power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional communications
facilities and personal wireless service facilities within the public rights-
of-way if there is insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests to
place and maintain facilities in that area of the public rights-of-way, for the
protection of existing facilities in the public rights- of-way or to
accommodate city adopted plans for public improvements or projects that the
city determines are in the public interest.
   (C)   All safety practices required by applicable law or accepted industry
practices and standards shall be used during the placement or maintenance of
communications facilities and personal wireless service facilities.
   (D)   Personal wireless service facilities located in the public rights-of-
way must meet the following minimum standards:
      (1)   Required approvals. No application for placement of personal
wireless service facilities in the public rights-of-way shall be permitted
without approval of the Building Department, the Public Services Department,
and the Planning and Economic Development Division.
      (2)   (a)   Because an antenna must be placed above- ground in order to
transmit and receive signals, an applicant proposing placement of an antenna in
the public rights-of-way, except in the case of a co- location, shall submit an
application for approval through the Planning and Economic Development Division
as a non-quasi-judicial action before the Planning and Zoning Board. The
application shall consist of the following:
            1.    Application form provided by the city;
            2.   Copy of current business tax receipt;
            3.   A scaled site plan depicting an area within a 600-foot radius
from the center of the proposed personal wireless service facility, and showing
the proposed antennas, equipment, related infrastructure, sidewalks, all
existing utilities, antennas, towers, stealth facilities, the right-of-way
boundaries, wireless communications facility boundary, road improvements, all
ingress and egress to nearby streets, major vegetation, required grading,
existing and proposed elevations, easements, and other significant features of
the site.
            4.    Certification signed by the applicant confirming the distance
separation from other personal wireless service facilities.
         (b)   No building permit shall be issued by the Building Department
and no engineering permit shall be issued by the Public Services Department
prior to the approval of a development plan where required pursuant to this
division (D).
      (3)   Completeness review; time limitation. The city shall grant or deny
a properly completed application for personal wireless service facilities in
the public rights-of-way within 90 days or, as required by federal and state
law, after the date the application is determined to be properly completed. An
application is deemed submitted or resubmitted on the date the application is
received by the Planning and Economic Development Division. The Planning and
Economic Development Division shall notify the applicant within 20 days after
the date the application is initially submitted or additional information
resubmitted, whether the application is properly completed in compliance with
the city’s requirements. If the application is not completed in compliance with
the city’s requirements, the Planning and Economic Development Division shall
so notify the applicant in writing indicating with specificity any deficiencies
which, if cured, make the application properly completed. Upon resubmission of
information to cure the stated deficiencies, the Planning and Economic
Development Division shall notify the applicant, in writing, no later than 20
days after the additional information is submitted, of any remaining
deficiencies that must be cured. If a specified deficiency is not properly
cured when the applicant resubmits its application to comply with the notice of
deficiencies, the Planning Division may continue to request the information
until such time as the specified deficiency is cured, or may establish a
reasonable time frame within which the required information to cure the
application deficiency is to be provided. If the curative information is not
provided within such time frame, the application will be considered withdrawn
or closed.
      (4)   Co-location or use of stealth facilities. An antenna in the public
right-of-way shall, to the extent possible, be co-located on an existing power,
light or other utility pole. When co-location of an antenna is not possible, a
freestanding stealth facility is preferred. For co-locations, the applicant
shall submit an application to the city’s Building Department for approval.
      (5)   Statement. A statement or statements shall be submitted certifying
that the construction of personal wireless service facilities proposed to be
located in the public rights-of-way will comply with applicable standards as
set forth in the Florida Building Code, latest edition, the State of Florida
Department of Transportation Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design,
Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways, and applicable
electrical codes; and describing the proposed personal wireless service
facilities’ capacity to permit multiple users, including an example of the
number and type of antennas or other attachments that can be accommodated on
support structures. No personal wireless service facility which exceeds its
support structure’s loading capacity, which causes any pole or structure to
exceed its loading capacity or which does not conform to applicable electrical
codes shall be permitted in the public rights-of-way.
      (6)   Dimensional limits for cabinets, boxes and vaults. No permit or
order shall be granted authorizing the placement, construction or modification
in the public rights-of-way of a personal wireless service facility cabinet,
box or vault having a total volume exceeding 24 cubic feet unless the applicant
provides a statement explaining the need for the greater proposed dimensions
and certifying that current technology provides no alternative consistent with
the dimensional requirements of this division (D)(6).
         (a)   Height, setbacks and related location requirements.
            1.   The height of a new personal wireless service facility in the
public right-of-way to which an antenna is attached shall not exceed the height
of existing poles or structures in the public rights-of-way within 100 feet of
such proposed new personal wireless service facility, or if no such existing
poles are present in the public rights-of-way within 100 feet of such proposed
new personal wireless service facility, the new personal wireless service
facility shall be a minimum of 20 feet in height, and not exceed a height of 50
feet. Height shall be measured from the crown of the road of the nearest public
street.
            2.    Except as otherwise provided herein, personal wireless
service facilities in the public rights-of-way shall conform to the standards
and requirements set forth in the State of Florida Department of Transportation
Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance
for Streets and Highways.
            3.   No antenna attached to a freestanding pole in the public
rights-of-way, other than as a co-location with an existing power, light or
other utility pole, or unless installed as a stealth facility, shall be
permitted within 50 feet of any principal residential structure.
            4.   A box or cabinet housing the equipment connected to an antenna
attached to a freestanding pole in the public rights-of-way shall be placed on
the ground instead of attached to the pole supporting the antenna, and shall be
screened from view.
         (b)   Antennas.
            1.   Each application for a personal wireless service facility,
other than for co-location, shall contain a rendering or photograph of the
proposed antenna which depicts its aesthetic features including, but not
limited to, the use of colors and screening devices. The application shall be
subject to administrative review regarding consistency with the requirements of
this section. The City Manager, or his or her designee, may require, to the
extent possible, that aesthetic features, including but not limited, to the use
of colors and screening devices, be used so that antennas blend into the
surrounding environment.
            2.   No signals, lights, or illumination shall be permitted on an
antenna or, except in the case of a light pole or a stealth facility designed
to emulate a light pole, on a pole to which such antenna is attached, unless
required by applicable state or federal laws or rules.
            3.   Antennas shall be mounted at a height and location that will
not interfere with use of the public rights-of- way.
            4.   No exterior antenna in the public rights-of-way shall exceed
the height of the pole to which it is attached unless it is attached as a co-
location to an existing power, light or other utility pole or on a pole
designed to emulate a light pole.
            5.   No antenna shall be mounted more than four inches from the
pole to which it is attached unless it is attached as a co-location to an
existing power, light or other utility pole.
            6.   Exterior looping of excess cable length installed on any
personal wireless service facility located in the public right-of-way is
prohibited.
            7.   Distance between antenna locations/number of antenna locations
within a specified area. To minimize the adverse visual impacts associated with
the proliferation and clustering of antennas and associated above-ground
personal wireless service facilities, no antenna site in the public rights-of-
way shall be located within 600 feet of any other such antenna site or
telecommunications tower. Further, no more than 13 antenna sites may be located
within an area of one square mile. This division (C)(6)(b)7. shall not apply to
any antenna co-located on an existing power, light or other utility pole within
the public rights-of-way.
         (c)   Co-locations. For the purposes of this section, CO-LOCATION
means the mounting or installation of an antenna on an existing power, light or
other utility pole for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio
frequency signals for communications purposes. In any co-location, the existing
power, light or other utility pole may be modified or replaced to accommodate
the new attachment, provided however that the modified or replacement pole
complies with the height, setback and related location requirements, unless
such requirements are waived. For the purposes  of this section, an existing
power, light or other utility pole modified or replaced to accommodate a new
attachment shall continue to be considered an existing pole after replacement
or modification.
         (d)   Approval required from other governmental agencies and owners.
Each application for the location of a personal wireless service facility in
the public rights-of-way may be required to include written approval, or a
statement of no objection, from state agencies that regulate siting, design,
and construction of such facilities, or have jurisdiction over the public
rights-of-way, if any such agencies require the applicant to seek their review
or approval. An existing facility in the public rights-of-way shall only be
utilized in a manner consistent with the city code and with the written
permission of the facility owner.
         (e)   FCC emissions standards. All personal wireless service
facilities in the public rights-of-way shall comply with current radio
frequency emissions standards of the Federal Communications Commission.
         (f)   Buffering.
            1.   Except in the case of an application for a co-location, as a
condition of approval the City Manager, or his or her designee, may require the
use of a fence as a buffer that is consistent in design and function with
existing fencing used in the public rights-of-way.
            2.   Except in the case of an application for a co-location, as a
condition of approval the City Manager, or his or her designee, may require the
use of landscaping as a buffer, which landscaping is consistent with the
landscaping otherwise located in the public rights-of-way. Additional
landscaping may be required if deemed necessary to buffer adjacent properties.
The City Manager, or his or her designee, may require landscaping in excess of
the requirements of the city code to enhance compatibility with adjacent
residential and nonresidential land uses.
            3.   All buffering required in connection with the use of personal
wireless service facilities in the public rights-of-way shall be maintained by
the owner of such facilities at its own cost.
         (g)   Equipment. The location in the public rights-of-way of any
equipment or equipment cabinets associated with personal wireless service
facilities shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. Any such
cabinets or equipment must be approved by the City Engineer as to safety, and
shall not interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way. The City Engineer
may require a statement certifying the need for the proposed equipment and
location. No generators utilized in connection with personal wireless services
facilities may be placed in the public rights-of-way, except temporarily in the
case of emergency and if approved in advance by the City Engineer.
         (h)   Signs and advertising. The use of any portion of a personal
wireless service facility in the public rights-of-way for the posting of signs
or for advertising purposes, including, but not limited to, the display of
lights, banners and streamers is strictly prohibited. For purposes of emergency
contact, the owner of the personal wireless service facility shall place one
identification label on the equipment advising of the name and contact
telephone number of the owner of the personal wireless service facility.
         (i)   Inspections.
            1.   Owners or operators of personal wireless service facilities in
the public rights-of-way shall ensure that the city’s Building Department has
current contact information for such owner or its authorized representative.
            2.   The owner or operator of a personal wireless service facility
in the public rights-of-way shall submit a report to the city’s Building
Department, certifying the integrity of the personal wireless service facility
and the safety of electrical components at least once every two years.
         (j)   Cooperative determination. In the event an applicant
demonstrates, in writing, to the satisfaction of the City Manager, or his or
her designee, that the operation of this section produces a result which is
either (i) a burdensome hardship on the applicant, and is inconsistent with the
general public welfare; or (ii) inconsistent with the intent of the particular
provisions of this section, and inconsistent with the general public welfare,
the applicant and the City Manager, or his or her designee, shall cooperate to
determine an appropriate location and aesthetic design for the proposed
facility. In any such cooperative determination there shall be a preference for
co-location with existing personal wireless service facilities or other utility
facilities, or for use of unused capacity on existing personal wireless service
facilities. Where facilities cannot be co-located and no such unused capacity
exists, there shall be a preference for the use of free-standing stealth-type
structures which are consistent, to the extent possible, with this section. The
City Manager, or his or her designee, may require a written statement
certifying that the proposed location is needed by a personal wireless services
provider to close a significant gap in its service to the affected areas.
         (k)   Modifications or replacements. Modification or replacement of
any personal wireless service facilities in the public rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval of the city’s Building Department. If such modification or
replacement of personal wireless service facilities or equipment would, as
reasonably determined by the city, result in the facility or equipment being
readily discernibly different in size, type, and appearance when viewed from
ground level from surrounding properties, such modification shall require
approval as a non-quasi judicial item before the Planning and Zoning Board. Any
co-location of personal wireless service facilities, removal of personal
wireless service facilities or replacement of personal wireless service
facilities that substantially changes the physical dimensions of an antenna
node site shall be subject to approval of the city’s Building Department.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, for an eligible
facilities request under Section 6409 of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job
Creation Act of 2012, the application shall be subject only to the Building
Department’s review and approval process.
         (l)   Statements and certifications. Any statement or certification
submitted by or on behalf of an applicant pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall be prepared applying rational analysis by one or more engineers
registered and licensed in the state, or by such other person or persons
designated by the applicant who are qualified to perform the required analysis.
Any person or persons providing such a statement or statements shall also
certify as to his or her competence in the discipline or disciplines necessary
to perform the analysis and to provide the statement.
   (E)   A registrant shall, at its own expense, restore the public rights-of-
way to at least its original condition before such work after the completion of
any placement or maintenance of a communications facility or personal wireless
service facility in public rights-of-way or each phase thereof. If the
registrant fails to make such restoration within 30 days following the
completion of such placement or maintenance, the city may perform such
restoration as it deems necessary and charge all costs of the restoration
against the registrant in accordance with F.S. § 337.402, as it may be amended.
The registrant shall guarantee its restoration work and shall correct any
improper restoration work at its own expense for 12 months following the
original completion of the work.
   (F)   Removal or relocation at the direction of the city of a registrant’s
communications facility or personal wireless service facility in public rights-
of-way shall be governed by the provisions of F.S. §§ 337.403 and 337.404, as
they may be amended.
   (G)   A permit from the city constitutes authorization to undertake only
certain activities on public rights-of-way in accordance with this chapter, and
does not create a property right or grant authority to impinge upon the rights
of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way.
   (H)   A registrant shall maintain its communications facility or personal
wireless service facility in public rights-of-way in a manner consistent with
accepted industry practice and applicable law.
   (I)   In the interest of the public’s health, safety and welfare, upon
request of the city, a registrant shall coordinate placement or maintenance
activities under a permit with any other work, construction, installation or
repairs that may be occurring or scheduled to occur within a reasonable time
frame in the subject public rights-of-way. The city may require a registrant to
alter its placement or maintenance schedule as the city determines to be
reasonably necessary so as to minimize disruptions and disturbance in the
public rights-of-way. The city may provide a more definite time frame based on
individual city construction or maintenance schedules.
   (J)   The city makes no warranties or representations regarding the fitness,
suitability, or availability of city’s public rights-of-way for the
registrant’s communications facilities or personal wireless service facilities
and any performance of work or costs incurred by registrant or provision of
services shall be at registrant’s sole risk. Nothing in this chapter shall
affect the city’s authority to add, vacate or abandon public rights-of-way and
city makes no warranties or representations regarding the availability of any
added, vacated or abandoned public rights-of-way for communications facilities
or personal wireless service facilities.
   (K)   The city shall have the right to make such inspections of
communications facilities and personal wireless service facilities placed or
maintained in public rights-of-way as it finds necessary to ensure compliance
with this chapter. In the event the city determines that a violation exists
with respect to registrant’s placement or maintenance of facilities in the
public rights-of-way that is not considered to be an emergency or danger to the
public health, safety or welfare, the city will provide the registrant at least
three days written notice setting forth the violation and requesting
correction.
   (L)   The city reserves the right to place and maintain, and permit to be
placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water, electric, storm drainage,
communications, and other facilities, cables or conduit, and to do, and to
permit to be done, any underground and overhead installation or improvement
that may be deemed necessary or proper by the city in public rights-of-way
occupied by the registrant. Registrant shall, if the registrant so agrees,
allow city facilities to be co-located within city’s public rights-of-way
through the use of a joint trench during registrant’s construction project.
Such joint trench projects shall be negotiated in good faith by separate
agreement between the registrant and the city and may be subjected to other
city rights-of-way requirements. The city further reserves without limitation
the right to alter, change, or cause to be changed, the grading, installation,
relocation, or width of the public rights-of-way within the limits of the city
and within said limits as same may from time to time be altered.
   (M)   A registrant shall, on the request of any person holding a permit
issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its communications facilities or
personal wireless service facilities to permit the work authorized by the
permit. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of facilities shall
be paid by the person requesting the same, and the registrant shall have the
authority to require such payment in advance. The registrant shall be given not
less than 30 days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary
relocation. If the city requests a temporary raising or lowering of a facility
for a public purpose, the city shall not be charged for the temporary raising
or lowering of the facility.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 10-2-13; Am. Ord. 1903, passed
8-1-18)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 121.20 SUSPENSION OF PERMITS.
    (A)   Subject to §
121.21, the City Manager or his or her designee may suspend a permit for work
in the public rights-of-way for one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to satisfy permit conditions, including conditions set
forth in this chapter or other applicable city ordinances, codes or regulations
governing placement or maintenance of communications facilities in public
rights-of-way, including, without limitation, failure to take reasonable safety
precautions to alert the public of work at the work site, or to restore any
public rights-of-way;
      (2)   Misrepresentation or fraud by registrant in a registration or
permit application to the city;
      (3)   Failure to properly renew or ineffectiveness of registration; or
      (4)   Failure to relocate or remove facilities as may be lawfully
required by the city.
   (B)   After the suspension of a permit pursuant to this section, the City
Manager or his or her designee shall provide written notice of the reason for
the suspension to the registrant.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 10-2-13)
§ 121.21 APPEALS.
   (A)   Final, written decisions of the City Manager, or his or her designee,
suspending a permit, denying an application for a registration or denying an
application for renewal of a registration are subject to appeal. An appeal must
be filed with the City Clerk within 30 days of the date of the final, written
decision to be appealed. Any appeal not timely filed as set forth above shall
be waived. The City Commission shall hear the appeal. The hearing shall occur
within 30 days of the receipt of the appeal, unless waived by the registrant,
and a written decision shall be rendered within 20 days of the hearing. Upon
correction of any grounds that gave rise to a suspension or denial, the
suspension or denial shall be lifted.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall effect the remedies the city has
available under applicable law.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 10-2-13; Am. Ord. 1903, passed
8-1-18)
§ 121.22 CONDITIONAL USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   In the event the registrant desires to use its existing facilities or
to construct new facilities for the purpose of providing other utility or non-
utility services to existing or potential consumers or resellers, by providing
any other services other than the provision of communications service, or for
providing any other use to existing or potential consumers, a registrant shall
seek such additional and separate authorization from city for such activities
as may be required by applicable law.
   (B)   To the extent that a registrant leases or otherwise uses the
facilities of a person that is duly registered or otherwise authorized to place
or maintain facilities in the public rights-of-way of the city, the registrant
shall make no claim, nor assert any right, which will impede the lawful
exercise of the city's rights, including requiring the removal of such
facilities from the public rights-of-way of the city, regardless of the effect
on registrant's ability to place or maintain its own communications facilities
in public rights-of-way of the city.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 10-2-13)
§ 121.23  INVOLUNTARY TERMINATION OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   The city may terminate a registration if:
      (1)   A federal or state authority suspends, denies, or revokes a
registrant's certification or local business tax receipt to provide
communications services;
      (2)   The registrant's placement or maintenance of a communications
facility in the public rights-of-way presents an extraordinary danger to the
general public or other users of the public rights-of-way and the registrant
fails to remedy the danger promptly after receipt of written notice; or
      (3)   The registrant ceases to use all of its communications facilities
in public rights-of-way and has not complied with §
121.30 of this chapter.
   (B)   Prior to termination, the registrant shall be notified by the City
Manager, or his or her designee, with a written notice setting forth all
matters pertinent to the proposed termination action, including which of
divisions (1) through (3) above is applicable as the reason therefore, and
describing the proposed action of the city with respect thereto. The registrant
shall have 30 days after receipt of such notice within which to address or
eliminate the reason or within which to present a plan, satisfactory to the
City Manager, or his or her designee, to accomplish the same. If the plan is
rejected, the City Manager, or his or her designee, shall provide written
notice of such rejection to the registrant and shall make a recommendation to
the City Commission regarding a final decision as to termination of
registration. A decision by a city to terminate a registration may only be
accomplished by an action of the City Commission. A registrant shall be
notified by written notice of any decision by the City Commission to terminate
its registration. Such written notice shall be sent within seven days after the
decision.
   (C)   In the event of termination, the former registrant shall:
      (1)   Notify the city of the assumption or anticipated assumption by
another registrant of ownership of the registrant's communications facilities
in public rights-of-way; or
      (2)   Provide the city with an acceptable plan for disposition of its
communications facilities in public rights-of-way. If a registrant fails to
comply with this division, the city may exercise any remedies or rights it has
at law or in equity, including but not limiting to taking possession of the
facilities, requiring the registrant's bonding company within 90 days of the
termination to remove some or all of the facilities from the public rights-of-
way and restore the public rights-of-way to its original condition before the
removal, or requiring that some or all of the facilities be removed and the
public rights-of-way restored to its original condition before the removal at
the registrant's expense.
   (D)   In any event, a terminated registrant shall take such steps as are
necessary to render every portion of the communications facilities remaining in
the public rights-of-way of the city safe.
   (E)   In the event of termination of a registration, this provision does not
permit the city to cause the removal of any communications facilities that are
used to provide another service for which the registrant holds a valid
certification or local business tax receipt with the governing federal or state
agency, where required, and is properly registered with the city for such
certificated or licensed service, where required.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07; Am. Ord. 1760, passed
10-2-13)
§ 121.24 EXISTING COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   A communications services provider with an existing communications facility
in the public rights-of-way of the city has 60 days from the effective date of
this chapter to comply with the terms of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, registration, or be in violation thereof. This provision shall not
require removal or alteration of communications facilities, wireless
facilities, utility poles or wireless support structures placed or maintained
in the public rights-of-way pursuant to a previously issued permit prior to the
effective date of this section unless such facilities are abandoned or
otherwise required to be altered or removed.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 10-2-13; Am. Ord. 1903, passed
8-1-18)
§ 121.25 INSURANCE.
    (A)   A registrant shall not commence construction, operation or
maintenance of the facility without obtaining all insurance required under this
section and approval of such insurance by Risk Management of the city, nor
shall a registrant allow any contractor or subcontractor to commence work on
its contract or subcontract until all similar such insurance required of the
same has been obtained and approved. The required insurance must be obtained
and maintained for the entire period the registrant has facilities in the
public rights-of-way, and for a period thereafter as specified in the minimum
coverages described below. If the registrant, its contractors or subcontractors
do not have the required insurance, the city may order such entities to stop
operations until the insurance is obtained and approved.
   (B)   Certificates of insurance, reflecting evidence of the required
insurance, shall be filed with the Risk Manager Coordinator. For entities that
are entering the market, the certificates shall be filed prior to the
commencement of construction and once a year thereafter, and as provided below
in the event of a lapse in coverage. For entities that have facilities in the
public rights-of-way as of the effective date of this chapter, the certificate
shall be filed within 60 calendar days of the adoption of this chapter,
annually thereafter, and as provided below in the event of a lapse in coverage.
   (C)   These certificates of insurance shall contain a provision that
coverages afforded under these policies will not be canceled until at least 45
calendar days prior written notice has been given to the city. Policies shall
be issued by companies authorized to do business under the laws of the State of
Florida. Financial ratings must be no less than "A-VI" in the latest edition of
Best’s Key Rating Guide, published by A.M. Best Guide. A registrant may self-
insure. Self insured status must be confirmed with certification of same by
presentation of financial statements which are not more than one year old and
signed by the registrant's Chief Financial Officer or designee. Information
contained therein is subject to review and approval by city's Risk Management
Division.
   (D)   In the event that the insurance certificate provided indicates that
the insurance shall terminate or lapse during the period of this contract, then
in that event, the registrant shall furnish, at least 30 calendar days prior to
the expiration of the date of such insurance, a renewed certificate of
insurance of equal and like coverage.
   (E)   A registrant and its contractors or subcontractors engaged in work on
the operator's behalf in, on, under or over public rights-of-way, shall
maintain the following minimum insurance:
      (1)   Comprehensive general liability insurance.  To cover liability
bodily injury and property damage. Exposures to be covered are: premises,
operations, products/completed operations, and certain contracts. Coverage must
be written on an occurrence basis, with the following limits of liability:
         (a)   Bodily injury
            (i)   Each occurrence   $1,000,000
             (ii)   Annual aggregate   $3,000,000
         (b)   Property damage
            (i)   Each occurrence   $1,000,000
            (ii)   Annual aggregate   $3,000,000
         (c)   Personal injury
            (i)   Annual aggregate   $3,000,000
         (d)   Completed operations and products liability shall be maintained
for two years after the abandonment of the facility by the registrant (in the
case of the registrant) or completion of the work for the registrant (in the
case of a contractor or subcontractor).
         (e)   Property damage liability insurance shall include coverage for
the following hazards: X-explosion, C-Collapse, U-underground.
      (2)   Workers’ compensation insurance. Shall be maintained to comply with
statutory limits for all employees, and in the case any work is sublet, each
registrant shall require the subcontractors similarly to provide workers’
compensation insurance for all the latter's employees unless such employees are
covered by the protection afforded by each registrant. Each registrant and its
contractors and subcontractors shall maintain employers’ liability insurance.
The following limits must be maintained:
         (a)   Workers’ compensation - statutory
         (b)   Employers’ liability -   $500,000 per occurrence
      (3)   Comprehensive auto liability.
         (a)   Bodily injury
            (i)   Each occurrence   $1,000,000
            (ii)   Annual aggregate   $3,000,000
         (b)   Property damage
            (i)   Each occurrence   $1,000,000
            (ii)   Annual aggregate   $3,000,000
Coverage shall include owned, hired and non-owned vehicles.
   (F)   Each communications service provider shall hold the city, its agents,
and employees, harmless on account of claims for damages to persons, property
or premises arising out of its construction, operation or repair of its
communications facility and name the city as an additional insured.
   (G)   This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the city’s
rights, privileges and immunities as set forth in F.S. § 768.28. Insurance
under this section shall run continuously with the presence of the registrant's
facilities in the public rights-of-way and any termination or lapse of such
insurance shall be a violation of this section and subject to the remedies as
set forth herein. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may, in its sole
discretion, require increased or decreased levels of insurance for any other
object placed in the city 's public rights-of-way by way of individual local
business tax receipt agreements.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07; Am. Ord. 1760, passed
10-2-13)
§ 121.26 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   A registrant shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold
harmless, and defend the city, its officials, boards, members, agents, and
employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings,
judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses incurred by
the city arising out of the placement or maintenance of its communications
system or facilities in public rights-of-way, regardless of whether the act or
omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter,
provided, however, that a registrant's obligation hereunder shall not extend to
any claims caused by the gross negligence or wanton or willful acts of the
city. This provision includes, but is not limited to, the city's reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or
proceedings. The city agrees to notify the registrant, in writing, within a
reasonable time of city receiving notice, of any issue it determines may
require indemnification. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from
participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel and at its
own cost if in the city's reasonable belief there exists or may exist a
conflict, potential conflict or appearance of a conflict. Nothing contained in
this section shall be construed or interpreted:
      (1)   As denying to either party any remedy or defense available to such
party under the laws of the State of Florida;
      (2)   As consent by the city to be sued; or
      (3)   As a waiver of sovereign immunity beyond the waiver provided in
F.S. § 768.28, as may be amended.
   (B)   The indemnification requirements shall survive and be in effect after
the termination or cancellation of a registration.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 10-2-13)
§ 121.27 CONSTRUCTION BOND.
    (A)   Prior to issuing a permit where the work under the permit will
require restoration of public rights-of-way, the city may require a
construction bond to secure the restoration of the public rights-of-way.
   (B)   In the event a registrant subject to such a construction bond fails to
complete the work in a safe, timely and competent manner in accordance with the
provisions of the permit, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally
from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the
city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation,
indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the
registrant, or the cost of completing the work, plus a reasonable allowance for
attorneys’ fees, up to the full amount of the bond.
   (C)   No less than 12 months after completion of the construction and
satisfaction of all obligations in accordance with the bond, the registrant may
request the City Engineer or his or her designee, to remove the requirement to
continue the construction bond. Notwithstanding, the city may require a new
bond for any subsequent work performed in the public rights-of-way.
   (D)   The construction bond shall be issued by a surety having a minimum
rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition; shall be
subject to the approval of the City Attorney; and shall provide that:
   “This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until sixty (60) days
after receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to
renew.”
   (E)   The rights reserved by the city with respect to any construction bond
established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and
remedies the city may have under this section, or at law or equity, and no
action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the construction bond
will affect any other right the city may have.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 10-2-13; Am. Ord. 1903, passed
8-1-18)
§ 121.28 RESERVED.
§ 121.29 ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
    (A)   A registrant’s failure to comply with provisions of this chapter
shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject the registrant
to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in F.S. Chapter
162, F.S. § 166.0415 and §§
32.035 et seq. of this code of ordinances, as they may be amended. In addition,
violation of this chapter may be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 for an
initial violation and not more than $500 for any repeat violations.
   (B)   In addition to any other remedies available at law, including but not
limited to F.S. § 166.0415, and F.S. Chapter 162, or equity or as provided in
this chapter, the city may apply any one or combination of the following
remedies in the event a registrant violates this chapter, or applicable local
law or order related to the public rights-of-way:
      (1)   Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or other law
applicable to occupants of the public rights-of-way, may result in imposition
of penalties to be paid by the registrant to the city so long as the violation
continues.
      (2)   In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the city may seek
legal or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   Before imposing a fine pursuant to division (B)(1) of this section,
the city shall give written notice of the violation and its intention to assess
such penalties, which notice shall contain a description of the alleged
violation. Following receipt of such notice, the registrant shall have 30 days
to either:
      (1)   Cure the violation to the city's satisfaction and the city shall
make good faith reasonable efforts to assist in resolving the violation; or
      (2)   File an appeal with the city to contest the alleged violation; §
121.21 of this chapter shall govern such appeal. If no appeal is filed and if
the violation is not cured within the 30 day period, the city may collect all
fines owed, beginning with the first day of the violation, through any means
allowed by law.
   (D)   In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the city
shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person or
persons bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required
in order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as the city
determines are appropriate to the public interest.
   (E)   Failure of the city to enforce any requirements of this chapter shall
not constitute a waiver of the city's right to enforce that violation or
subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement
remedies.
   (F)   In any proceeding before the city where there exists an issue with
respect to a registrant's performance of its obligations pursuant to this
chapter, the registrant shall be given the opportunity to provide such
information as it may have concerning its compliance with the terms and
conditions of this chapter. The city may find a registrant that does not
demonstrate compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter in default
and apply any one or combination of the remedies otherwise authorized by this
chapter.
   (G)   The City Manager or designee shall be responsible for administration
and enforcement of this chapter, and is authorized to give any notice required
by law.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 10-2-13; Am. Ord. 1903, passed
8-1-18)
§ 121.30 ABANDONMENT OF A COMMUNICATIONS OR PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY.
   (A)   Upon abandonment of a communications facility or personal wireless
service facility owned by a registrant in public rights-of-way, the registrant
shall notify the city within 90 days.
   (B)   The city may direct the registrant to remove all or any portion of
such abandoned facility at the registrant’s sole expense if the city determines
that the abandoned facility's presence interferes with the public health,
safety or welfare, which shall include, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Compromises safety at any time for any public rights-of-way user or
during construction or maintenance in public rights-of-way;
      (2)   Prevents another person from locating facilities in the area of
public rights-of-way where the abandoned facility is located when other
alternative locations are not reasonably available; or
      (3)   Creates a maintenance condition that is disruptive to the public
rights-of-ways use. In the event of division (2), the city may require the
third person to coordinate with the registrant that owns the existing facility
for joint removal and placement, where agreed to by the registrant.
   (C)   In the event that the city does not direct the removal of the
abandoned facility, the registrant, by its notice of abandonment to the city,
shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion
of the facility by the city, another utility or person at such third party’s
cost.
   (D)   If the registrant fails to remove all or any portion of an abandoned
facility as directed by the city within a reasonable time period as may be
required by the city under the circumstances, the city may perform such removal
and charge the cost of the removal against the registrant.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 10-2-13)
§ 121.31 FORCE MAJEURE.
   In the event a registrant’s performance of or compliance with any of the
provisions of this chapter is prevented by a cause or event not within the
registrant’s control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed
excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result, provided,
however, that such registrant uses all practicable means to expeditiously cure
or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For purposes of this
chapter, causes or events not within a registrant’s control shall include,
without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes,
fires and other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil
disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints imposed by order of a
governmental agency or court. Causes or events within registrant’s control, and
thus not falling within this section, shall include, without limitation,
registrant’s financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship, and
misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of registrant’s directors,
officers, employees, contractors or agents.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 10-2-13)
§ 121.32 REPORTS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   Each registrant shall, upon 30 calendar days written notice, if
reasonably possible, but in no event less than 5 business days written notice,
provide the city access to all books and records related to the construction,
maintenance, or repair of the facility to the extent the city review of the
books and records is necessary to manage its rights-of-way.
   (B)   Any and all non-proprietary or non-confidential books and records may
be copied by the city. To the maximum extent permitted by F.S. § 202.195, as
amended, such books and records shall be kept confidential and exempt from the
provisions of F.S. § 119.07(1). A registrant is responsible for obtaining or
maintaining the necessary possession or control of all books and records
related to the construction, maintenance or repair of the facility, so that it
can produce the documents upon request. Books and records must be maintained
for a period of five years, except that any record that is a public record must
be maintained for the period required by state law.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, the terms "books and records" shall be
read expansively to include information in whatever format stored. Books and
records requested shall be produced to the city at City Hall, except by
agreement.
   (D)   If any books and records are too voluminous, or for security reasons
cannot be copied and moved, then a registrant may request that the inspection
take place at some other location mutually agreed to by the city and the
registrant, provided that the registrant must make necessary arrangements for
copying documents selected by the city after its review; and the registrant
must pay all travel and additional copying expenses incurred by the city in
inspecting those documents or having those documents inspected by its designee.
   (E)   Without limiting the foregoing, a registrant shall provide the city
the following within 10 calendar days of their receipt or (in the case of
documents created by the registrant or its affiliate) filing:
      (1)   Notices of deficiency or forfeiture related to the operation of the
facility; and
      (2)   Copies of any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any
judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy by the operator or by any
partnership or corporation that owns or controls the operator directly or
indirectly.
   (F)   In addition, the city may, at its option, and upon reasonable notice
to the registrant, inspect the facilities in the public rights-of-way to ensure
the safety of its residents.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 10-2-13)
§ 121.33 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS AND REMEDIES.
   (A)   The city reserves the right to amend this chapter as it shall find
necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers.
   (B)   This chapter shall be applicable to all communications facilities
placed in the public rights-of-way on or after the effective date of this
chapter and shall apply to all existing communications facilities in the public
rights-of-way prior to the effective date of this chapter, to the full extent
permitted by state and federal law.
   (C)   The adoption of this chapter is not intended to waive any rights or
defenses the city may have under existing franchise, local business tax receipt
or other agreements with a communications services provider.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall affect the remedies the city has
available under applicable law.
(Ord. 1380, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 4-18-07; Am. Ord. 1760, passed
10-2-13)
SMALL AND MICRO WIRELESS FACILITIES
§ 121.45 SMALL AND MICRO WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   This section was adopted pursuant to the authority provided in chapter 2017-
136, Laws of Florida, which enacted F.S. § 337.401(7), known as the “Advanced
Wireless Infrastructure Deployment Act,” as may be amended from time to time.
To the extent of any conflict between this section and state law, the
applicable provisions of state law shall control. To the extent of any conflict
between this section and any other provision of
Chapter 121, this section shall control.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
      ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in providing wireless services.
      APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical. plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes enacted solely to address threats of destruction of
property or injury to persons, or local codes or ordinances adopted to
implement F.S. § 337.401. The term includes objective design standards adopted
by ordinance that may require a new utility pole that replaces an existing
utility pole to be of substantially similar design, material, and color or that
may require reasonable spacing requirements concerning the location of ground-
mounted equipment. The term includes objective design standards adopted by
ordinance that may require a small wireless facility to meet reasonable
location context, color, stealth, and concealment reguirements.
      APPLICANT. A person who submits an application and is a wireless
provider.
      APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the city for a permit
to collocate small wireless facilities.
      CITY UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned by the city and located in the
right-of-way.
      COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate,
or replace one or more wireless facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to a
wireless support structure or utility pole. The term does not include the
installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure in the public
rights-of-way.
      MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility having dimensions no
larger than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
      SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets the following
qualifications:
         (a)   Each Antenna associated with the facility is located inside an
enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of Antennas
that have exposed elements, each Antenna and all of its exposed elements could
fit within an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet in volume; and
         (b)   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is
cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The following types of
associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment
volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation
boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches,
cutoff switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other
services, and utility poles or other support structures.
      UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in
part to provide communications services or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, signage, or a similar function. The term includes the vertical
support structure for traffic lights but does not include a horizontal
structure to which signal lights or other traffic control devices are attached
and does not include a pole or similar structure 15 feet in height or less
unless the city grants a waiver for such pole.
      WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless
services provider.
      WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole,
a guyed or self-supporting tower, or another existing or proposed structure
designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. The term does
not include a utility pole.
   (B)   Location; alternative location procedure. Small wireless facilities
shall not be subject to the minimum separation distances set forth in §
121.12(D)(6)(b)7 of the city code, except as expressly permitted by law. Within
14 days after the date of filing a complete application for a small wireless
facility, the city may request that the proposed location of a small wireless
facility be moved to another location in the right-of-way and placed on an
alternative city utility pole or support structure or may place a new utility
pole. The city and the applicant may negotiate the alternative location,
including any objective design standards and reasonable spacing reguirements
for ground-based equipment, for 30 days after the date of the request. At the
conclusion of the negotiation period, if the alternative location is accepted
by the applicant, the applicant must notify the city of such acceptance and the
application shall be deemed granted for any new location for which there is
agreement and all other locations in the application. If an agreement is not
reached, the applicant must notify the city of such non-agreement and the city
shall grant or deny the original application within 90 days after the date the
application was filed. A request for an alternative location, an acceptance of
an alternative location, or a rejection of an alternative location must be in
writing and provided by electronic mail.
   (C)   Height. The height of a small wireless facility shall not exceed ten
feet above the utility pole or structure upon which the small wireless facility
is to be collocated. Unless waived by the city, the height for a new utility
pole is limited to the tallest existing utility pole as of July 1, 2017,
located in the same right-of-way, other than a utility pole for which a waiver
has previously been granted, measured from grade in place within 500 feet of
the proposed location of the small wireless facility. If there is no utility
pole within 500 feet, the height of the utility pole upon which the small
wireless facility is to be collocated shall not exceed 50 feet.
   (D)   Collocation application process. Within 14 days after receiving an
application for a permit to place a small wireless facility, the city shall
determine and notify the applicant by electronic mail as to whether the
application is complete. If an application is deemed incomplete, the city shall
specifically identify the missing information. An application is deemed
complete if the city fails to provide notification to the applicant within 14
days. Pursuant to F.S. § 337.401(7), as may be amended from time to time, a
complete application to place a small wireless facility is deemed approved if
the city fails to approve or deny the application within 60 days after receipt
of the application. If the city does not use the 30-day negotiation period
provided in subsection (B) above, the parties may mutually agree to extend the
60-day application review period. The city shall grant or deny the application
at the end of the extended period. A permit issued pursuant to an approved
collocation application shall remain effective for one year unless extended by
the city.
   (E)   Written approval or denial. The city shall notify the applicant of
approval or denial by electronic mail. The city shall approve a complete
application unless it does not meet the applicable codes. If the application is
denied, the city shall specify in writing the basis for denial, including the
specific code provision(s) on which the denial was based, and send the
documentation to the applicant by electronic mail on the day the city denies
the application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city
and resubmit the application within 30 days after notice of the denial is sent
to the applicant. The city shall approve or deny the revised application within
30 days after receipt or the application is deemed approved. Any subsequent
review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial.
   (F)   Consolidated application. An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the city may, at the applicant’s direction, file a
consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up
to 30 small wireless facilities. If the application includes multiple small
wireless facilities, the city may separately address small wireless facility
collocations for which incomplete information has been received or which are
denied.
   (G)   Basis for denial. The city may deny a proposed collocation of a small
wireless facility in the public rights-of-wav if the proposed collocation:
      (1)   Materially interferes with the safe operation of traffic control
equipment:
      (2)   Materially interferes with sight lines or clear zones for
transportation, pedestrians, or public safety purposes:
      (3)   Materially interferes with compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act or similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian
access or movement:
      (4)   Materially fails to comply with the 2010 edition of the Florida
Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual; or
      (5)   Fails to comply with applicable codes.
   (H)   Exemptions. The following shall not require permit approval, fees, or
other charges:
      (1)   Routine maintenance;
      (2)   Replacement of existing wireless facilities with wireless
facilities that are substantially similar or of the same or smaller size; or
      (3)   Installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro
wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing
utility poles in compliance with applicable codes by or for a communications
services provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way and who is remitting
taxes under F.S. Chapter 202.
   (I)   Collocation on city utility poles.
      (1)   The fee to collocate a small wireless facility on a city utility
pole shall be $150 per pole annually.
      (2)   The city may reserve space on a city utility pole for future public
safety uses. However, a reservation of space may not preclude collocation of a
small wireless facility. If replacement of the city utility pole is necessary
to accommodate the collocation of the small wireless facility and the future
public safety use, the pole replacement is subject to make-ready provisions and
the replaced pole shall accommodate the future public safety use.
      (3)   For a city utility pole that supports an aerial facility used to
provide communication services or electrical service, the city and applicant
shall comply with the process for make-ready work under 47 U.S.C. § 224 and
implementing regulations. The good faith estimate of the city for any make-
ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation
must include pole replacement, if necessary.
      (4)   For a city utility pole that does not support an aerial facility
used to provide communications services or electric service, the city shall
provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable the
pole to support the requested collocation, including necessary pole
replacement, within 60 days after receipt of a complete application. Make-ready
work, including any pole replacement, shall be completed within 60 days after
written acceptance of the good faith estimate by the applicant. Alternatively,
the city may require the applicant seeking to collocate a small wireless
facility to provide a make-ready estimate at the applicant’s expense of the
work necessary to support the small wireless facility, including pole
replacement, and perform the make-ready work. If pole replacement is reguired,
the scope of the make-ready estimate is limited to the design, fabrication, and
installation of a utility pole that is substantially similar in color and
composition. The city may not condition or restrict the manner in which the
applicant obtains, develops, or provides the estimate or conducts the make-
ready work subject to usual construction restoration for work in the rights-of-
way.
      (5)   The make-ready work specified in subsections (I)(3) and (4) of this
section shall be subject to the city’s usual construction restoration standards
for work in the right-of-way. The replaced or altered city utility pole shall
remain the property of the city.
   (J)   Design standards. The city’s design standards set forth in the
applicable codes may be waived by the City Manager, or his or her designee,
upon a showing that the design standards are not reasonably compatible for the
particular location of a small wireless facility or that the design standards
impose an excessive expense for a small wireless facility. The waiver shall be
granted or denied within 45 days after the date of the request.
   (K)   Permitting. An applicant for installation of a small wireless facility
shall obtain a right-of-way permit from the city for any work that involves
excavation, closure of a sidewalk, or closure of a vehicular lane.
   (L)   Airport airspace. A structure granted a permit and installed pursuant
to this section shall comply with F.S. Chapter 333, and federal regulations
pertaining to airport airspace protections.
   (M)   No authorization to collocate on city utility poles; no application to
homeowner’s association restricted pole. This section does not authorize a
person to collocate small wireless facilities or micro wireless facilities on a
city utility pole, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law, or erect a
wireless support structure in a location subject to covenants, conditions,
restrictions, articles of incorporation, and bylaws of a homeowners’
association.
(Ord. 1903, passed 8-1-18)
CHAPTER 122: AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS
Section
   
122.01   Definitions
   
122.02   Intent
   
122.03   Automated external defibrillator devices required
   
122.04   Registration
   
122.05   Installation and operation
   
122.06   Required compliance timeframes
   
122.07   Penalties
   
122.08   Applicability
§ 122.01 DEFINITIONS.
   AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIB- RILLATORS. Automated external defibrillator
device. A defibrillator device that:
      (1)   Is commercially distributed in accordance with the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act;
      (2)   Is capable of recognizing the presence or absence of ventricular
fibrillation, and is capable of determining without intervention by the user of
the device whether defibrillation should be performed; and
      (3)   Upon determining that defibrillation should be performed, is able
to deliver an electrical shock to an individual.
(Ord. 1833, passed 11-12-15)
§ 122.02 INTENT.
   It is the intent of the city and the purpose of this chapter:
   (A)   To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by requiring
the installation of automated external defibrillator devices within certain
buildings in the city; and
   (B)   To provide for the inspection of each automated external defibrillator
device within the city.
(Ord. 1833, passed 11-12-15)
§ 122.03 AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR DEVICES REQUIRED.
   Automated external defibrillator devices shall be installed in the following
buildings located within the geographical boundaries of the city:
   (A)   Gymnasiums, fitness centers and indoor recreational centers in excess
of 1,500 square feet;
   (B)   Assembly occupancies as defined in the Florida Fire Prevention Code
with a maximum capacity of 100 or more;
   (C)   All hotels and motels;
   (D)   Assisted living facilities as defined by F.S. § 429.02, as amended
from time to time;
   (E)   Nursing home facilities as defined by F.S. § 400.01, as amended from
time to time;
   (F)   Adult day care centers, as defined by F.S. § 429.01, as amended from
time to time;
   (G)   All ambulatory health care occupancies as defined by the Florida Fire
Prevention Code and the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 99, Health
Care Facilities;
   (H)   Office buildings with interior corridors and a square footage greater
than 20,000 square feet; and
   (I)   Commercial and retail spaces with a square footage greater than 30,000
square feet.
(Ord. 1833, passed 11-12-15)
§ 122.04 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   All AEDs shall have product approval and be registered with the
Pembroke Pines Fire Prevention Bureau prior to installation.
   (B)   The Pembroke Pines Fire Prevention Bureau shall review and approve the
number and installation locations for AED devices, and shall inspect the
establishment to confirm the AED installation as approved.
   (C)   Registration shall include the AED notification letter filled out by
the owner or authorized agent and shall include the following:
      (1)   General description/drawings of their proposed AED location(s);
      (2)   Product vendor;
      (3)   Product specifications, brand and model; and
      (4)   Unit serial number.
(Ord. 1833, passed 11-12-15)
§ 122.05 INSTALLATION AND OPERATION.
   (A)   The Pembroke Pines Fire Prevention Bureau shall inspect all automated
external defibrillator devices for operation prior to being placed in service
or available for use, and on an annual basis.
   (B)   Automated external defibrillator devices shall be:
      (1)   Conspicuously located in plain view of the primary public entrance,
with unobstructed access;
      (2)   Housed in a cabinet with a clear window in the door, an audible
alarm signaling the opening of a door, permanently affixed to a wall, and whose
top is no more than 48 inches above the floor;
      (3)   Located below a sign having a minimum area of 70 square inches and
containing the letters "AED" and the universally recognizable symbol, which
shall be placed no more than 60 inches, on center, above the floor;
      (4)   Readily accessible and immediately available when needed for on-
site employees and the general public, including disabled persons; and
      (5)   Placed near the main elevator(s) on the first floor and every
consecutive floor. If the building does not have an elevator, automated
external defibrillators will be placed in area of main entrance.
      (6)   Automated external defibrillators shall be located on each floor
such that the maximum length of travel measured from the most remote point on a
floor to any automated external defibrillators, shall not exceed 300 feet.
      (7)   Automated external defibrillators shall be located on each floor
such that the maximum length of travel between any two automated external
defibrillators shall not exceed 600 feet.
   (C)   Automated external defibrillator devices shall contain adult and
pediatric pads, disposable razors, and bandage scissors. Adult living
facilities shall be exempt from providing pediatric pads.
   (D)   All automated external defibrillator devices shall be used in
accordance with the manufacturer's guidelines.
   (E)   It shall be the responsibility of the business owner to:
      (1)   Install automated external defibrillator devices;
      (2)   Provide all necessary training for appropriate use;
      (3)   Maintain automated external defib-rillator devices in accordance
with manufacturer's recommended maintenance requirements and as required
herein.
   (F)   If an automated external defibrillator device is removed for repair, a
replacement shall be provided.
   (G)   If there is more than one entrance or exit in the building, or if the
building is multiple stories, the business owner shall place a sign at each
entrance, exit, or elevator indicating the location of the automated external
defibrillator device.
(Ord. 1833, passed 11-12-15)
§ 122.06 REQUIRED COMPLIANCE TIMEFRAMES.
   (A)   New occupancies shall not receive a certificate of occupancy until all
provisions of this chapter have been satisfied following the date of adoption
by the City of Pembroke Pines.
   (B)   Existing occupancies shall comply with the provisions of this chapter
no later than one year following the date of adoption by the City of Pembroke
Pines.
(Ord. 1833, passed 11-12-15)
§ 122.07 PENALTIES.
   It shall constitute a violation of the City Code, punishable as provided in
§
130.99 to intentionally or willfully:
   (A)   Render an automated external defibrillator device inoperative except
during such time as the automated external defibrillator device is being
serviced, tested, repaired, or recharged, except pursuant to court order;
   (B)   Obliterate the serial number on an automated external defibrillator
device for purposes of falsifying service records;
   (C)   Improperly service, recharge, repair, test, or inspect an automated
external defibrillator device:
      (1)   Use the inspection certificate of another person; or
      (2)   Hold an inspection certificate and allow another person to use said
inspection certificate number.
(Ord. 1833, passed 11-12-15)
§ 122.08 APPLICABILITY.
   The business owner required to have an automated external defibrillator
device shall comply with this section.
(Ord. 1833, passed 11-12-15)
CHAPTER 123: RESERVED
CHAPTER 124: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS FOR CHILDCARE FACILITIES
Section
   
124.01   Purpose and intent
   
124.02   Definitions
   
124.03   Security requirements for child care facilities
§ 124.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish uniform security
requirements for child care facilities in the City of Pembroke Pines. It is
further the intent of the city to:
   (A)   Provide additional security measures to protect children, parents,
employees, and visitors at child care facilities to protect them from crime and
improve their quality of life within the City of Pembroke Pines;
   (B)   Improve law enforcement and first responders' response times to
emergencies that occur at child care facilities;
   (C)   Curtail the instances of crime at child care facilities; and
   (D)   Deter individuals from committing crime in child care facilities
within the City of Pembroke Pines.
(Ord 1899, passed 3-7-18)
§ 124.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHILD CARE FACILITIES. Shall be defined in § 402.302, F.S.. as may be
amended from time to time.
   DOOR ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEM. A system that maintains a locked door(s) in a
child care facility, which allows a person who wishes to gain entry into the
facility, the ability to press a button to request entry. The property owner,
business owner, employee, tenant, or authorized individual inside the child
care facility is permitted to use an intercom to speak to the person requesting
entry to determine why they are seeking entry. The property owner, business
owner, employee, tenant, or authorized individual in the building may press and
hold button which releases the lock on the door and permits the individual to
enter the premises or refrain from pressing the button to decline the
individual's request for entry. Once the button is pressed and held it will
release the lock mechanism and the individual will be able to gain entry into
the building.
   PANIC ALARM BUTTON. A button in a building that is professionally designed,
maintained and monitored by an alarm company, that once it is pressed or pushed
by an individual, activates a silent alarm that sends a signal to an alarm
company to dispatch the City of Pembroke Pines Police Department, City of
Pembroke Pines Fire Rescue, and other enforcement and first responders to the
location where the panic button was pushed or pressed. The panic button is used
by an individual when there is an imminent threat to persons or property or in
the event of emergency.
(Ord 1899, passed 3-7-18)
§ 124.03 SECURITY REQUIREMENTS FOR CHILD CARE FACILITIES.
   The security requirements set forth in this section shall supplement all
security requirements established by the Florida Department of Children and
Families, as well as any other agency regulating child care facilities.
   (A)   All child care facilities shall keep all doors locked against unwanted
entry during hours of operation and at all other times while children under the
age of 18 are present.
   (B)   All child care facilities, shall install at least one panic alarm
button in a convenient, accessible, and inconspicuous location in the facility.
All panic alarm buttons shall be professionally installed and maintained in
good working condition.
   (C)   All panic alarm buttons in all child care facilities shall have a
redundant power supply and the ability to report to the alarm company attempts
to disable the system.
   (D)   All child care facilities shall install a door access control system
for all primary entry doors in the facility. All door access control systems
shall be listed, professionally installed and in good working condition.
   (E)   All door access control systems in all child care facilities shall
have a redundant power supply and the ability to report to the alarm company
attempts to disable the system.
   (F)   Such door access control systems shall comply with the reguirements of
access-controlled egress door assemblies, as set forth in the Florida Fire
Prevention Code. Such systems shall not have the function to “buzz” occupants
out or interfere with egress.
   (G)   Permits shall be reguired for alarm systems which include but are not
limited to door access control systems and panic alarm buttons (“alarm permit
fees”).
   (H)   All alarm permit fees for child care facilities that come into
compliance within 180 days of the effective date of this chapter shall be
waived by the city.
   (I)   All property owners, tenants, and operators of child care facilities
shall perform maintenance of all panic alarm buttons and door access control
systems to ensure that all panic alarm buttons and door access control systems
are in good working condition.
   (J)   The door access control system and panic alarm button shall be tested
annually by a licensed and qualified service contractor during the course of
the fire alarm system's required annual testing.
   (K)   The Fire Prevention Bureau shall verify that the door access control
system and panic alarm button has been tested as outlined per division (J)
during the required annual fire safety inspection.
(Ord 1899, passed 3-7-18)
CHAPTER 125: BLEEDING CONTROL KIT REQUIREMENTS FOR CHILD CARE FACILITIES
Section
   
125.01   Purpose and intent
   
125.02   Definitions
   
125.03   Bleeding control kit requirements for child care facilities
§ 125.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The Bleeding Control Kit requirements set forth in this section shall
supplement all requirements, including but not limited to safety requirements,
established by the Florida Department of Children and Families, as well as any
other agency regulating child care facilities.
   (B)   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to:
      (1)   Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
children, parents, employee, and visitors at child care facilities; and
      (2)   Establish uniform requirements for child care facilities in the
City of Pembroke Pines to keep and maintain BCKs on the premises of child care
facilities.
(Ord. 1920, passed 11-19-18)
§ 125.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLEEDING CONTROL KIT ("BCK"). A collection of equipment that is used to
attempt to control bleeding from an individual who has suffered a traumatic
injury.
   CHILD CARE FACILITIES shall be defined in F.S. § 402.302, as may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 1920, passed 11-19-18)
§ 125.03 BLEEDING CONTROL KIT REQUIREMENTS FOR CHILD CARE FACILITIES.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the business owner to comply with
having a BCK on the premises of the child care facility in accordance with the
regulations set forth herein.
   (B)   The BCK shall be:
      (1)   Readily accessible and immediately available when needed for on-
site employees and the general public, including disabled persons;
      (2)   Located with or adjacent to the Automatic External Defibrillator if
such device is required or present in the building.
   (C)   A bleeding control kit shall contain the following equipment as a
minimum:
      (1)   One commercially manufactured tourniquets:
      (2)   Two four-inch pressure dressings;
      (3)   One compressed gauze pads;
      (4)   Two pairs of extra-large medical gloves;
      (5)   One pair of trauma scissors; and
      (6)   One instruction card.
   (D)   Penalties. It shall constitute a violation of the City Code,
punishable by a $250 civil penalty for:
      (1)   Intentionally or willfully rendering a BCK inoperative except
during such time as the BCK is being serviced, except pursuant to court order;
      (2)   Failure to maintain a complete kit in accordance with §
125.03(3) above;
      (3)   Intentionally opening an encased BCK for any purpose other than to
provide emergency medical care. It shall not be a violation of this subsection
for an owner of property, or an agent thereof, to open their encased BCK for
maintenance, repair, or inspection;
      (4)   Not complying with any requirement of
Ch. 125 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pembroke Pines.
(Ord. 1920, passed 11-19-18)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Violation of state misdemeanors
   
130.02   Resisting or refusing to assist police officer
   
130.03   Stopping, questioning, and searching persons
   
130.04   Voluntary identification card program
   
130.05   Civil infractions
   
130.06   Adult civil citation program
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 VIOLATION OF STATE MISDEMEANORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to commit within the city any act which is or
shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor.
   (B)   All fines and forfeitures received by the county court system from
violations of ordinances committed within the city shall be paid monthly to the
city, in addition to any other fines and forfeitures received by the county
court system that are required to be paid to the city as otherwise provided by
law.
('69 Code, § 12-1) (Ord. 20, passed 7-19-60; Am. Ord. 491, passed 1-29-79)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 RESISTING OR REFUSING TO ASSIST POLICE OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to resist or oppose, or to refuse to
assist when called upon so to do, the Chief of Police or any other member of
the police force, or any other person with the power of arrest, in the
discharge of his duties under the law.
('69 Code, § 12-9) (Ord. 25, passed 7-25-60) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Resisting arrest, see F.S. § 843.02
   Using violence to resist arrest, see F.S. § 843.01
§ 130.03 STOPPING, QUESTIONING, AND SEARCHING PERSONS.
   (A)   A police officer may stop for questioning and investigation any person
abroad in a public place whom he has probable cause to believe may be
committing, may have committed, or is about to commit a felony, and may demand
of him his name, address, and an explanation of his actions.
   (B)   When a police officer has stopped a person for questioning pursuant to
this section, and when the police office has probable cause to believe he is in
danger of life or limb, he may search the person for a dangerous weapon. If the
police officer finds such a weapon, the possession of which may constitute a
crime, he may take and keep it until the completion of the question, at which
time he shall either return it, if lawfully expressed, or arrest the person.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as set forth in §
130.99.
('69 Code, § 12-10) (Ord. 189, passed 9-9-68) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 VOLUNTARY IDENTIFICATION CARD PROGRAM.
   (A)   Purpose. The general object and purpose of this section is the
establishment of a system of identification of owners, operators, and employees
who offer goods and services to citizens of the city in order to act as a
deterrence and to aid in the detection of crime within the city. This section
provides for the voluntary participation in a voluntary identification card
program by the owners, operators, and employees who offer goods and services to
the citizens of the city.
   (B)   Voluntary participation. Each employer and employee of any business,
profession, or occupation engaged in business within the city or offering
services within the city may voluntarily participate in the identification card
program as follows:
      (1)   Each employer and employee may register with the Chief of Police of
the city and complete and sign an employer authorization form or employee
authorization form, as the case may be, in the form attached as Exhibit "A" to
Ordinance 862, requesting that a voluntary identification card be issued;
      (2)   Each employer and employee shall provide legal acceptable
identification. Legal acceptable identification shall mean identification such
as a driver's license or state identification card or two legal documents
verifying the name and date of birth of the applicant; and
      (3)   In the event the review of all documentation reveals that there are
no outstanding warrants, the Chief of Police of the city will issue a city
voluntary identification card to the employer or employee.
   (C)   Charge. For the purpose of defraying the cost incurred by the city
relative to the issuance of a voluntary identification card, the sum of $6
shall be paid for each voluntary identification card or renewal thereof.
   (D)   Administrative rules. The Chief of Police of the city shall promulgate
all administrative rules and regulations necessary or expedient for the purpose
of carrying into effect this section.
(Ord. 862, passed 3-16-88) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 CIVIL INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   A law enforcement officer is empowered to issue a citation for
the violation of this code if that officer has reasonable cause to believe that
a person has committed an act violating this code.
      (2)   Every civil violation cited by a law enforcement officer shall be
limited to a civil infraction.
      (3)   The maximum civil penalty for non-criminal violations of municipal
ordinances are as set forth in the respective sections of this code.
      (4)   The minimum civil penalty for non-criminal violations of municipal
ordinances are as set forth in the respective sections of this code.
   (B)   Any person issued a municipal citation for a waiverable offense may
avoid a court appearance by:
      (1)   Payment of the minimum civil penalty within ten days from the date
of citation; and
      (2)   Payment shall be made at the address specified on the citation.
Payment by U.S. mail must be posted within ten working days of the citation
issuance.
(Ord. 1412, passed 6-19-02)
§ 130.06 ADULT CIVIL CITATION PROGRAM.
   (A)   Policy and intent. It is the policy and intent of the City of Pembroke
Pines for officers of the city's Police Department to use reasonable judgment
and appropriate discretion when making decisions that may lead to an arrest or
an alternative to arrest. The Adult Civil Citation Program is designed to
divert first-time misdemeanor offenders from the criminal justice system.
Department members are responsible for adhering to the following protocols in
support of the program.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
      ACC PROGRAM. The Adult Civil Citation Program established pursuant to
this section.
      DEPARTMENT. The City of Pembroke Pines Police Department.
      PROVIDER. The entity engaged by the City of Pembroke Pines to provide
educational and/or counseling services as a component of the successful
completion of the city's Adult Civil Citation Program.
   (C)   Engagement of provider. The city shall contract with an entity
qualified to provide educational and/or counseling services related to mental
or behavioral health and addiction recovery. Adults who receive a civil
citation pursuant to this section may, at the Department's discretion or as
provided by this section, be required to complete a program offered by the
provider. All fees and costs associated with the completion of a provider
program shall be the responsibility of the adult issued an adult civil citation
pursuant to this section.
   (D)   The ACC Program shall only be available as an option to adults for
misdemeanor offenses relating to:
      (1)   Criminal mischief, if the victim consents;
      (2)   Petit theft, if the victim consents;
      (3)   Possession of alcohol by a person under 21 years of age;
      (4)   Possession of 20 grams or less of cannabis;
      (5)   Possession of paraphernalia, which may be included if in possession
of less than 20 grams of cannabis; or
      (6)   Offenses of assault and battery, if the victim consents.
   (E)   Eligible adults who elect to participate in the ACC Program must agree
to the issuance of the adult civil citation. By accepting and signing the adult
civil citation, the adult misdemeanor offender:
      (1)   Admits to have been informed of and understands their Miranda
Rights;
      (2)   Admits to the offense(s) cited and gives up their right to appear
in court;
      (3)   Agrees to waive their right to a speedy trial;
      (4)   Agrees to have their case handled by the ACC Program;
      (5)   Agrees to complete the required education/counseling program with
the provider and/or make restitution (if applicable) by the deadline assigned
by the Pembroke Pines Police Department's Civil Citation Program; and
      (6)   Agrees, if the adult civil citation is being issued for possession
of cannabis, to submit to drug screening by the provider. If deemed necessary
by the Department or the provider upon receipt of the results of the screening,
the offender agrees to participate in the provider's addiction recovery
program. Successful completion of the recovery program shall be a condition of
completion of the ACC Program set forth in division (O)(2).
      (7)   Failure to successfully complete the program will result in the
case being referred to criminal prosecution.
      (8)   Failure to agree to the issuance of a civil citation may result in
arrest.
   (F)   The officer shall advise the ACC Program after the following
eligibility criteria has been met:
      (1)   The adult is cooperative, and:
         (a)   Does not have any prior arrests;
         (b)   Has not been previously issued an adult civil citation; and
         (c)   Agrees to the issuance of an adult civil citation.
      (2)   The offense does not involve any of the following:
            (a)   Domestic violence;
            (b)    Stalking;
            (c)    Loitering and prowling;
            (d)    Exhibition of sexual organs;
            (e)   The offense committed is not traffic related.
   (G)   Upon determining probable cause exists for the arrest of an adult,
officers are responsible for determining the eligibility of the adult for the
issuance of an adult civil citation. They can determine if the adult has
previously been issued an adult civil citation or is currently participating in
the ACC Program by either calling the Department's ACC Program coordinator or
contacting the provider.
   (H)   Officers shall explain the following to the adult:
      (1)   The difference between an actual arrest and an adult civil
citation; and
      (2)   The option to refuse the adult civil citation.
   (I)   If the adult offender refuses the adult civil citation and is
arrested, the officer has the option to either:
      (1)   Issue a Notice to Appear (NTA); or
      (2)   Transport the adult to the Broward County Jail.
   (J)   Officers are responsible for documenting the following in the offense
or arrest paperwork:
      (1)   The reason(s) for either issuing or not issuing an adult civil
citation; and
      (2)   Any adult civil citation refusal.
   (K)   The signature of the adult on the adult civil citation attests to
their agreement, and officers shall:
      (1)   Issue Miranda warnings prior to obtaining the adult's signature on
the adult civil citation; and
      (2)   Ensure the right thumbprint of the adult is placed in the bottom
right corner on the adult civil citation form.
   (L)   Officers shall include the elements of the crime and all other
pertinent information in the offense report narrative section.
   (M)   Adults issued an adult civil citation shall not be transported to the
Broward County Jail.
   (N)   Supervisors are responsible for reviewing all arrest or adult civil
citation documents and shall ensure:
      (1)   Adults issued adult civil citations meet the criteria for adult
civil citation issuance;
      (2)   Adults arrested did not meet the criteria for adult civil citation
issuance; and
      (3)   Officers followed the documentation requirements of this section.
   (O)   The Department member designated as the ACC Program Coordinator is
responsible for the following:
      (1)   Review of all completed adult civil citations to ensure correctness
and compliance with program protocols; and
      (2)   Completion of adult civil citation follow-up activities to include:
         (a)   Upon being notified by the provider that an adult has
successfully completed the program, complete a supplemental offense report with
a case status designation of exceptional clearance; and
         (b)   Upon being notified by the provider that an adult has failed to
complete the program, the Department will refer the adult to criminal
prosecution.
   (P)   Failure of the ACC Program occurs when the adult:
      (1)   Fails to comply with the assigned intervention services within the
prescribed time period; or
      (2)   Commits a new criminal offense prior to completion of the program.
   (Q)   In addition to any conditions and penalties imposed pursuant to this
section, adults issued an ACC shall be subject to a fine in an amount to be
determined
by the city.
   (R)   Adults who successfully satisfy the requirements of this section and
the ACC Program shall not incur any form of documented criminal record related
to the issuance of the adult civil citation.
(Ord. 1868, passed 2-15-17; Am. Ord. 1936, passed 11- 13-19)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   The violation of any provision of this title for which another penalty is
not already otherwise provided shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$500, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both. Each day
any violation of this title continues shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
131.01   Placing injurious substances in Halloween treats
§ 131.01 PLACING INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES IN HALLOWEEN TREATS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to inject into or in any way place
injurious substance whatsoever into any candy, gum, apple, popcorn ball, or any
item given to children during the celebration of Halloween.
   (B)   Any person violating division (A) of this section shall be subject to
the penalty set forth in §
130.99.
('69 Code, § 12-19) (Ord. 299, passed 10-30-72) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Adulteration of food prohibited, see F.S. Ch. 500
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
132.01   Destruction of city property
   
132.02   Theft or larceny of motor vehicles or bicycles
   
132.03   Damage to property by motor vehicle
   
132.04   Littering, vandalizing prohibited
   
132.05   Despoiling public or private property
   
132.06   Display and use of the flag of the United States
§ 132.01 DESTRUCTION OF CITY PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wantonly, wilfully, or maliciously
mar, deface, injure, or mutilate any of the city buildings, vehicles,
equipment, furniture, streets, signs, traffic signs, traffic-control equipment,
or any other property of the city, or to cause the same to be done.
('69 Code, § 12-3) (Ord. 23, passed
7-24-60) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Damaging art work in public buildings, see F.S. § 806.14
§ 132.02 THEFT OR LARCENY OF MOTOR VEHICLES OR BICYCLES.
   (A)   The terms used herein shall be defined as set forth in state law
governing petty larceny and motor vehicles.
   (B)   Any person found guilty of the theft or larceny of a motor vehicle or
bicycle shall, upon conviction thereof, be imprisoned for a period of not less
than ten days, and shall in addition thereto be subject to the penalties of §
130.99.
('69 Code, § 12-16) (Ord. 259, passed 6-7-71) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Theft of bicycle, see F.S. § 812.014
   Theft of motor vehicle constitutes grand theft of the second degree, see
F.S. § 812.014(2)(b)(4)
§ 132.03 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY BY MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and an act of vandalism for any person to operate
a motor vehicle on public or private property which causes damage to lawns,
shrubs, trees, or other property.
   (B)   This section shall apply to the operator of the motor vehicle as well
as the owner of the motor vehicle, and it shall be unlawful for the owner of
the motor vehicle to permit the use of the motor vehicle by any other
individual so as to violate the provisions of this section.
   (C)   Any individual, corporation, or firm found guilty of violating this
section shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with §
130.99.
('69 Code, § 12-19.9) (Ord. 538, passed 7-14-80) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.04 LITTERING, VANDALIZING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall litter on or cause to be littered on any land, whether
private or public, any trash, rubbish, debris, refuse, garbage, or other
substance, or damage or cause to be damaged any property, whether private or
public, by any acts of vandalism, malicious mischief, or other similar acts.
('69 Code, § 12-19.7) (Ord. 495, passed 1-29-79) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.05 DESPOILING PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall intentionally, and without consent, misuse, injure,
destroy, befoul, deface, or otherwise damage or disturb by any means public or
private property belonging to another.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall
be punished by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $500 or by
imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both, in the discretion of the
court.
   (C)   A parent or natural guardian of a minor convicted under this section
shall be liable for any fine assessed by the court or reward paid by the city.
(Ord. 841, passed 8-5-87)
§ 132.06 DISPLAY AND USE OF THE FLAG OF THE UNITED STATES.
   (A)   No person may, in any manner, for exhibition or display:
      (1)   Place or cause to be placed any word, figure, mark, picture,
design, drawing, or advertisement of any nature upon any flag of the United
States; or
      (2)   Expose to public view any such flag standard, color, ensign, or
shield upon which shall have been printed, painted, or otherwise produced, or
to which shall have been attached, appended, affixed, or annexed any such word,
figure, mark, picture, design, drawing, or advertisement.
   (B)   No disrespect should be shown to the flag of the United states of
America; the flag should not be dipped to any person or thing. Regimental
colors, state flags, and organization or institutional flags are to be dipped
as a mark of honor.
      (1)   The flag should never be displayed with the union down, except as a
signal of dire distress in instances of extreme danger to life or property.
      (2)   The flag should never touch anything beneath it, such as the
ground, the floor, water, or merchandise.
      (3)   The flag should never be carried flat or horizontally, but always
aloft and free.
      (4)   The flag should never be used as wearing apparel, bedding, or
drapery. It should never be festooned, drawn back, nor up, in folds, but always
allowed to fall free. Bunting of blue, white, and red, always arranged with the
blue above, the white in the middle, and the red below, may be used for
covering a speaker's desk draping the front of the platform, and for decoration
in general.
      (5)   The flag should never be fastened, displayed, used, or stored in
such a manner as to permit it to be easily torn, soiled, or damaged in any way.
      (6)   The flag should never be used as a covering for a ceiling.
      (7)   The flag should never have placed upon it, mark, insignia, letter,
word, figure, design, picture, or drawing of any nature.
      (8)   The flag should never be used as a receptacle for receiving,
holding, carrying, or delivering anything.
      (9)   The flag should never be used for advertising purposes in any
manner whatsoever. It should not be embroidered on such articles as cushions or
handkerchiefs and the like printed or otherwise impressed on paper napkins or
boxes or anything that is designed for temporary use and discard. Advertising
signs should not be fastened to a staff or halyard from which the flag is
flown.
      (10)   The flag, when it is in such condition that it is no longer a
fitting emblem for display, should be destroyed in a dignified way, preferably
by burning.
   (C)   The flag, when carried in a procession with another flag or flags,
should be either on the marching right; that is, the flag's own right, or, if
there is a line of other flags, in front of the center of that line.
      (1)   The flag should not be displayed on a float in a parade except from
a staff, or as provided in this section.
      (2)   The flag should not be draped over the hood, top, sides, or back of
a vehicle or of a railroad train or a boat. When the flag is displayed on a
motorcar, the staff shall be fixed firmly to the chassis or clamped to the
right fender.
      (3)   No other flag or pennant should be placed above or, if on the same
level, to the right of the flag of the United States of America, except during
church services conducted by naval chaplains at sea, when the church pennant
may be flown above the flag during church services for the personnel of the
Navy. No person shall display the flag of the United Nations or any other
national or international flag equal, above, or in a position of superior
prominence or honor to, or in place of, the flag of the United States at any
place within the United States or any territory or possession thereof:
provided, that nothing in this section shall make unlawful the continuance of
the practice heretofore followed by displaying the flag of the United Nations
in a position of superior prominence or honor, and other national flags in
positions of equal prominence or honor with that of the flag of the United
States at the headquarters of the United Nations.
      (4)   The flag of the United States of America, when it is displayed with
another flag against a wall from crossed staffs, should be on the right, the
flag's own right, and its staff should be in front of the staff of the other
flag.
      (5)   The flag of the United States of America should be at the center
and at the highest point of the group when a number of flags of states or
localities or pennants of societies are grouped and displayed from staffs.
      (6)   When flags of states, cities, or localities, or pennants of
societies are flown on the same halyard with the flag of the United States, the
latter should always be at the peak. When the flags are flown from adjacent
staffs, the flag of the United States should be hoisted first and lowered last.
No such flag or pennant may be placed above the flag of the United States or to
the United States flag's right.
      (7)   When flags of two or more nations are displayed, they are to be
flown from separate staffs of the same height. The flags should be of
approximately equal size. International usage forbids the display of the flag
of one nation above that of another nation in time of peace.
      (8)   When the flag of the United States is displayed from a staff
projecting horizontally or at an angle from the window sill, balcony, or front
of a building, the union of the flag should be placed at the peak of the staff
unless the flag is at half staff. When the flag is suspended over a sidewalk
from a rope extending from a house to a pole at the edge of the sidewalk, the
flag should be hoisted out, union first, from the building.
      (9)   When displayed either horizontally or vertically against a wall,
the union should be uppermost and to the flag's own right, that is, to the
observer's left. When displayed in a window, the flag should be displayed in
the same way, with the union or blue field to the left of the observer in the
street.
      (10)   When the flag is displayed over the middle of the street, it
should be suspended vertically with the union to the north in an east and west
street or to the east in a north and south street.
      (11)   When used on a speaker's platform, the flag, if displayed flat,
should be displayed above and behind the speaker. When displayed from a staff
in a church or public auditorium, the flag of the United States of America
should hold the position of superior prominence, in advance of the audience,
and in the position of honor at the clergyman's or speaker's right as he faces
the audience. Any other flag so displayed should be placed on the left of the
clergyman or speaker or to the right of the audience.
      (12)   The flag should form a distinctive feature of the ceremony of
unveiling a statue or monument, but it should never be used as the covering for
the statue or monument.
      (13)   The flag, when flown at half-staff, should be first hoisted to the
peak for an instant and then lowered to the half-staff position. The flag
should be again raised to the peak before it is lowered for the day. On
Memorial Day the flag should be displayed at half- staff until noon only, then
raised to the top of the staff. By order of the President, the flag shall be
flown at half- staff upon the death of principal figures of the United States
Government and the Governor of the state, territory, or possession, as mark of
respect to their memory. In the event of the death of other officials or
foreign dignitaries, the flag is to be displayed at half- staff in accordance
with recognized customs or practices not inconsistent with law. In the event of
the death of a present or former official of the government of any state,
territory, or possession may proclaim that the National flag shall be flown at
half-staff. The flag shall be flown at half-staff 30 days from the day of death
of the Vice President, the Chief Justice or a retired Chief Justice of the
United States, or the Speaker of the House of Representatives; from the day of
death until interment of an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, a Secretary
of an executive or military department, a former Vice President, or the
Governor of the State, territory, or possession; and on the day of death and
the following day for a Member of Congress.
      (14)   When the flag is used to cover a casket, it should be so placed
that the union is at the head and over the left shoulder. The flag should not
be lowered into the grave or allowed to touch the ground.
      (15)   When the flag is suspended across a corridor or lobby in a
building with only one main entrance, it should be suspended vertically with
the union of the flag to the observer's left upon entering. If the building has
more than one main entrance, the flag should be suspended vertically near the
center of the corridor or lobby with the union to the north, when entrances are
to the east and west or to the east when entrances are to the north and south.
If there are entrances in more than two directions, the union should be to the
east.
   (D)   Time and occasions for display.
      (1)   It is the universal custom to display the flag only from sunrise to
sunset on buildings and on stationary flagstaffs in the open. However, when a
patriotic effect is desired, the flag may be displayed 24 hours a day if
properly illuminated during the hours or darkness.
      (2)   The flag should be hoisted briskly and lowered ceremoniously.
      (3)   The flag should not be displayed on days when the weather is
inclement, except when an all weather flag is displayed.
      (4)   The flag should be displayed on all days especially on United
States and State holidays.
      (5)   The flag should be displayed daily on or near the main
administration building of every public institution.
      (6)   The flag should be displayed in or near every polling place on
election days.
      (7)   The flag should be displayed during school days in or near evening
school hours.
(Ord. 900, passed 8-16-89) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
Section
Drugs
   
133.01   Hypodermic syringes
   
133.02   Glue; sniffing or possession
   
133.03   Narcotic and hallucinogenic drugs; drug paraphernalia
Pornography
   
133.20   Definitions
   
133.21   Obscene, pornographic materials prohibited
   
133.22   Adult bookstores/video stores; sales to minors
   
133.23   Display of pornographic materials where juveniles permitted
   
113.24   Adult entertainment prohibited at establishments where alcoholic
beverages sold or consumed
   
113.25   Adult entertainment establishments to register with the city;
admission of minors prohibited
 
   
133.99   Penalty
DRUGS
§ 133.01 HYPODERMIC SYRINGES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, distribute, or possess
any hypodermic or injection syringe or needles unless the sale, distribution,
or possession is by virtue or under authority of a written prescription,
properly executed by a person authorized to execute prescriptions for medicine
and drugs in the manner and in accordance with the laws of the state. ('69
Code, § 12-11) (Ord. 234, passed 9-21-70)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any hypodermic or
injection syringe or needle unless the injection syringe or needle is broken
and rendered incapable of further use.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished in accordance with the provisions of §
133.99.
('69 Code, § 12-11.1) (Ord. 314, passed 2-20-73) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited, see F.S. § 893.147(1)(b)
§ 133.02 GLUE; SNIFFING OR POSSESSION.
   (A)   As used in this section, the term MODEL GLUE shall not mean any of the
ingredients or types set forth below when used industrially and in the usual
course of business, but shall mean any glue or cement of the type commonly used
in the building of model airplanes, boats, and automobiles, and which contains
one or more of the following volatile solvents:
      (1)   Acetone.
      (2)   Amylacetate.
      (3)   Benzol or benzene.
      (4)   Butyl acetate.
      (5)   Butyl alcohol.
      (6)   Carbon tetrachloride.
      (7)   Chloroform.
      (8)   Cyclohexanone.
      (9)   Ethanol or ethyl alcohol.
      (10)   Ethyl acetate.
      (11)   Hexane.
      (12)   Isopropanol or isopropyl alcohol.
      (13)   Isopropyl acetate.
      (14)   Methyl "Cellosolve" acetate.
      (15)   Methyl ethyl ketone.
      (16)   Methyl isobutyl ketone.
      (17)   Toluol or toluene.
      (18)   Trichloroethylene.
      (l9)   Tricrsyl phosphate.
      (20)   Xylol or xylene.
      (21)   Other solvents, materials, substances, chemicals, or combinations
thereof, having the property of releasing toxic vapors.
('69 Code, § 12-39)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally smell or inhale
the fumes of any type of model glue, or to induce any other person to do so,
for the purpose of causing a condition of or inducing symptoms of intoxication,
elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational behavior, exhilaration,
paralysis, stupefaction, dulling of the senses of the nervous system, or for
the purpose of in any manner, changing, distorting, or disturbing the audio-
visual or mental processes. However, this section shall not apply to the
inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes.
('69 Code, § 12-40)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally possess any model
glue for the purpose of using it in the manner prohibited by this section.
('69 Code, § 12-41)
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to possess
or buy any model glue without the consent of a parent or legal guardian.
('69 Code, § 12-43)
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or transfer possession of
any model glue to another person under 18 years of age unless the minor is
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian and the sale or transfer is for model
building or other lawful use.
('69 Code, § 12-44)
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally possess, buy,
sell or otherwise transfer any type of model glue for the purpose of inducing
or aiding any other person to violate the provisions of this section.
('69 Code, § 12-42) (Ord. 175, passed 2-5-68) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Regulation of harmful chemical substances, see F.S. § 877.111
§ 133.03 NARCOTIC AND HALLUCINOGENIC DRUGS; DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   Definition. The definition of NARCOTIC DRUGS set forth in F.S. Ch. 893
shall include the following drugs:
      (1)   Lysergic acid (LSD).
      (2)   Mescaline--chemical derived from the Peyote cactus.
      (3)   Psilocybin--derived from the Mexican mushroom.
      (4)   Dimethlytryptamine (DMT).
      (5)   Morning glory seeds.
      (6)   Ololiuquic seeds.
      (7)   PCP.
      (8)   STP.
      (9)   Other drugs which cause hallucinogenic reactions.
('69 Code, § 12-98)
   (B)   Adoption of state law. The provisions of F.S. Chapter 893 are adopted
and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein, except as
modified herein.
('69 Code, § 12-97) (Ord. 221, passed 2-16-70)
   (C)   Regulation of paraphernalia.
      (1)   Sale or display. The sale and display of narcotic and other
paraphernalia, devices, contrivances, and instruments for the smoking or
injection of marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, or the
displaying or offering for sale, gift, or delivery of such devices to minors,
shall be strictly regulated in accordance with this section. This section shall
be known as the "Paraphernalia Regulation Regulations."
      (2)   Allowing Minors on Premises. No owner, manager, proprietor,
operator, or other person involved in or employed at any place of business
selling or displaying for the purpose of sale, any device, contrivance,
instrument, or paraphernalia for smoking, injecting, or consuming marijuana,
hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance as defined now or hereinafter defined
in F.S. Ch. 893 other than prescription drugs, and devices to ingest
prescription drugs, as well as roach clips, cigarette papers, and rollers
designed for the smoking of the foregoing, shall allow or permit any person
under the age of 18 years to be, remain in, enter, or visit that room unless
the minor person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or by his or her
legal guardian.
      (3)   Minors Going on Premises Restricted. It shall be a violation of
this section for a person under the age of 18 years to be, remain in, enter, or
visit any room in any place used for the sale or displaying for sale, devices,
contrivances, instruments, or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana,
hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and
devices; to ingest or inject prescription drugs, including roach clips and
cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing,
unless that person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or his or her
legal guardian.
      (4)   Separate Room Required. In any place of business to which the
public is invited, the display for sale, or the offering for sale, of devices,
contrivances, instruments, or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana,
hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs, and
devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, including roach clips,
cigarette papers, and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, a
separate room or enclosure shall be maintained for this purpose from which
minors not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, shall be absolutely
excluded. Each entrance to such a room shall be sign-posted in reasonably
visible and legible words to the effect that narcotic paraphernalia are being
offered for sale in the room and minors are excluded from the room unless
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
      (5)   (a)   Violations; penalty. Any individual found guilty of violating
this section, whether that individual is an adult or a minor as defined herein,
shall be guilty of a punishable violation and shall be subject to punishment in
accordance with §
133.99.
('69 Code, § 12-98.1) (Ord. 530, passed 2-25-80)
         (b)   Any person who shall sell, possess, purchase, transfer, use,
manufacture, compound, produce, or prepare any of the aforementioned drugs or
the drugs set forth in F.S. Chapter 893, and not subject to the exceptions
provided therein, shall be guilty of a punishable violation and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
133.99.
('69 Code, § 12-99) (Ord. 221, passed 2-16-70) Penalty, see §
133.99
PORNOGRAPHY
§ 133.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. An adult arcade, adult theater, adult
bookstore/adult video store, adult motel, or adult dancing establishment,
massage services, whether or not licensed pursuant to F.S. Chapter 480, tanning
salons or other similar establishment or enterprise, which presents adult
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified
Anatomical Areas" (as defined below) for use on the premises, observation,
purchase, rental, or lease by establishment patrons. Adult entertainment
establishments include, but are not limited to modeling studios or lingerie
studios.
   ADULT MATERIAL. Including, but not limited to, one or more of the following:
      (1)   Whether new or used books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed
matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
visual representations; recordings, other audio matter; and novelties or
devices that have, as their primary or dominant theme, subject matter
depicting, exhibiting, illustrating, describing, or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
      (2)   Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia which are
designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities; or
      (3)   Live exhibitions or performances that have as their primary or
dominant theme the display of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
   NUDITY or NUDE. The showing or exhibition of, with less than a fully opaque
covering, of the female or male genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the showing
of the female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
   Includes:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
         (a)   Human genitals, pubic region.
         (b)   Buttock.
         (c)   Female breast, below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Includes:
      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy.
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, or female breast.
('69 Code, § 12-15) (Ord. 258, passed 6-7-71; Am. Ord. 1257, passed 4-15-98;
Am. Ord. 1357, passed 11-1-00)
§ 133.21 OBSCENE, PORNOGRAPHIC MATERIALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of distributing obscene materials when he
sells, lends, rents, leases, gives, advertises, publishes, exhibits, or
otherwise disseminates to any person any obscene material of any description,
knowing the obscene nature thereof, or who offers to do so, or who possesses
the material with the intent so to do.
   (B)   Material is obscene if, considered as a whole, applying community
standards, its predominant appeal is to prurient interest; that is, a shameful
or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion, and utterly without redeeming
social value; and if, in addition, it goes substantially beyond customary
limits of candor in describing or representing such matters. Undeveloped
photographs, molds, printing plates, and the like shall be deemed obscene,
notwithstanding that processing or other acts may be required to make the
obscenity patent or to disseminate it.
   (C)   Material not otherwise obscene, may be deemed obscene under this
section if the distribution thereof, or the offer to do so, or the possession
with the intent to do so, is a commercial exploitation of erotica solely for
the sake of their prurient appeal.
('69 Code, § 12-12) (Ord. 240, passed 11-2-70)
Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Distribution of obscene material prohibited, see F.S. § 847.011
   Exhibition of obscene material declared to be a nuisance, see F.S. § 823.13
§ 133.22 ADULT BOOKSTORES/VIDEO STORES; SALES TO MINORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or employee of any
bookstore, video, or art store operating as an adult bookstore, video, or art
store, where 50% or more of the stock is comprised of books, magazines,
pictures, videos, posters, and the like for adults in the fields of erotic
material, to sell that material to persons under the age of 18 years.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any retail merchandising store having a
section, department, or division devoted to pictures, posters, books,
magazines, videos, motion picture films, or slide films for adults in the field
of erotic or adult material, to sell or rent that material to any person under
the age of 18 years.
   (C)   The owner, operator, or employee of any adult picture store, video
store, or art store on the premises of the place of business shall be held
responsible for the enforcement of the foregoing provisions for sale or
admission of persons under the age of 18 years.
('69 Code, § 12-13) (Ord. 243, passed 12-21-70; Am. Ord. 1257, passed 4-15-98)
Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Display of materials harmful to minors prohibited, see F.S. § 847.012
§ 133.23 DISPLAY OF PORNOGRAPHIC MATERIALS WHERE JUVENILES PERMITTED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any description or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement,
or sadomasochistic abuse, when it:
         (a)   Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful, or morbid
interest of juveniles;
         (b)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult
community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for juveniles;
and
         (c)   Is utterly without redeeming social importance for juveniles.
      (2)   JUVENILE. Any person under the age of 18 years.
      (3)   KNOWINGLY. Having general knowledge of, reason to know, belief, or
ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
         (a)   The character and content of any material described herein which
is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant, and
         (b)   The age of the juvenile. However, an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonably bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of the juvenile.
      (4)   NUDITY. The showing or exhibition of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the
showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
portion below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or the depiction
of covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
      (5)   SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
clad in undergarments, a mask, or bizarre costume; or the condition of being
fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so
clothed.
      (6)   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual
intercourse, or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals,
pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be a female, breast.
      (7)   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (B)   Offense. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to place in
plain view in any establishment giving unrestricted access to juveniles so as
likely to come within the view of a juvenile:
      (1)   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, video, motion picture
film, or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the
human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and
which is harmful to juveniles; or
      (2)   Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or
sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in division (B)(1) above,
or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual
excitement, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse which, taken as a whole,
is harmful to juveniles.
      (3)   Any adult material.
   (C)   Legislative intent. It is the intention of the City Commission that
this section shall apply to all persons within the city and shall specifically
be deemed to be an adoption of an endorsement of the laws of the state
pertaining to this subject, but specifically making it unlawful as stated
herein to allow the display of obscene materials in an area where unrestricted
access is given to juveniles.
   (D)   Penalty. A person convicted under this section shall be guilty of an
offense punishable as set forth in §
133.99.
('69 Code, § 12-13.1) (Ord. 445, passed 5-16-77; Am. Ord. 1257, passed 4-15-98)
Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Display of material harmful to juveniles, see F.S. § 847.0125
§ 133.24 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT PROHIBITED AT ESTABLISHMENTS WHERE ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES SOLD OR CONSUMED.
   It shall be unlawful for any female or male to perform specified sexual
activities or exhibit specified anatomical areas in a public place or any
establishment licensed to sell or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages
or beer and wine.
('69 Code, § 12-14) (Ord. 258, passed 6-7-71; Am. Ord. 1257, passed 4-15-98)
Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.25 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS TO REGISTER WITH THE CITY;
ADMISSION OF MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The operator of any adult entertainment establishment shall register
with the City Manager the name and address of its president or owner prior to
commencing business within the city or, if already existing, within 30 days of
the adoption of this section.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any adult entertainment
establishment to admit on the premises any person under the age of 18 years.
('69 Code, § 6-52) (Ord. 243, passed 12-21-70; Am. Ord. 1257, passed 4-15-98)
Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Exposing minors to harmful motion pictures, see F.S. § 847.013
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The violation of any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not otherwise provided, shall be punished as set forth in §
130.99.
   (B)   A person convicted of violating §
133.23 shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine not in excess of
$500, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both.
('69 Code, § 12-13.1(B)) (Ord. 445, passed 5-16-77)
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
134.01   Disorderly persons
   
134.02   Disorderly conduct
   
134.03   Hitchhiking
   
134.04   Smoking in certain public places prohibited
   
134.05   Police false alarms
   
134.051   Fire false alarms
   
134.06   Discharging fireworks; permit required
   
134.07   Loitering
   
134.08   Smoking prohibited near school property
   
134.09   Sale or display of loose leaf granular incense and bath salts
   
134.10   Prohibition of sale or distribution of electronic nicotine dispensing
devices and nicotine products to persons under 21 years of age
Firearms
   
134.22   Martial arts devices
Curfew for Minors
   
134.35   Establishment of curfew
   
134.36   Violation of curfew prohibited
   
134.37   Detention, treatment of violators
   
134.38   Liability of parents
   
134.39   Restriction to community by minor
Advertising on Vehicles and Watercraft
   
134.50   Posting advertisements or notices; abatement procedure
Residency of Sexual Offenders and Sexual Predators
   
134.60   Sexual offender residency prohibition; findings and intent
   
134.61   Definitions
   
134.62   Sexual offender and sexual predator residence prohibition; penalties;
exceptions
   
134.63   Property owners prohibited from renting real property to certain
sexual offenders and sexual predators; penalties
 
   
134.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 134.01 DISORDERLY PERSONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to be a disorderly person. Any person of
sufficient ability, who shall refuse or neglect to support his family; any
common prostitute; any window peeper; any person who engages in an illegal
occupation or business; any person who shall be drunk, intoxicated, or engaged
in any indecent or obscene conduct in any public place; any vagrant; any person
who is found begging in any public place; any person found loitering in a house
of ill fame or prostitution, or place where prostitution or lewdness is
practiced, encouraged, or allowed; any person who shall loiter in or about any
police station, police headquarters building, county jail, hospital, court
building, or any other place or public building for the purpose of soliciting
employment of legal services or the services of sureties upon criminal
recognizances; or any person who shall be found jostling shall be deemed a
disorderly person.
   (B)   Proof of recent reputation for engaging in an illegal occupation or
business shall be prima facie evidence of being engaged in an illegal
occupation or business.
('69 Code, § 12-6) (Ord. 27, passed 7-24-60) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.02 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   All persons who shall do any of the following shall be deemed guilty
of disorderly conduct:
      (1)   Make, aid, countenance, or assist in making improper noise, riot,
disturbance, or breach of the peace;
      (2)   Collect in bodies or crowds for unlawful purposes, or for any
purpose, to the annoyance or disturbance of other persons;
      (3)   Who are idle or dissolute and go about begging;
      (4)   Use or exercise any juggling or other unlawful games or plays;
      (5)   All persons lodging in or found at any time in outhouses, sheds,
barns, stables, or unoccupied buildings or lodging in the open air and not
giving a good account of themselves;
      (6)   Wilfully assault another or be engaged in or aid or abet any fight,
quarrel, or other disturbance;
      (7)   All persons who stand, loiter, or stroll about in any place,
waiting or seeking to obtain money or other valuable thing from others by trick
or fraud, or to aid or assist therein;
      (8)   Engage in any fraudulent scheme, device, or trick to obtain money
or other valuable thing in any place, or who shall aid, abet, or in any manner
be concerned therein;
      (9)   All touts, ropers, steerers, or cappers, so- called for any
gambling room or house, who shall ply or attempt to ply their calling on any
public street;
      (10)   All persons found loitering about any hotel, barroom, gambling
room, or house, or who shall be found in a gambling house or disorderly house,
or wandering about the streets either by night or by day without any known
lawful means of support, or without being able to give a satisfactory account
of themselves;
      (11)   Have or carry any pistol, knife, dirk, knuckles, or other
dangerous weapon concealed on or about their persons;
      (12)   All persons who are known to be thieves, burglars, pickpockets,
robbers, or confidence men, either by their own confession or otherwise, or by
having been convicted of larceny, burglary, or other crime against the laws of
the state or any state in the United States, who are found lounging in,
prowling, or loitering around any boat landing, depot, banking institution,
place of public amusement, auction room, hotel, store, shop, thoroughfare, car,
omnibus, public conveyance, public gathering, public assembly, courtroom,
public building, tippling shop, or any public place, and who are unable to give
a reasonable excuse for being so found.
   (B)   Those found guilty of violating this section shall be punished as set
forth in §
134.99.
('69 Code, § 134.021) (Ord. 27, passed 7-24-60) Penalty, see §
134.99
Statutory reference:
   Disorderly conduct, see F.S. § 877.03
§ 134.03 HITCHHIKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hitchhike upon the public
streets of the city. For the purpose of this section, HITCHHIKING shall be
defined as the soliciting of a ride in or upon any motor vehicle not operated
for hire.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punishable as
provided in §
134.99.
('69 Code, § 12-19.1) (Ord. 342, passed 11-5-73) Penalty, see §
134.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipality's authority to regulate hitchhiking, see F.S. § 316.008
§ 134.04 SMOKING IN CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to smoke, vape, carry a
burning cigarette, cigar, pipe or use an electronic nicotine dispensing device
or nicotine product in any of the following described places:
      (1)   Retail store public areas where merchandise is displayed for sale.
      (2)   Elevators in any public place.
      (3)   Public theaters and auditoriums during a performance, except where
areas are designated to permit smoking.
      (4)   Buses and other public conveyances, except taxicabs and jitneys.
      (5)   All city owned parks and recreation areas.
      (6)   Any location within the city in which smoking is prohibited under
F.S. Ch. 386.
   (B)   Every person or his agent having control of any premises within which
smoking, vaping, the carrying of burning objects, or the use of an electronic
nicotine dispensing device or nictotine product is prohibited by this section,
shall conspicuously display the following signs in the following manner:
      (1)   Retail stores. The sign shall read "SMOKING, VAPING AND THE USE OF
ELECTRONIC NICOTINE DISPENSING DEVICES OR NICOTINE PRODUCTS PROHIBITED BY LAW
IN THIS SECTION" and shall be displayed at each public entrance to the retail
stores.
      (2)   Elevators. The sign shall read "SMOKING, VAPING AND THE USE OF
ELECTRONIC NICOTINE DISPENSING DEVICES OR NICOTINE PRODUCTS IN ELEVATORS
PROHIBITED BY LAW IN THIS SECTION," and shall be displayed in close proximity
to the entrance of the elevator and within the interior of the elevator. An
ashtray or other device shall be located in close proximity to the elevator
entrance for the disposal of prohibited items.
      (3)   Public theaters and auditoriums. The sign shall read "SMOKING,
VAPING AND THE USE OF ELECTRONIC NICOTINE DISPENSING DEVICES OR NICOTINE
PRODUCTS PROHIBITED BY LAW IN THIS SECTION," and shall be placed on or about
each entrance to areas not designated as permitting smoking, vaping, or the use
of electronic nicotine dispensing devices or nicotine products.
      (4)   Public conveyances. The sign shall read "SMOKING, VAPING AND THE
USE OF ELECTRONIC NICOTINE DISPENSING DEVICES OR NICOTINE PRODUCTS PROHIBITED
BY LAW," and shall be placed on or about each public entrance to the public
conveyance.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed
any sign required to be posted by this section.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place hot or burning
substances or objects such as cigarettes, cigars, pipe ashes, or any other
similar nicotine product in, upon, or in close proximity to any public or
private premises where there is any material or substance which is combustible
or liable to damage by heat, fire, or explosion.
   (E)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke cigarettes, cigars,
pipes, or use an electronic nicotine dispensing device or any nicotine product
on city property as follows:
         (a)   Within 25 feet of the entranceway of any municipal buildings;
and/or
         (b)   In bleacher areas, dugouts, in and around team seating areas,
concession areas and restrooms within any park or recreational facility owned
by the city. This restriction shall not apply to city-owned golf courses.
      (2)   Any person issued a citation pursuant to this section shall be
deemed to be charged with a civil infraction. A fine of $25 shall be assessed
for each violation of this section.
      (3)   This section shall not apply to any person smoking or using an
electronic nicotine dispensing device or nicotine product within a motor
vehicle that is within a city park or parked in front of a city building,
whether or not located in a parking lot.
   (F)   Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punishable as
provided herein or as otherwise provided in §
10.99.
('69 Code, § 12-19.2) (Ord. 351, passed 1-7-74; Am. Ord. 1412, passed 6-19-02;
Am. Ord. 1938, passed 11-13-19) Penalty, see §
134.99
Statutory reference:
   Smoking in elevators prohibited, see F.S. § 823.12
   Smoking in government buildings, see F.S. § 255.27
§ 134.05 POLICE FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   Declaration of intent. The intent of this section is to encourage
alarm users and alarm businesses to maintain operational reliability, to
promote the proper use of alarm systems and to reduce or eliminate dispatch
requests for false alarms.
   This section governs systems intended to summon police to require permits to
establish fees, to provide penalties for violations, to establish a system for
the administration and to establish criteria for limited response to alarms.
   (B)   Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALARM BUSINESS.  Any business operated by a person for a profit which
engages in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining,
repairing, replacing, selling, monitoring, servicing or responding to an alarm
system, or which causes any of these activities to take place.
      ALARM COORDINATOR. A person or persons selected by the Chief of Police to
administer, control and review alarm applications, permits and false alarm
notifications and to provide technical assistance to alarm users in preventing
false alarms from their systems.
      ALARM PERIOD. The designated 12-month period of January 1 to December 31
of each year.
      ALARM SYSTEM. Any mechanical or electrical device sold or installed,
which is designed for use for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a
building, structure, facility or enclosed area, or for alerting others of
unauthorized entry, or any other crime or fire emergency and which emits sound
or transmits a signal or message when activated.
      ALARM USER. The person(s), firm, partnership, corporation, association,
organization, company or other entity that owns the premises on which the alarm
system is maintained, or the lessee of the premises, if the lessee is legally
responsible for the operation and maintenance of the alarm system.
      APPLICANT.  Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity
using an alarm system and which submits the required registration to the city.
      FALSE ALARM.  The activation of an alarm system for any reason other than
an unauthorized entry, such as mechanical failure, malfunction, improper
installation, weather related, or an action or omission of the owner or lessee
of an alarm system or of his employees or agents.
      LIMITED RESPONSE. That the Police Department may respond only to verified
emergencies, i.e., crime in progress, panic button, silent alarm, call from
person on-site or alarm company to report a crime.
      RESPONSE FEE. Those expenses incurred by the city whenever the city
dispatches personnel and equipment to the premises of a false alarm.
   (C)   Registration of alarm system.
      (1)   Required registration.
         (a)   Before placing an alarm system into operation, every alarm user
shall register the alarm system for each alarm system the user operates in the
city. Applications to register an alarm system shall be made on forms provided
by the Police Department. An incomplete application form shall be returned to
the applicant for completion within 30 calendar days during which time the
system shall be considered unregistered.
         (b)   The alarm system shall be installed pursuant to division (C)(5)
below related to alarm permit. If the alarm system has been installed without a
permit, the applicant shall have 30 calendar days to secure the required
permit. If the applicant does not secure the required permit, the alarm user is
subject to penalties pursuant to division (C)(5) below.
         (c)   Alarm systems shall be registered on an annual basis by the
alarm user, to ensure that the alarm user certifies that the registration
information maintained in the city's records is correct. The registration shall
be effective for the period of January 1 to December 31 of each calendar year.
If the city responds to an alarm call that has not been registered, the city
shall allow 30 days for the alarm to be registered. If not registered within 30
days from that date, a $50 fine will be assessed against the user.
         (d)   Alarm users having more than one alarm system, protecting two or
more separate structures, shall be required to register each alarm separately
for each structure, unless the structures are protected by the same alarm
system.
         (e)   The individual or entity that procures the alarm system and
engages an alarm service provider shall be responsible for compliance with this
section.
      (2)   Registration procedures.
         (a)   Registration forms will be available at the Police Department.
The application form shall require the applicant to provide the following
information, which includes, but is not limited to:
            1.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant's
property to be serviced by the alarm and the name, address and telephone
numbers of the person who will be responsible for the proper maintenance and
operation of the alarm system and payment of fees and fines assessed under this
section of the code.
            2.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, if
different from the property to be serviced.
            3.   The name, address and telephone number of the alarm user, if
different than the applicant. In the event that the applicant or alarm user is
a corporation, the president of the corporation shall be listed.
            4.    The make and type of alarm.
            5.   Whether the alarm is for residential or for nonresidential
use; if for nonresidential use, the applicant shall attach sufficient
documentation to ascertain compliance with UL (Underwriter's Laboratories), FM
(Factory Mutual) standards or all other appropriate licenses and certificates
for burglary testing and installation.
            6.   The name, address and telephone number of the alarm business
maintaining and/or monitoring the alarm, if any, if different from the business
installing the alarm.
            7.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of no less than two
key-holders, persons or entities to be contacted in the event of an alarm, who
have access to the premises for emergencies or when multiple alarms occur
within a 24-hour period or for resetting or shutting off the alarm should the
alarm be false.
            8.   The applicant shall be required to acknowledge that they have
read and understand the requirements of this section.
         (b)   In the event that the user of the registered alarm changes, the
new user shall register the alarm with the Police Department.
      (3)   Requirements for alarm permit.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful for a person, firm, corporation,
partnership or other entity to install or maintain an alarm in operational
order unless it first obtains a permit to install the alarm from the city's
Building Division, Department of Public Works.
         (b)   In addition to satisfactory completion of the registration
required pursuant to this section:
            1.   A new installation of an alarm system at a nonresidential
location shall be registered only if it is demonstrated that the alarm system
has been installed by an alarm business and only if the installation is of
equipment approved and listed by UL (Underwriter's Laboratories) or FM (Factory
Mutual) standards and has received all other appropriate licenses and
certificates for burglary and testing installation.
            2.   An existing alarm in a nonresidential location shall be
registered only if it is demonstrated that the alarm has been inspected and
validated by an alarm business and only if the alarm has been certified by an
alarm business that the alarm meets or exceeds UL (Underwriter's Laboratories)
or FM (Factory Mutual) standards for burglary testing or installation.
            3.   The alarm system has the capacity to prevent false alarms by
the use of a backup power supply.
            4.   Every audible alarm system installed by a licensed contractor
shall have a device to automatically terminate the audible signal within 15
minutes of activation.
      (4)   Penalties. Alarm without permit, unregistered alarm or expired
alarm registration.
         (a)   It is hereby determined that the occurrence of an alarm caused
by an alarm system for which no permit has been issued, no registration is
filed or the registration has expired, is a violation of this section.
         (b)   The fine for an alarm without a permit issued and which user
does not receive a permit within 30 days after notification for the first alarm
response shall be $50 in addition to any administrative costs imposed pursuant
to § 32.051 of this code.
      (5)   Response to alarm; determination of false alarm.
         (a)   Whenever an alarm is activated in the city, thereby requiring a
response to the location by the Police Department, a law enforcement officer on
the scene of the activated system shall inspect the premises protected by the
system and shall determine whether the city's response was due to a false
alarm.
         (b)   In making said determination, the investigating officer shall
presume that the alarm was a false alarm when there is no sign or physical
evidence of an unauthorized entry or an attempted unauthorized entry.
         (c)   All residential or commercial intrusion/burglary alarms that
have a central monitor shall have a central monitoring verification call made
to the premises generating the alarm signal, prior to alarm monitor personnel
contacting the Police Department for alarm dispatch.
      (6)   Report of false alarm; notice to alarm user. If the law enforcement
officer at the scene determines that the alarm is false, the false alarm shall
be documented by the Police Department.
         (a)   For the second false alarm in the designated 12-month alarm
period, notice shall be provided to the alarm user by first-class mail or by
personal service. If by mail, there shall be a presumption of receipt within
five calendar days of mailing. This notice shall include a listing of
documented false alarms during the 12-month alarm period and include a warning
to the alarm user that in the event of a third false alarm within the 12-month
alarm period, at the same location, the alarm user shall be required to
reimburse the city for the cost of the city's response to said false alarm.
         (b)   For the third or subsequent false alarm in the designated 12-
month alarm period, notice shall be provided to the alarm user by first-class
mail. This notice shall include a listing of documented false alarms during the
12-month alarm period and include the amount of fee due to the city.
      (7)   False alarm fines. The city shall maintain records for all false
alarms. In the event of a third false alarm and for each subsequent alarm
within the designated 12-month alarm period, the alarm user shall be
responsible to pay a fine to the city according to the following schedule:
         (a)   Police Department. One hundred dollars for the third false alarm
and for each false alarm thereafter.
         (b)   The false alarm response fee shall be paid within 30 calendar
days of the incident of alarm or the alarm user must contest the charge within
30 calendar days of the incident of alarm consistent with division (C)(13) of
this section. Failure to pay the fee or contest the charge within the 30
calendar days of the incident of alarm shall result in a limited response by
the Police Department and prosecution of the case before a special magistrate
pursuant to the requirements of F.S. § 162.09, as amended from time to time.
      (8)   It is the intent of this section that the 12-month alarm period
during which the alarm user shall be responsible for penalties pursuant to this
section for the third and each succeeding false alarm shall be the period
January 1 to December 31 of each calendar year.
      (9)   Violations. Response fees shall be paid within 30 calendar days
from the date of receipt of the notice. Failure to make payment within 30
calendar days from the date of receipt of the notice shall constitute a
separate offense against the city. The penalty for this violation shall be a
fine of not more than $500.
      (10)   Multiple alarms within a 24-four hour period. For locations which
have multiple alarms within a 24-hour period (midnight to midnight), it shall
be the responsibility of the monitoring company for the second or subsequent
alarm during this period to require a key-holder (person who has access to the
alarmed premises and has the ability to operate the alarm system) to meet the
officer on-site, unless there is evidence of a verified emergency. If an alarm
is not monitored, the key-holder listed on the alarm registration shall be
responsible for meeting the officer on-site unless there is evidence of a
verified emergency. If a key-holder is not available to meet the officer on-
site, the city has the option not to respond to the alarm unless there is
evidence of a verified emergency.
      (11)   Limited response.
         (a)   An alarm system may be placed on limited response for one or
more of the following occurrences:
            1.   Alarm systems with six or more false alarms, and corrective
action prescribed by the alarm coordinator has not been completed: or
            2.   The alarm user has response fees which are overdue for 60 or
more calendar days: or
            3.   The alarm system is unregistered and the applicant has not
registered or obtained a permit within 30 calendar days after notification.
         (b)   Prior to being placed on limited response, except for an
unregistered system, the alarm user shall be notified in writing with the date
specific as to when the alarm system shall be placed on limited response. Said
notice shall be sent by certified mail to the alarm user. Any unregistered
system may be placed on limited response, if the applicant has not registered
within 30 calendar days of notification, until such time that the alarm system
is registered with the city. In addition, the user of an unregistered system or
a system installed without a permit may be subject to a notification to appear
before a special magistrate and/or be issued a city citation.
         (c)   The alarm user shall pay a reinstatement fee of $250 to be
reinstated to non-limited response status together with certification by an
alarm system contractor that any and all problems with the alarm system have
been corrected.
      (12)   Appeal of response fee and appeal of limited response status.
         (a)   An alarm user may appeal assessment of the response fee to the
special magistrate by filing a written reguest for review setting forth the
reasons for the appeal within 30 calendar days of the incident of alarm. A
special magistrate shall conduct a hearing and consider the evidence presented.
The decision of the special magistrate is final. The filing of a request for an
appeal stays the assessment of the response fees until the special magistrate
makes a final decision.
         (b)   An alarm user placed on limited response may appeal the limited
response status by filing a written request setting forth the reasons for the
appeal within ten calendar days of receipt of notification. A special
magistrate shall conduct a hearing and consider the evidence presented. The
decision of the special magistrate is final.
         (c)   If an alarm user is found in violation of city code, a fine
amount may be imposed not to exceed $250 per day for the first violation and
not to exceed $500 per day for a repeat violation. Should an appeal be heard by
the special magistrate, pursuant to F.S. § 162.09 and the required corrective
action is not taken, a lien may be imposed on the property where the violation
exists and upon any real or personal property owned by the violator.
      (13)   Existing alarms. This section shall apply to all existing alarm
systems. Alarm users with existing and installed systems shall have 180
calendar days from the effective date of this section to comply with the
provisions herein.
      (14)   This section shall not apply to the following:
         (a)   An alarm attached to a motor vehicle.
         (b)   Property owned by a governmental entity.
   (D)   Alarms; limitation on period that audible alarm may sound.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, to
maintain or operate any form or type of alarm or system in any place or on any
premises being so placed and operated that sounds can be heard for more than 15
minutes in a residential district and more than 30 minutes in a business and/or
industrial district from any neighboring property, whether public or private.
This restriction shall apply whether the sound is continuous or repeated over
the respective 15-and/or 30-minute period.
      (2)   Audible alarms or systems operating over 15 minutes in residential
districts and over 30 minutes in business and/or industrial districts are
declared to be so loud, disturbing, and unnecessary as to be detrimental to the
citizens of Pembroke Pines and a disturbance of the public peace and welfare.
      (3)   Every audible alarm system installed by a licensed contractor shall
have a device to automatically terminate the audible signal within 15 minutes
of activation.
      (4)   Remedies and penalties.
         (a)   When an audible alarm has sounded in accordance with the
provisions of this section and every reasonable effort has been made to contact
persons authorized to enter the premises to deactivate the alarm, or if the
contacted person has failed to appear within the respective time frame, the law
enforcement officer at the scene may take the necessary steps to disconnect the
system or alarm.
         (b)   All costs that may be incurred by the City of Pembroke Pines
shall be paid by the alarm user. The alarm user shall also assume all
liabilities that may arise from the entry to the premises and the
disconnection.
         (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to pay any
cost assessed for deactivating an alarm pursuant to this section. The refusal
or failure to pay within a reasonable time shall constitute a separate offense
against the City of Pembroke Pines. The penalty for this violation shall be a
fine of not more than $500.
('69 Code, § 12-19.8) (Ord. 512, passed 6-25-79; Am. Ord. 731, passed 3-27-85;
Am. Ord. 1590, passed 9-5-07; Am. Ord. 1648, passed 6-17-09) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.051 FIRE FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   Any person knowingly communicating by electronic means, or otherwise
turning in, causing to be made, or communicating a false alarm, including but
not limited to audible or visual alarms to the Fire Department shall be in
violation of this section. After two false alarms are reported to the Fire
Department within a 12-month period, fines shall be assessed as set forth in §
134.99(B) for each violation.
   (B)   Whenever an alarm is activated in the city, thereby requiring a
response to the location by the Fire Department, a fire official on the scene
of the activated system shall inspect the premises protected by the system and
shall determine whether the city's response was due to a false alarm.
   (C)   In making said determination, the fire official shall presume that the
alarm was a false alarm where there is no sign or physical evidence of a fire.
   (D)   Any person failing to post a telephone number to be called in the case
of an emergency in the window or door of his or her business premises shall be
in violation of this section. This posting shall be in a place visible to
individuals outside of the business premises.
   (E)   Failure to post a telephone number in the window or the door of a
business premises as required by division (D) of this section will be punished
by a fine as set forth in §
134.99 for each violation.
(Ord. 1648, passed 6-17-09)
§ 134.06 DISCHARGING FIREWORKS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge any fireworks of any kind or form,
including paper cap pistols of all descriptions within the city, without first
obtaining from the appropriate city official, a permit for the discharge of
those fireworks and paper cap pistols.
('69 Code, § 12-5) (Ord. 30, passed 7-24-60) Penalty, see §
134.99
Statutory reference:
   Fireworks, see F.S. Ch. 79l
   Regulations by municipalities, see F.S. § 79l.02
§ 134.07 LOITERING.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place where people at large are generally found
to be present, are generally entitled to be present, or are generally invited
to be present.
      (2)   The act of standing or remaining in or about any public place,
which places include, but are not limited to any public sidewalk, public
street, public overpass, public bridge, or public shopping center.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or be in any place, when
that person knows or has reasonable cause to believe that any cannabis,
narcotic, barbiturate, dangerous drug, or any controlled substance as defined
in F.S. Chapter 893, is being used, injected, swallowed, or otherwise consumed
by those persons in and around that place.
('69 Code, § 12-152) (Ord. 613, passed 8-4-82) Penalty, see §
134.99
Statutory reference:
   Loitering prohibited, see F.S. § 856.021
§ 134.08 SMOKING PROHIBITED NEAR SCHOOL PROPERTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to smoke tobacco
in, on, or within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising a public or
private elementary, middle or secondary school between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and midnight.
   (B)   A law enforcement officer may issue a citation to any person in
violation of the provisions of this section.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person issued a citation pursuant to this section shall
be deemed to be charged with a civil infraction. A fine of $25 shall be
assessed for each violation of this section. As an alternative to the fine, the
person issued the citation may be considered to complete 50 hours of community
service, if available, or successful completion of a school approved anti-
tobacco "alternative to suspension" program, if available.
   (D)   Refusal to accept and sign citation. Any person who willfully refuses
to accept and sign a citation issued pursuant to this section shall be guilty
of a separate violation and that person may be arrested by any law enforcement
officer of the city.
   (E)   This section shall not apply to any person occupying a moving vehicle
or within a private residence.
(Ord. 1203, passed 1-15-97)
§ 134.09 SALE OR DISPLAY OF LOOSE LEAF GRANULAR INCENSE AND BATH SALTS.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
      BATH SALTS.  Any product or material sold in powder, block, granular,
liquid, gelatin, or other similar form containing any chemical compound,
synthetic or natural, which imitates the effect of any controlled substance
which may be used or converted into a form intended for introduction into the
human body.
      LOOSE LEAF GRANULAR INCENSE. Any aromatic plant material containing any
chemical compound, synthetic or natural, which imitates the effects of any
controlled substance in granular, loose leaf or powder form which may be used
or converted into a form intended for introduction into the human body.
   (B)   Sale or display prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to sell or
display or otherwise transfer in a retail setting of loose leaf granular
incense or bath salts, as defined by this section, within the city.
   (C)   Enforcement. This section may be enforced by any law or code
enforcement officer of the city. Any loose leaf granular incense or bath salts,
as defined by the section, may be seized and held by the city as evidence to be
used in any further proceeding.
   (D)   Penalties for violation. Any person found guilty of violating this
section. whether that individual is an adult or a minor, shall be subject to
punishment in accordant with §
130.05 or
134.99 of the City Code. Repeated violations of this section may result in
additional penalties including, but not limited to, action to revoke a business
license tax receipt.
(Ord. 1731, passed 9-5-12; Am. Ord. 1811, passed 2-18-15)
§ 134.10 PROHIBITION OF SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF ELECTRONIC NICOTINE DISPENSING
DEVICES AND NICOTINE PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ELECTRONIC NICOTINE DISPENSING DEVICE. Any electronic or battery-operated
device which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine  or other
substances and includes those composed of a mouthpiece, heating element, and
battery or electronic circuits that provide a vapor of liquid nicotine and/or
other substances to the user. This term shall include such devices whether they
are manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an
electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic
hookah, an e-cigarette, an e-cigar, an e-pipe, a vaporizer, an electronic
nicotine delivery system (ENDS) or under any other product name, and whether it
is utilizing liquid nicotine or any other substance at the time of use by a
person.
      NICOTINE PRODUCT. Any product that contains nicotine, including liquid
nicotine, that is intended for human consumption, whether inhaled, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any means, but does not include a:
         (a)   Tobacco product, as defined in F.S. § 569.002;
         (b)   Product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food
and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act; or
         (c)   Product that contains incidental nicotine.
      VAPE/VAPING. The act of inhaling or exhaling of vapor produced by an
electronic nicotine dispensing device or possession of an electronic nicotine
dispensing device while that device is actively producing vapor or aerosol from
a nicotine product or any other substance. The term does not include the mere
possession of an electronic nicotine dispensing device.
   (B)   (1)   Sale or distribution of electronic nicotine dispensing devices
and nicotine products to persons under 21 years of age prohibited. It is
unlawful for any person to sell, gift, deliver or otherwise transfer in a
retail setting any electronic nicotine dispensing device or nicotine product,
as defined by this section, to any person under the age of 21 years, or to a
person who appears to be under the age of 27 years without first examining
identification to confirm that the recipient is at least 21 years of age.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, gift, deliver or otherwise
transfer in a retail setting any products with names similar to, or which
resemble illegal substances, such as, by way of example, but not limitation,
"liqweed," "cocoa e-juice," and "hash oil e-juice," or similar names or
descriptions to any person under 21 years of age or to a person who appears to
be under the age of 27 years without first examining identification to confirm
that the recipient is at least 21 years of age.
   (C)   Enforcement. This section may be enforced by any law or code
enforcement officer of the city. Any electronic nicotine dispensing device or
nicotine product, as defined by this section, may be seized and held by the
city as evidence to be used in any further proceeding.
   (D)   Penalties for violation. Any person found guilty of violating this
section, whether that individual is an adult or a minor, shall be subject to
punishment in accordance with §
10.99. Repeated violations of this section may result in additional penalties
including, but not limited to, an action to revoke a business license tax
receipt.
(Ord. 1938, passed 11-13-19)
FIREARMS
§ 134.22 MARTIAL ARTS DEVICES.
   (A)   MARTIALARTSDEVICES. Devices which are designed with the express
purpose of inflicting bodily harm upon individuals at whom those devices are
directed. MARTIAL ARTS DEVICES are defined to be sticks, discs, chains, boards,
rods, plates, and devices constructed of similar materials which may be
projected through the air by one individual at another individual for the
purpose of injuring that individual. To be included within this definition, the
device may not have any other useful or lawful purpose other than the
infliction of bodily injury.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any individual, firm, or corporation to offer
for sale, sell, use, or possess martial arts devices as defined herein.
('69 Code, § 12-29) (Ord. 597, passed 5-5-82) Penalty, see §
134.99
CURFEW FOR MINORS
§ 134.35 ESTABLISHMENT OF CURFEW.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under 17 years of age to be or remain
upon any street or alley or other public place in the city after 11:00 p.m. on
weekdays and 12:00 a.m. on weekends unless that person is accompanied by a
parent, guardian, or other person having custody of the minor; or unless in the
performance of duty directed by the parent, guardian, or other person having
custody; or unless the person is in lawful employment making it necessary to be
in those places after the hours aforesaid.
('69 Code, § 12-144) (Ord. 504, passed 4-16-79) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.36 VIOLATION OF CURFEW PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone having the legal care and custody of any
person, as described above, to allow or permit that person to go or be upon any
public street, alley, or other public place in the city in the nighttime as
restricted in §
134.35, except in case of necessity.
('69 Code, § 12-145) (Ord. 504, passed 4-16-79) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.37 DETENTION, TREATMENT OF VIOLATORS.
   (A)   Every member of the police force, while on duty, is hereby authorized
to detain any minor willfully violating the provisions of §
134.35 until the parent or guardian of the child shall take him into custody;
but the officer shall immediately, upon taking custody of the child,
communicate with the parent or guardian.
('69 Code, § 12-146)
   (B)   If it shall appear that any child taken into custody for a violation
of this subchapter is growing up in a delinquent or vagrant fashion, is
incorrigible, or is a repeated violator of this subchapter for lack of proper
parental care, or because he has no home, proper proceedings shall be taken to
have the child placed in the care of a state institution as provided by
statute.
('69 Code, § 12-147) (Ord. 504, passed 4-16-79)
§ 134.38 LIABILITY OF PARENTS.
   If it shall appear that any child taken into custody for a violation of this
subchapter is guilty of a violation of state law or has willfully or
maliciously destroyed or stolen property, real, personal, or mixed, belonging
to any municipal corporation, county, school district, department of the state,
person, partnership, corporation, association, or religious organization, the
minor's parents shall be liable in accordance with state law for civil damages
up to the actual value of the property damaged, in addition to taxable court
costs as provided in F.S. § 741.24.
('69 Code, § 12-148) (Ord. 504, passed 4-16-79; Am. Ord. 885, passed 2-15-89)
§ 134.39 RESTITUTION TO COMMUNITY BY MINOR.
   In the event a juvenile or his parents are found to be in violation of this
subchapter, the City Prosecutor and police officer involved in the complaint
shall request that the penalties imposed, in addition to others imposed by the
court, shall include restitution to this community by a work program as
prescribed by the City Commission in conjunction with the needs of this
community and as supervised by the city officials.
('69 Code, § 12-149) (Ord. 504, passed 4-16-79)
ADVERTISING ON VEHICLES AND WATERCRAFT
§ 134.50 POSTING ADVERTISEMENTS OR NOTICES; ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, park or
cause to be parked, any advertising vehicle or watercraft in or upon any
roadway, right-of-way, waterway, marine area, or other public place within the
city in which the public has the right of travel. An advertising vehicle or
watercraft is any wheeled conveyance or any waterborne craft designed or used
for the primary purpose of displaying advertisements. This section shall not
apply to:
   (A)   Any vehicle or watercraft which displays an advertisement or business
notice of its owner, so long as such vehicle or craft is engaged in the usual
business or regular work of the owner, and not used merely, mainly or primarily
to display advertisements;
   (B)   Buses transporting members of the public; or
   (C)   Taxis.
(Ord. 1344, passed 8-2-00)
RESIDENCY OF SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS
§ 134.60 SEXUAL OFFENDER RESIDENCY PROHIBITION; FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence,
and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an
extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to
use physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and most sexual offenders
commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are
prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual
offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly
exorbitant.
   (B)   It is the intent of this subchapter to serve and to protect the city's
compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where
children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual
offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or
permanent residence.
(Ord. 1518, passed 8-3-05)
§ 134.61 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   PERMANENT RESIDENCE. A place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for
14 or more consecutive days.
   SEXUAL OFFENDER. For purposes of this chapter, shall be defined as provided
by F.S. § 943.0435(a), as may be amended from time to time.
   SEXUAL PREDATOR. For purposes of this chapter, shall be defined as a repeat
sexual offender, a sexual offender who uses physical violence, a sexual
offender who preys on children or as otherwise defined by F.S. § 775.21, also
known as The Florida Sexual Predators Act, as may be amended from time to time.
   TEMPORARY RESIDENCE. A place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for
a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which
is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely
abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or
nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent
residence.
(Ord. 1518, passed 8-3-05; Am. Ord. 1574, passed 2-21-07)
§ 134.62 SEXUAL OFFENDER AND SEXUAL PREDATOR RESIDENCE PROHIBITION; PENALTIES;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a violation of
F.S. §§ 794.011, 800.04, 827.071, or 847.0145, or a similar crime in another
jurisdiction, or any similar offense committed in this state which has been
redesignated from a former statute number to one of those listed in this
division, regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, in which the
victim of the offense was less than 16 years of age, to establish a permanent
residence or temporary residence within 2,500 feet of any school, designated
public school bus stop, day care center, park, playground, or other place where
children regularly congregate.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person who is required to register as a sexual
offender or sexual predator under the laws of the state, to establish a
permanent residence or temporary residence within 2,500 feet of any school,
designated public school bus stop, day care center, park, playground, or other
place where children regularly congregate.
   (C)   For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the
requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer
property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest
outer property line of a school, designated public school bus stop, day care
center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate.
   (D)   Penalties. A person found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to arrest or issued a notice to appear and shall appear at the
prearranged court date to answer the charge. Once notified of the residency
restriction, the person shall have two weeks to vacate the premises. A person
who fails to vacate the premises within two weeks after receiving notice of the
residency restriction shall be subject to arrest.
   A person who violates this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$500 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment; for a second or subsequent conviction of a violation of this
section, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or
imprisonment in the county fail not more than 12 months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
   (E)   Exceptions. A person residing within 2,500 feet of any school,
designated public school bus stop, day care center, park, playground, or other
place where children regularly congregate does not commit a violation of this
section if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The registered person established the permanent residence prior to
July 1, 2005.
      (2)   The person was a minor when he or she committed the offense and was
not convicted as an adult.
      (3)   The person is a minor.
      (4)   The school, designated public school bus stop or day care center
within 2,500 feet of the person's permanent residence was opened after the
person established the permanent residence.
(Ord. 1518, passed 8-3-05; Am. Ord. 1574, passed 2-21-07)
§ 134.63 PROPERTY OWNERS PROHIBITED FROM RENTING REAL PROPERTY TO CERTAIN
SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any property owner or property manager or his or
her agent or assignee to knowingly let, rent, or allow to be occupied free of
charge any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with
the knowledge, either actual or constructive, that it will be used as a
permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from
establishing such permanent residence of temporary residence pursuant to any
provision of this Code, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or
other conveyance, is located within 2,500 feet of any school, designated public
school bus stop, day care center, park, playground, or other place where
children regularly congregate.
   (B)   A property owner's or property manager's failure to comply with
provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this section, and
shall subject the property owner or property manager to the code enforcement
provisions and procedures of the City Code that allow the city to seek relief
as otherwise provided by law. A property owner or property manager shall be in
violation of this section if they knew or should have known that an occupant of
property under their control was in violation of this Code. A property owner or
property manager who is found to be in violation of this section shall be
issued a notice to appear.
(Ord. 1518, passed 8-3-05; Am. Ord. 1574, passed 2-21-07)
§ 134.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The violation of any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not otherwise provided, shall be punished as set forth in §
130.99.
   (B)   After two false alarms are reported violating §
134.051, a fine of $100 shall be imposed for the third violation, $200 for the
fourth violation, $300 for the fifth and subsequent alarm violations within a
12-month period. Once the alarm system has been repaired and re-certified, any
additional false alarms that follow in the same 12-month period shall begin at
the $100 fee and progress as stated in this section for subsequent false
alarms.
   (C)   Failure to post a telephone number as required by §
134.051(D) will be punished by a fine of not more than $150 for each violation.
('69 Code, § 12-19.8) (Ord. 512, passed 6-25-79; Am. Ord. 1590, passed 9-5-07;
Am. Ord. 1648, passed 6-17-09)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDINGS
      
151.   EXCAVATION REGULATIONS
      
152.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
153.   (RESERVED)
      
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
         
APPENDIX: TYPICAL WATERWAY BANK SLOPES
      
155.   LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
      
156.   CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
      
157.   LOCAL HOUSING ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
      
158.   AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM
      
159.   SPECIAL DISTRICTS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   (Reserved)
   
150.02   New home buyers warranty
   
150.03   Escrow deposits
   
150.04   Homeowner or condominium association affidavit requirement for
building permits
Building Code
   
150.10   Short title
   
150.11   Florida Building Code adopted by reference; rejection of county
regulations
   
150.12   Effect of adoption of Florida Building Code on existing construction
   
150.13   Procedure for amending Florida Building Code
   
150.14   (Reserved)
   
150.15   (Reserved)
   
150.16   Permit fee schedule
   
150.17   (Reserved)
   
150.18   Bond to accompany building permit application
   
150.19   Building Official may streamline building permit procedure
   
150.20   Certificate of occupancy fee; disposition, waiver of fee
   
150.21   Threshold buildings
   
150.22   Administration by Building and Zoning Department of city
   
150.23   Unsafe Structures Board
   
150.24   Violations
Fire Safety Regulations
   
150.30   Police, fire, rescue, construction projects, and capital expenditures;
fee assessment on buildings
   
150.31   Smoke detectors
   
150.32   Annual fire inspections, life safety plan review and apparatus; fee
schedule
Public Works Construction
   
150.40   Adoption of county specifications
   
150.41   Substitution of certain terms, penalty for those used in county
specifications
   
150.42   Building permit, fee payment required
   
150.43   Permit fee schedule
   
150.44   Imposition of fine, penalty not to excuse violation
Swimming Pools and Barriers
   
150.50   Definition
   
150.51   Permit for pool or pool barrier construction, when required
   
150.52   (Reserved)
   
150.53   (Reserved)
   
150.54   Barriers required for existing pools
   
150.55   Barriers to be nonscalable and impenetrable
   
150.56   Final inspection and approval
   
150.57   Violations
Theatres, Auditoriums
   
150.65   Permit application; required plans
Condominium Conversion
   
150.70   Definitions
   
150.71   Compliance with existing ordinances
   
150.72   Issuance of building permits
   
150.73   Violations
Interim Services and Facilities Fee
   
150.80   Definitions
   
150.81   Imposition of fee
   
150.82   Computation of fee
   
150.83   Fee collection
   
150.84   Unpaid fee; lien
Clean-Up Upon Completion of Construction
   
150.90   Removal of building materials, debris required; exception;
construction or improvement
Property Maintenance Code
   
150.95   Property Maintenance Code
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 (RESERVED)
§ 150.02 NEW HOME BUYERS WARRANTY.
   (A)   Purpose. The objective of this section is to protect the purchasers of
new residences in this city by requiring the providing of insurance or third-
party warranties for the correction of major construction defects or proof that
same shall be available at the time the developer closes on the sale of the
property with the original purchaser as a condition precedent to the future
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any dwelling in this city, and a
bond to insure completion of a residential home.
   (B)   Requirement of affidavit.
      (1)   Each person or entity, as a condition to the issuance of a building
permit, shall provide the city with an affidavit, signed by the person or a
principal of the entity requesting the building permit, in a form prescribed by
the City Attorney and available at the Building Department.
   (C)   Requirements of insurance, warranty, or other security.
      (1)   To assure the quality of construction in this city and to assure to
residents financial resources which may be necessary for the correction of
major structural construction defects, the Chief Building Official shall not
issue a certificate of occupancy for any dwelling unit until the developer,
builder, or general contractor shall first furnish proof to such official of
the issuance or guaranteed availability of same at the time the developer
closes on the sale of the property with the original purchaser of an insurance
policy or insured five-year or greater warranty provided by any VA/FHA approved
warranty company and warranty certificate by a company authorized by the
Florida Department of Insurance to do business in the state or authorized under
applicable federal law, naming as beneficiary the purchaser and his successors
and assigns of that dwelling unit and obligating the insurer in a minimum
amount equal to the original purchase price of the home to make and pay for all
corrections which may be necessary with respect to any major structural defects
subject to warranty time limitations.
      (2)   Insurance policies or warranty certificates issued for condominium
units shall be in a form consistent with the Florida Condominium Warranty
Statute, to wit, F.S. § 7l8.203.
      (3)   The developer, builder, or general contractor may in lieu of any
insurance policy deposit with the city a good and sufficient bond of the
developer, builder, or general contractor approved as to form and substance, by
the City Attorney, or a cash deposit, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit,
or other collateral approved by the City Commission which shall be held as
security for the payment of corrections of construction defects hereinafter
defined. Promissory notes shall not be accepted under this section. The bond or
letter of credit shall be in an amount equal to $5,000 per individual dwelling
unit with a maximum of $100,000 aggregate for all dwelling units constructed by
the same developer with any one project. The bond or letter of credit shall be
for a term of five years from the date of the certificate of occupancy or shall
be issued annually, but provide for an automatic renewal.
   (D)   The regulations contained herein shall not apply to a single-family
home constructed by an owner/builder for his own residence. In order to qualify
as an owner/builder, an individual must sign and provide the city with an
affidavit in recordable form stating that he shall live in the residence when
completed and that he intends to occupy the residence for at least two years.
If the owner/ builder moves from the residence within two years of the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy, he shall be required to provide a bond as
required in this section.
   (E)   Identification and determination of major structured defects.
      (1)   MAJOR STRUCTURAL DEFECT shall mean any noncompliance with the
Florida Building Code, as to any part of the original construction of the
building which results in actual physical damage to the following designated
load- bearing portions of the residence caused by failure to such load-bearing
portions which affect their load- bearing functions to the extent that the
residence becomes unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise unlivable:
            (a)   Foundation systems and footings;
            (b)   Beams;
            (c)   Girders;
            (d)   Lintels;
            (e)   Columns;
            (f)   Walls and partitions;
            (g)   Floor systems;
            (h)   Roof framing system;
            (i)   Mechanical;
            (j)   Air conditioning systems;
            (k)   Plumbing; or
            (l)   Electrical systems.
      (2)   The Chief Building Official shall determine whether there have been
any major structural defects with respect to the building code or other
applicable laws which were existing at the time of the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy.
   (F)   Penalty. Failure to comply with this section shall prohibit the
granting of a building permit, or if a building permit is in effect at the time
of the passage of this section, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued.
(Ord. 87-6, passed 5-20-87; Am. Ord. 1715, passed 5-2-12)
§ 150.03 ESCROW DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Purpose of section. The purpose of this section is to protect future
residents from the loss of deposits on the purchase of their dwelling by
providing for the maintenance of escrow accounts or, in lieu thereof, providing
for surety or letters of credit to secure the deposits until closing of the
dwelling unit by the purchaser.
   (B)   Requirement of escrow.
      (1)   The developer shall be required to place in an escrow account, with
a person, firm, or institution having a bona fide fiduciary obligation, all
deposits received towards the purchase of any dwelling unit constructed or to
be constructed within the city. The deposits shall be released from escrow upon
or simultaneously with the closing of the unit.
      (2)   The developer shall submit to the Chief Building Official, with the
developer's application for permit, evidence from the escrow agent that the
deposits are placed in an escrow account. If the developer desires to secure a
building permit prior to the sale of a dwelling unit, the developer shall
deposit with the Chief Building Official a bond as provided in division (B)(3)
below. At the time of sale of the unit, the developer may request and the Chief
Building Official shall release the bond upon evidence that the deposits have
been placed in escrow.
      (3)   In lieu of placing the purchaser's deposits in escrow, the
developer may deposit with the Chief Building Official a bond, approved as to
form and substance by the City Attorney, in the form of cash, letter of credit,
or other collateral, which shall be held as security for the deposits. That
bond shall be in an amount greater than the amount of the deposit or 5% of the
selling price of the dwelling unit. Where a developer is building multiple
units simultaneously, the aggregate amount of all bonds shall not be required
to exceed $100,000 per subdivision. The city shall release the bonds upon the
closing of the unit.
(Ord. 87-6, passed 5-20-87; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 5-4-94)
§ 150.04 HOMEOWNER OR CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION AFFIDAVIT REQUIREMENT FOR
BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   Declaration of intent. The intent of this section is to require
property owners whose property is governed by a homeowners' association or
condominium association to provide an affidavit indicating their awareness that
they may be subject to additional association regulations despite the issuance
of a building permit for exterior renovations by the city. This section is
intended to protect the city from becoming involved in controversies between
property owners and their associations, where property owners may obtain
permits from the city for projects inconsistent with the association's
regulations. This section is further intended to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens and residents of the city by ensuring awareness of all
proper regulations prior to the issuance of a building permit.
   (B)   Definitions.
      (1)   CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION. An association created pursuant to F.S.
Chapter 718, to govern and represent the residents of a condominium.
      (2)   HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION. An association created pursuant to F.S.
Chapter 720, to govern and represent the residents of a community.
   (C)   Affidavit requirement for building permits.
      (1)   As part of the application process, when applying for a city
building permit, every applicant shall sign an affidavit indicating an
awareness that if the subject property is located in a homeowner's association
or condominium association there may be additional regulations despite the
issuance of a permit by the city. Applicants whose subject property is not
located within a homeowners' association or condominium association shall
submit an affidavit indicating that the subject property is not in such an
association and that this section is not applicable.
      (2)   The Building Department shall, at the applicant's expense, forward
by certified mail a copy of the affidavit of awareness to the homeowners'
association or condominium association, provided that such association is on
the city's master list. The cost of this mailing shall be factored into the
city's fees for building permits.
(Ord. 1586, passed 8-1-07)
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.10 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter may be cited as the building code.
('69 Code, § 6-11) (Ord. 46, passed 11-2-61)
§ 150.11 FLORIDA BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; REJECTION OF COUNTY
REGULATIONS.
   The city adopts by reference the latest addition of the Florida Building
Code, as may be amended from time to time. The provisions of the Florida
Building Code, as amended from time to time, shall be in full force and effect
in the city to the same extent as though set forth in full herein.
('69 Code, § 6-12) (Ord. 46, passed 11-2-61; Am. Ord. 184, passed 8-19-68; Am.
Ord. 1715, passed 5-2-12)
§ 150.12 EFFECT OF ADOPTION OF FLORIDA BUILDING CODE ON EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.
   All homes for which building permits were pending at City Hall on January
16, 1978, shall be permitted in accordance with the building code and fee
schedule as it existed prior to January 16, 1978. Between January 16, 1978, and
February 1, 1978, no builder, developer, or contractor shall be permitted for
more homes than he has been permitted for in a pro-rata time period for the
next immediate proceeding twelve-month period of time prior to February 1,
1978. For the purpose of this computation, the builder, developer, or
contractor shall be authorized additional permits for any homes that he
certifies to as having been validly contracted for sale to a bona-fide third
party purchaser prior to January 16, 1978.
('69 Code, § 6-24) (Ord. 461, passed 1-16-78; Am. Ord. 1715, passed 5-2-12)
§ 150.13 PROCEDURE FOR AMENDING FLORIDA BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Building and Zoning Department to bring to
the attention of the City Commission all amendments to or other changes in the
building code adopted in §
150.11, at the times the amendments and other changes are enacted so that the
Commission may enact the amendments and changes into ordinance, and keep the
building code up-to-date at all times. ('69 Code, § 6-13)
   (B)   All administrative and technical amendments to the Florida Building
Code as applied solely within the jurisdiction of the City Commission shall be
enacted in accordance with F.S. § 553.73(4)(a) and (b).
(Ord. 1715, passed 5-2-12)
§ 150.14 (RESERVED).
§ 150.15 (RESERVED).
§ 150.16 PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Building permit fees shall be paid whenever a building permit is
required under provisions of the building code of the city, in accordance with
the schedule of fees. In the event any work for which a permit is required is
started or proceeded with prior to the issuance of a permit by the duly-
authorized person, the person shall be liable for and pay to the city a double
permit fee for the work. The payment of the double permit fee shall be made
before any further permits shall be issued to the person owing the double
permit fee. The payment of the double permit fee shall not relieve any person
from fully complying with the other requirements specified by ordinance nor
from any other penalties prescribed therein.
   (B)   The fees schedules for building permit structural fees, electrical
permits, gas permits, mechanical and air conditioning permits, plumbing, site
improvements, and miscellaneous fees are incorporated herein by reference and
available in the City Clerk's office.
(Am. Ord. 1111, passed 2-1-95; Am. Ord. 1200, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. 1223,
passed 8-6-97; Am. Ord. 1358, passed 12-20-00; Am. Ord. 1388, passed 9-20-01;
Am. Ord. 1420, passed 9-4-02; Am. Ord. 1453, passed 8-6-03; Am. Ord. 1763,
passed 10-16-13; Am. Ord. 1783, passed 6-18-14)
§ 150.17 (RESERVED).
§ 150.18 BOND TO ACCOMPANY BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Whenever an application is made for a building permit in the city, it
shall be the duty of the Building Official to determine whether the improvement
is to be erected on a lot or tract in a section served by public sidewalks or
public curbs, and whether there is a probability that the public side-walks or
public curbs and gutters may be damaged by moving supplies and materials to the
proposed location. If, in the opinion of the Building Official, it appears
probable that, in the course of construction, the public sidewalks or public
curbs and gutters in front of or adjacent to or in the neighborhood of the
proposed improvement may be damaged by moving supplies and materials to the
proposed location, the Building Official shall require a cash bond of $250 to
be posted with him by the applicant, to guarantee during the construction,
before issuing the permit.
   (B)   The Building Official shall give a receipt for the sum of money on a
form to be prepared by him. The receipt form shall contain a provision that any
part or all of the sum shall be used by the city and its employees, if
necessary, in the replacement of curbs, sidewalks, and gutters broken or
damaged in construction.
   (C)   Before final approval of any building or structure constructed,
whether there has been posted a cash bond or not, the Building Official shall
require the necessary replacements or repairs to sidewalks, curbs, and gutters
and shall refuse final approval of the construction unless replacements and
repairs are made.
('69 Code, § 6-22) (Ord. 268, passed 11-15-71; Am. Ord. 542, passed 8-18-80)
§ 150.19 BUILDING OFFICIAL MAY STREAM- LINE BUILDING PERMIT PROCEDURE.
   The Building Official shall be authorized to institute procedures that may
be necessary and adequate to streamline the permitting process when requested
by the builder, developer, or contractor involved. These procedures shall be
designed to facilitate permitting of similar categories of homes and shall
specifically permit builders, developers, and contractors when they so request
in writing to pay the highest fee for that style home in any tract or
subdivision development.
('69 Code, § 6-25) (Ord. 461, passed 1-16-78; Am. Ord. 626, passed 10-6-82)
§ 150.20 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FEE; DISPOSITION, WAIVER OF FEE.
   (A)   A certificate of occupancy fee shall be charged at the time of
issuance, in accordance with the following fees.
      (1)   Residential: $25 for each dwelling unit.
      (2)   Commercial: $0.01 per square foot of floor area of all enclosed or
semi-enclosed areas; minimum fee of $25.
('69 Code, § 6-19)
   (B)   All certificates of occupancy fees shall be deposited into a special
fund to be used and expended solely for the improvement, enlargement, purchase
of buildings or land or both, and repair of capital facilities or public works.
Any sums unexpended from the fund at the end of the city's fiscal year shall be
considered encumbered for the use and purposes of the special fund for the
ensuing fiscal year.
('69 Code, § 6-20)
   (C)   The City Commission shall have the authority to waive the certificate
of occupancy fee to those persons, firms, or corporations who have previously
donated lands or funds for city purposes or uses.
('69 Code, § 6-21)
(Ord. 210, passed 8-18-69; Am. Ord. 386, passed 2-3-75; Am. Ord. 461, passed 1-
16-78; Am. Ord. 626, passed 10-6-82)
§ 150.21 THRESHOLD BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit for or commencement of
construction of a threshold building, the owner of real property desiring to
build a threshold building shall retain the services of a design professional,
being a registered engineer, a registered architect, or a firm of registered
architects or registered engineers, to provide special inspection services
during the construction of the threshold building in accordance with F.S. §
553.79, and certification of construction upon completion of construction of
and prior to the actual occupancy and the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy of any threshold building, in accordance with F.S. § 553.79.
   (B)   The owner shall require that the design professional perform his
services in the following prescribed manner and the design professional shall
perform his services in the following prescribed manner. Failure of the
services to be performed in the following prescribed manner shall cause denial
of building permits for the threshold building, issuance of stop work orders on
all phases of construction of the threshold building, or denial of a
certificate of occupancy for the threshold building by the Chief Building
Official.
      (1)   The owner shall require the design professional have in force at
all times during construction, professional liability insurance in an amount
not less than $1,000,000 issued by an insurance company acceptable to the city.
The insurance company shall provide a certificate of insurance to the city.
      (2)   The owner shall require the design professional to inspect all
structural components of a threshold building that are related to the public
health, safety, or welfare, and to have present at all times when these
components of a threshold building are being constructed a qualified special
inspector, or a person registered under F.S. Ch. 471, as an engineer or under
F.S. Ch. 481 as an architect.
      (3)   The owner shall require the design professional to maintain
adequate written records of the performance of special inspection services on
the threshold building at the actual job site during construction. These
records shall be available for inspection by the owner, contractor,
subcontractor, and all regulatory agencies, including the city.
      (4)   The owner shall require the design professional to permanently
retain, after completion of the threshold building and after the certificate of
occupancy is issued, all records provided for in division (B)(3) above at his
permanent place of practice.
      (5)   The owner shall require the design professional, upon completion of
the building and upon application for a certificate of occupancy from the city,
to certify to the city that the construction of all structured components which
are related to the public health, safety, and welfare were inspected at all
times when the components were being constructed, that the person performing
the inspection was qualified as a special inspector in accordance with law, and
that, to the best of his knowledge, the construction of the threshold building
complies with the application codes and the intent and design specified in the
permitted documents.
      (6)   The owner and the design professional shall certify to the city
that the design professional and his agents and employees have no business
relationship with the owner, developer, financiers, general contractor, or
subcontractors of the threshold building and that he has been retained as an
independent professional to perform services on the threshold building. This
provision is intended to prohibit the use of a design professional who has a
commodity of interest with the owners, stockholders, directors, officers,
employees or other persons interested in the threshold building. The design
professional's fee shall not be contingent upon financial aspects of the
threshold building but shall be a fixed fee, hourly fee, or a percentage of
value fee. The design professional may be, but is not required to be, the
architect or engineer who designed the threshold building.
      (7)   The owner shall submit with his application for a building permit,
a true copy of a written agreement with a design professional providing for the
services required in division (B)(1) through (B)(6) above and providing for
adequate compensation for all special inspection services to be rendered. The
owner shall cease all work on the project at any time that the design
professional is not rendering the services provided for in this section and in
the agreement. In the event the design professional resigns from the threshold
building, the owner shall cease all work until a successor design professional
is retained and a new agreement is provided to the city. The owner and
successor design professional shall be responsible for providing all the
certifications for the total construction required in division (B)(5) above.
The owner and design professional shall notify the city in writing immediately,
and not later than 24 hours later, of any temporary or permanent cessation of
special inspection services to the threshold building.
(Ord. 683, passed 2-15-84) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.22 ADMINISTRATION BY BUILDING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT OF CITY.
   The terms and conditions of this subchapter shall be administered by the
Building Department of the city. Any reference in this subchapter to Building
Official shall mean the Building Department of the city. Zoning functions shall
be within the Planning Department. The City Planner shall also be known as the
Director of Zoning and the Director of Zoning shall supervise all zoning
functions within the city. Any reference to the Board of County Commissioners,
the County Board of Rules and Appeals, or the County Advisory Board of Rules
and Appeals shall mean the city, which shall have the same rights, powers, and
duties as the County Board of Rules and Appeals when acting as such.
('69 Code, § 6-14) (Ord. 46, passed 11-2-61; Am. Ord. 958, passed 6-5-91)
§ 150.23 UNSAFE STRUCTURES BOARD.
   (A)   Pursuant to §
150.11(A), and Section 116.13 of the Broward County Amendments to the Florida
Building Code, the City Unsafe Structures Board is hereby created, consisting
of nine members who shall be appointed by the City Commission.
   (B)   The provisions of Section 116.13 of the Broward County Amendments to
the Florida Building Code, to the extent the provisions were enacted prior to
the effective date of this section, shall govern all matters pertaining to the
Unsafe Structures Board, including, but not limited to the qualifications of
Board members, terms of office, organization of the Board, duties and powers of
the Board, duties of legal counsel to the Board, conflicts of interest, and any
other matters pertinent to the Unsafe Structures Board, unless otherwise
provided by ordinance.
('69 Code, § 6-14.1) (Ord. 640, passed 12-15-82; Am. Ord. 1715, passed 5-2- 12)
§ 150.24 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating any of the terms of the Building Code, as set out in §§
150.10 through 150.24, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided
in §
10.99. Each day that a violation of the building code is continued or permitted
to exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable upon
conviction as provided in §
10.99. The imposition of any sentence for the violation of the building code
shall not be construed as excusing or permitting the continuance thereof.
('69 Code, § 6-15) (Ord. 46, passed 11-2-61) Penalty, see §
10.99
FIRE SAFETY REGULATIONS
§ 150.30 POLICE, FIRE RESCUE, CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS, AND CAPITAL EXPENDITURES;
FEE ASSESSMENT ON BUILDINGS.
   (A)   There is hereby established an assessment against all hotels, motels,
commercial, industrial, and all nonresidential buildings within the city at the
rate of $.10 per square foot of space within the building. This shall be paid
at the time of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy and shall be used
for the purpose of purchasing fire- fighting and emergency equipment.
   (B)   In the event that a project of any nature shall include fire
prevention designs such as sprinkler systems, standpipes, notification systems
or any other life safety protective apparatus approved by the City Manager,
Fire Chief and Building Official in accordance with the city and the South
Florida Building Codes, Broward County edition, the builder shall receive a
reduced assessment fee by 50% of the above stated fees. Annually, the City
Commission may adjust by ordinance the fees set forth herein by the change of
budget expenditures in the Fire or Police Departments directly related hereto.
   (C)   There is hereby established an assessment against all single-family
detached dwellings and all multiple dwellings within the city at a rate of
$60.00 per unit. This fee shall be paid at the time of issuance of the
certificate of occupancy and shall be used for the purpose of purchasing fire-
fighting, emergency, and rescue equipment and fire/rescue services as are
deemed necessary by the City Commission from time to time.
   (D)   There is hereby established an assessment against all hotels, motels,
commercial, industrial, and non-residential buildings within the city at the
rate of $.07 per square foot of space within the building. This shall be paid
at the time of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy and shall be used
for the purpose of purchasing police equipment.
   (E)   There is hereby established an assessment against all single-family
detached dwellings and all multiple dwellings at the rate of $60.00 per unit.
This fee shall be paid at the time of the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy and shall be used for the purpose of purchasing police equipment and
services as are deemed necessary by the City Commission from time to time.
   (F)   There is hereby established an assessment against all residential
dwelling units and business units, within the city at a rate of $12.00 per unit
per year. The term "unit" shall be defined as each dwelling unit for
residential buildings, and one unit for each Equivalent Residential Connection
("ERC's") based upon the number of ERCs calculated for the size of the water
meter for commercial buildings. This assessment shall be paid in 12 equal
monthly payments at the time of payment of the monthly water bill and shall be
used for public safety, police, fire equipment and capital expenditures. Said
assessment shall terminate when the Police Station, which is being funded by
this fee, is fully paid off or ten years from the effective date of Ordinance
892, whichever occurs first.
('69 Code, § 6-2) (Ord. 350, passed 1-7-74; Am. Ord. 763, passed 11-13-85; Am.
Ord. 808, passed 11-5-86; Am. Ord. 892, passed 5-17-89)
Cross-reference:
   Responsibility for fire protection, see §§
93.25 through 93.27
§ 150.31 SMOKE DETECTORS.
   (A)   Any structure which is the subject of new construction and occupancy
after May 19, 1980, or any existing structure which is substantially altered in
such a fashion as to require the issuance of a building permit for the
alterations shall have smoke detectors installed therein.
   (B)   The Chief Building Official shall publish a list of approved smoke
detectors for installation as required pursuant to this section. The Building
Official shall determine the number of smoke detectors required for the
structure and shall approve the location of the smoke detectors in the
structure. All installations shall comply with the current edition of NFPA 74
of the National Fire Codes and must be approved by the Underwriters'
Laboratories.
   (C)   The following smoke detectors shall be installed.
      (1)   Residential structure. A photo-electric battery or 110-volt
electrically-operated device which emits alarm signals by light or sound
indicating the presence of smoke emanating from combustible material. In the
case of 110-volt electrically- operated smoke detectors installed in
residential occupancies, the smoke detectors shall be installed without wall
switches.
      (2)   Non-residential structure. A 110-volt electrically-operated device
which emits alarm signals by light or sound indicating the presence of smoke
emanating from combustible materials. The smoke detectors must activate an
outside audible alarm when triggered by detection of smoke. This section shall
not apply to structures which have been issued a certificate of occupancy prior
to October 6, 1982. Such structures shall install battery-powered smoke
detectors to be used in lieu of the 110 circuit type.
('69 Code, § 6-3) (Ord. 533, passed 5-19-80; Am. Ord. 631, passed 10-6-82; Am.
Ord. 690, passed 4-18-84) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.32 ANNUAL FIRE INSPECTIONS, LIFE SAFETY PLAN REVIEW AND APPARATUS; FEE
SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The fee schedules relating to life safety plan review fees,
inspection, and testing of fire safety and fire-extinguishing apparatus, and
annual fire inspection must be approved by the City Commission. The fee
schedules shall be available in the City Clerk's office.
   (B)   On October 1 of each year, the fees referred to above shall be
increased, in accordance with the Consumer Price Index for Urban Consumers in
the United States, published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the 12
months ending April of each year, without City Commission approval, unless
otherwise instructed by the City Commission.
   (C)   Annual fire inspections shall be conducted on all businesses or
commercial enterprises operating within the city and each business or
commercial enterprise shall receive an individual inspection notwithstanding
that more than one business or commercial enterprise may be located within a
single structure. The "owner" as defined by the Florida Building Code shall be
responsible for payment of the inspection fees, provided however that the
property owner, as set forth on the latest tax assessment roll provided to the
city by the property appraiser's office, shall be ultimately responsible for
the payment of the fees.
   (D)   Collection, disposal of fees. The fees specified herein shall be
collected by the Building and Zoning Department at the time that plans are
submitted for review or at the time that the fire safety and fire-
extinguishing apparatus inspections and testing are accomplished. Thereafter,
the Building and Zoning Department shall remit the funds to the account of the
Fire Department to be used to promote fire safety within the city.
('69 Code, § 6-4) (Ord. 591, passed 3-3-82; Am. Ord. 926, passed 5-16-90; Am.
Ord. 1140, passed 10-18-95; Am. Ord. 1590, passed 9-5-07; Am. Ord. 1877, passed
6-21-17)
PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION
§ 150.40 ADOPTION OF COUNTY SPECIFICATIONS.
   The Broward County "General Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
and Minimum Engineering and Construction Standards for Water and Sewer
Installations and the General Specifications for Construction Methods and
Procedures for Installation of Gas, Water, and Sewer Lines," now on file in the
office of the City Clerk in compliance with F.S. § 165.19, is adopted by
reference, subject to any amendments or deletions contained in this code, and
to any provisions of this code inconsistent therewith.
('69 Code, § 6-29) (Ord. 121, passed 8-16-65)
§ 150.41 SUBSTITUTION OF CERTAIN TERMS, PENALTY FOR THOSE USED IN COUNTY
SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Wherever the context permits in the specifications adopted by
reference in §
150.40, there shall be substituted for the officers, boards, departments, and
commissions mentioned therein comparable officers, boards, departments, and
commissions of the city. Wherever the term "Broward County" is used therein,
the term "City of Pembroke Pines" shall be substituted.
   (B)   Wherever a penalty is provided therein, there shall be substituted
therefor the penalty as provided in §
10.99.
('69 Code, § 6-30) (Ord. 121, passed 8-16-65)
§ 150.42 BUILDING PERMIT, FEE PAYMENT REQUIRED.
   No work or construction governed under the terms of this subchapter or for
which a permit fee is assessed shall be commenced unless a permit for the same
is obtained from the Building and Zoning Department of the city and a fee paid
thereto in accordance with the schedule of fees in §
150.43.
('69 Code, § 6-31) (Ord. 121, passed 8-16-65) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.43 PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE.
   The permit fees for public works construction in the city are available in
the City Clerk's office.
§ 150.44 IMPOSITION OF FINE, PENALTY NOT TO EXCUSE VIOLATION.
   The imposition of any fine or penalty for a violation of this subchapter
shall not be construed as excusing or permitting the continuance of the
violation.
('69 Code, § 6-33) (Ord. 121, passed 8-16-65)
SWIMMING POOLS AND BARRIERS
§ 150.50 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SWIMMING POOL. A body of water, which is deeper than six inches at its
deepest point, which is wider than three feet, and which is contained in an
artificially created or built receptacle affixed to the earth or resting on the
ground, used or intended to be used for swimming or wading. The terms of this
subchapter shall apply to all portable pools while containing water. SWIMMING
POOL shall include any body of water located on private property of the depth
and width herein provided, such as, but not limited to, ponds, brooks, fish
ponds, and ponds for growing aquatic plants. Therapeutic pools or spas shall be
subject to the requirements of this section.
('69 Code, § 6-44) (Ord. 96, passed 7-15-63; Am. Ord. 490, passed 1-29-79; Am.
Ord. 1028, passed 3-17-93)
§ 150.51 PERMIT FOR POOL OR POOL BARRIER CONSTRUCTION; WHEN REQUIRED.
   Before any work on a swimming pool or a swimming pool safety barrier is
commenced, permits shall be secured for all swimming pools and for the safety
barriers. Plans shall contain all details necessary to show compliance with the
terms and conditions of this subchapter. No swimming pool permit shall be
issued unless simultaneously therewith a permit is secured for the erection of
the required safety barrier. If the premises are already enclosed, a permit for
the safety barrier shall not be required, if, upon inspection of the premises,
the existing barrier is proven to be satisfactory.
('69 Code, § 6-48) (Ord. 33, passed 3-2-61) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.52 (RESERVED)
§ 150.53 (RESERVED)
§ 150.54 BARRIERS REQUIRED FOR EXISTING POOLS.
   Any existing pool not enclosed with a pool barrier, excluding pools existing
within an adult condominium development that has established pool committees
and lifeguards and has executed an agreement for indemnification of the city,
shall be enclosed with a pool barrier in accordance with §§
150.52,
150.55, and
150.56(B).
('69 Code, § 6-49.1) (Ord. 509, passed 6-25-79) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.55 BARRIERS TO BE NONSCALABLE AND IMPENETRABLE.
   (A)   Where the swimming pool safety barrier is a wooden-type fence, the
boards, pickets, louvers, or other members shall be spaced, constructed, and
erected so as to make the fence nonscalable and impenetrable.
   (B)   Walls, whether of the rock or block type, shall be so erected as to
make them nonscalable.
   (C)   Wire fences shall be the two-inch chain-link or diamond weave
nonscalable type, or of an approved equal, with top rail. They shall be of a
heavy, galvanized material, or any other rustproof material measuring up to
that standard.
('69 Code, § 6-49) (Ord. 33, passed 3-2-61) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.56 FINAL INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   No swimming pool final inspection and approval shall be given by the
Building and Zoning Department, unless a safety barrier has been erected as
required herein.
('69 Code, § 6-45)
   (B)   It shall be within the discretion of the Building Inspector to refuse
approval of any swimming pool safety barrier which, in his opinion, does not
furnish the safety requirements of this subchapter, that is, that is high
enough and so constructed as to keep children of preschool age from getting
over or through it.
('69 Code, § 6-46)
(Ord. 33, passed 3-2-61) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.57 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
('69 Code, § 6-50) (Ord. 33, passed 3-2-61) Penalty, see §
10.99
THEATRES, AUDITORIUMS
§ 150.65 PERMIT APPLICATION; REQUIRED PLANS.
   (A)   All applications for permits to construct or use existing buildings
for theatre, auditorium, or motion picture purposes shall have plans prepared
showing the following.
      (1)   Ingress and egress to the building and all appurtenant structures.
      (2)   All arrangements for seating, including aisles, number of seats,
stages, projection rooms, and other facilities.
      (3)   Fire exits, escapes, and other doors and doorways.
      (4)   Off-street parking sufficient to accommodate all patrons to be
seated within the theatre, auditorium, and motion picture house.
      (5)   Design of any advertising, signs, billboards, marquees and other
exterior structures or appurtenances.
   (B)   The plans and specifications shall be presented to the Building and
Zoning Department for preliminary approval as to conformity with the Building
Code of the city and other applicable ordinances, as well as compliance with
the Southeastern Fire Underwriters rules and regulations relating to public
theatres and auditoriums. The Building and Zoning Department shall then make a
determination and recommendation to the City Commission as to the compliance of
the plans for the proposed theatre or auditorium with the foregoing provisions,
rules, and regulations. The plans and specifications shall also be submitted to
the State Fire Marshal for his approval.
   (C)   All plans and specifications shall be presented to the City Commission
for approval before any permit shall be issued for the construction of a
theatre, auditorium, or motion picture house or the use of an existing building
for such purposes. No plans shall be approved unless the City Commission finds
that adequate provision has been made for ingress and egress, fire exits,
public safety, off-street parking, handling of traffic, signs, and other
indications of use consistent with good morals and the proper development of
commercial establishments within the city. The criteria for approval of the
foregoing, particularly the requirements set forth in division (A) above, shall
be in conformity with the applicable building and zoning ordinances and
regulations of the city and other regulatory statutes of the city and state.
('69 Code, § 6-51) (Ord. 243, passed 12-21-70) Penalty, see §
10.99
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION
§ 150.70 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the definition of a condominium shall be
as defined in F.S. Ch. 718 relating to condominiums .
('69 Code, § 6-53) (Ord. 537, passed 7-14-80)
§ 150.71 COMPLIANCE WITH EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   After the effective date of this subchapter, any property located within the
city which converted from rental use to a use as a condominium shall be
required to comply with all existing zoning, landscaping, parking, and use
ordinances of the city relating to condominiums which are in force at the time
of the recording of the declaration of condominium.
('69 Code, § 6-54) (Ord. 537, passed 7-14-80) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.72 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   Prior to the issuance of any building permits for construction or
renovation, the Building Official shall insure that all current requirements of
the South Florida Building Code, as amended by Broward County and of the
ordinances of the city have been met incident to the construction for sale of
condominium units in structures that were previously not valid and existing
condominiums on the date of the passage of this subchapter.
('69 Code, § 6-55) (Ord. 537, passed 7-14-80; Am. Ord. 1715, passed 5-2-12)
§ 150.73 VIOLATIONS.
   In the event an attempt is made to convert any existing buildings within the
city to condominium ownership, without compliance with this subchapter, the
individual, firm, or corporate developer, as defined in F.S. Ch. 7l8, shall be
penalized in accordance with §
10.99.
('69 Code, § 6-56) (Ord. 537, passed 7-14-80) Penalty, see §
10.99
INTERIM SERVICES AND FACILITIES FEE
§ 150.80 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OWNER. That person or legal entity reflected on the public records of the
county, as the owner of real property upon which a structure has been
completed.
   STRUCTURE. Any building constructed on real property located within the
municipal boundaries of the city, which is not exempt from municipal ad valorem
taxation as provided by general law.
('69 Code, § 6-57) (Ord. 578, passed 9-16-81)
§ 150.81 IMPOSITION OF FEE.
   As of the date a certificate of occupancy is issued by the Building and
Zoning Department, every structure located within the city shall be subject to
an interim services and facilities fee. This interim services and facilities
fee shall be in effect until that date when the structure in question appears
on the assessment rolls of the tax assessor's office in the county.
('69 Code, § 6-58) (Ord. 578, passed 9-16-81)
§ 150.82 COMPUTATION OF FEE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the fee calculation provided in division (B) below,
the minimum interim services and facilities fee shall be $25.
   (B)   An interim services and facilities fee applicable to structures
certified for occupancy by the Building and Zoning Department but not appearing
on the county tax rolls as an improvement to real property shall be computed by
the City Finance Department, according to the following criteria.
      (1)   Interim service fees shall be determined annually as follows:
         (a)   Fees will be based on cost of service and not on the increase in
value of real property;
         (b)   Fees will be arrived at by using the proposed budget which
reflects anticipated increases in level of service;
         (c)   The functional population shall be calculated annually and will
estimate the number of residents, employees and customers in the city per
average day;
         (d)   The expenditures per functional person is computed annually for
appropriate expenditure categories;
         (e)   Expenditures per functional person are translated annually to
expenditures per housing unit, per square foot of office or retail space and
the like; and
         (f)   Assumptions and methodology based on Boynton Beach study done by
Florida Atlantic University, Florida International University Social Center for
Environmental on Urban Problems done in 1991.
      (2)   The interim services and facilities fee shall be computed at the
rates set forth in Attachment A, available in the City Clerk's office for
public inspection, with new rates being effective each October 1.
      (3)   The interim services and facilities fee shall be levied for
municipal services rendered to those properties not exempt from ad valorem
taxation and issued a certificate of occupancy either permanent or temporary,
for a full or a partial use of the premises which has not received a tax bill.
      (4)   The minimum $25 fee shall be paid as the initial fee and credited
against the balance of the fee for the remainder of the calendar year. The
interim services and facilities fee may be billed monthly, at the city's
option.
('69 Code, § 6-59) (Ord. 578, passed 9-16-81; Am. Ord. 1138, passed 10-18-95)
§ 150.83 FEE COLLECTION.
   (A)   The Building Official shall be charged with the collection of the
interim services and facilities fee, which fee shall be collected from the
owner as a condition precedent to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or
shell certificate of occupancy by the Building Department. Upon request for a
certificate of occupancy, the chief Building Official shall request and shall
receive a statement of the interim service and facilities fees due and payable
for the structure in question from the Finance Department. The fee statements
shall be presented to the owner and collected prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy. Subsequent to collection, and in any event on a daily
basis, the Building Official shall remit monies collected pursuant to this
section to the Finance Department.
   (B)   The Finance Director shall deposit all fees collected into a non-
lapsing trust fund established and maintained by the city.
   (C)   The Finance Director is hereby directed to deposit all fees collected
pursuant to Section 4.06 of the Charter into the non-lapsing trust fund created
in accordance with the provisions set forth in this section.
   (D)   The use of the collected fees will be restricted and limited to the
purchase of new or replacement equipment and the acquisition, expansion, and
development of service facilities for new users, in a manner consistent with
the principles set forth in Contractors and Builders Association of Pinellas
County vs. City of Dunedin, 329 So.2d 314 (Fla. 1976) and otherwise consistent
with all requirements of the Constitution of the United States, this state, and
all applicable laws.
('69 Code, § 6-60) (Ord. 578, passed 9-16-81; Am. Ord. 805, passed 9-3-86)
§ 150.84 UNPAID FEE; LIEN.
   A lien for all interim services and facilities fees shall attach to any
property as of the date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy by the
City Building and Zoning Department and shall continue in full force and effect
until discharged by payment as provided in this subchapter. These liens shall
be foreclosed as provided by law.
('69 Code, § 6-61) (Ord. 578, passed 9-16-81)
CLEAN-UP UPON COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION
§ 150.90 REMOVAL OF BUILDING MATERIALS, DEBRIS REQUIRED; EXCEPTION;
CONSTRUCTION OR IMPROVEMENT.
   (A)   Upon completion of the proposed development, building, or
construction, all muck, organic matter, clay, rock, and all other unsuitable
materials, including, but not limited to previously-demolished buildings,
building foundations, pipes, septic tanks, appurtenances, timberbrush, stumps,
roots, rubbish, debris, and all other obstruction resting on or protruding
through the surfaces of the existing grounds and excavated areas shall be
completely removed by any developer, builder, or permit holder from all
building pads and surrounding public rights-of-way, underground utility
easements, drainage ponds, and storm water disposal and retention areas without
positive drainage systems.
   (B)   Organic matter may be left when properly certified by a registered
engineer attesting to compliance with the Florida Building Code.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the developer to construct or
improve, or to post a bond guaranteeing improvement to, all roadways adjacent
to and within the property being developed. There shall be no requirement to
bond improvements for private roadways on private property. All improvements
for private roadways must be 100% complete prior to the issuance of certificate
of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all private
roadways are completed, or uncompleted portions guaranteed by posting bond.
   (D)   The term DEVELOPER shall include any party, including natural persons,
partnerships, firms, corporations, or business entity conducting as a business
demucking, excavation, fill, grading, subgrading, basecoursing, asphalt and
concrete paving, sidewalk, swale, landscaping, irrigation, curbing, gutter,
drainage system installation, pavement marking, or traffic sign, road sign,
traffic signal, guardrail, or street lighting installation.
   (E)   The term ROADWAY shall include all public and private roads, highways,
alleys, driveways, and parking areas, and other asphalt or concrete pavements.
   (F)   The improvement shall include, but not be limited to, demucking,
excavation, fill, grading, subgrade, basecourse, asphalt and concrete paving,
sidewalk, swale, landscaping, irrigation, curbing, gutter, drainage system,
pavement marking, traffic sign, road sign, traffic signal, guardrail, and
street lighting.
   (G)   All improvements shall be done in accordance with the following basic
criteria:
      (1)   Design criteria. As a minimum, all pavements shall be designed in
accordance with the latest edition of "Manual of Minimum Standards for Design,
Construction, and Maintenance for Streets and Highways" as published by the
State of Florida, and the provisions of the Broward County Water Resources
Management Division's "Grading and Drainage Regulations and Standards," except
as modified herein, and the provisions of the city code of ordinances.
      (2)   Construction criteria. Construction materials and methods shall
meet the requirements of the latest edition of the Florida Department of
Transportation "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction" and
supplements, except as modified herein, and the provisions of the city code of
ordinances.
      (3)   Typical sections. Sketches of typical sections for various rights-
of-way are attached to Ord. 792, which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk and available for public inspection during the customary business hours.
      (4)   Subgrade. The entire width of the right-of-way shall be completely
demucked before construction of the roadway begins. No material of classes A-5,
A-7, or A-8 shall be allowed. All material supporting the roadway and shoulders
shall be stabilized to have a minimum LBR of 40. Sub-grades shall be compacted
to 95% of maximum density per AASHTO T-l80.
      (5)   Basecourse. Limerock bases shall be 6 inches for driveways and
parking areas, 8 inches for local subdivision public and private roads, and l2
inches (in two lifts) for arterial roads. Limerock of the Miami formation shall
be used, and shall have a minimum carbonate content of 60% (70% for arterial
roads), and a minimum LBR of 100. Base material shall be compacted to a density
of not less than 98% of maximum density as determined by AASHTO T-l80.
      (6)   Wearing (surface) courses.
            (a)   For all roads except arterial, the surface course is to be a
minimum one and one-half (1½") inch asphaltic concrete FDOT type S-III (in two
lifts).
            (b)   For arterial roads, surface courses are to be of asphaltic
concrete construction in two lifts as follows:
               1.   Bottom course -minimum one and one-fourth (1 1/4") inch
thick (D.O.T.) type S-1.
               2.   Top course -minimum three- quarter (3/4") inch thick
(D.O.T.) type S-3. A tack coat shall be used between paving courses, and a
prime coat shall be used on the finished rock base.
      (7)   Curb/gutter. All curb elements on arterial roads shall have a
limerock foundation or "pad" of at least four-inch thickness, compacted to 98%
of maximum density, per AASHTO T-180.
      (8)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be of concrete with a minimum thickness
of four inches, six-inch thickness required at driveways.
      (9)   Underground utilities. All underground utility mains and
structures, for water, sewer, gas, drainage, telephone, power, cable TV, and
others, must be installed, inspected, tested, and approved prior to any
subgrade construction.
      (10)   Traffic engineering. The construction plans must include plans for
traffic signs, street number signs, pavement markings, and street lighting.
   (H)   Detail plans must be reviewed and approved by the Engineering
Department.
(Ord. 648, passed 3-16-83; Am. Ord. 792, passed 6-4-86; Am. Ord. 1191, passed
11-20-96; Am. Ord. 1715, passed 5-2-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 150.95 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   (A)   Title. This section shall be known as the city Property Maintenance
Code, and may be referred to in the short form as this section.
   (B)   Findings and declaration of policy.
      (1)   It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the city
structures used for residential and nonresidential use which are or may become
in the future, substandard with respect to structure, equipment or maintenance.
      (2)   Conditions, including, but not limited to, structural
deterioration, lack of maintenance, and appearance of exterior premises,
infestation, lack of essential plumbing facilities, lack of maintenance or
upkeep of essential utilities and facilities, existence of fire hazards,
inadequate provisions for light and air, unsanitary conditions and
overcrowding, constitute a menace to the health, safety, welfare, and
reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of the city.
      (3)   It is further found and declared that by reason of lack of
maintenance and because of progressive deterioration, certain properties have
the further effect of creating blighting conditions and initiating slums, and
that if the same are not curtailed and removed, these conditions will grow and
spread and will necessitate in time the expenditure of large amounts of public
funds to correct and eliminate the same, and that by reason of timely
regulations and restrictions as herein contained, the growth of slums and
blight may be prevented and the neighborhood and property values thereby
maintained, the desirability and amenities of residential and nonresidential
uses and neighborhood enhances and the public health, safety, and welfare
protected and fostered.
   (C)   Purpose and authority.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety
and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance, condition, and occupancy of residential and nonresidential premises
within the city; to establish minimum standards governing utilities, facilities
and other physical components and conditions essential to make the aforesaid
facilities fit for human habitation, occupancy and use; to fix certain
responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators, and distinct and
separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants; to authorize and establish
procedures for the inspection of residential and nonresidential premises; and
to fix penalties for the violation of this section.
      (2)   It is the intent of this section to establish definitive and
practical requirements for maintenance and renovation of existing buildings and
structures, and construction of any buildings or structures lying within the
city.
      (3)   It is further the specific purpose of this section to establish
such minimum standards for land, building, landscape and property maintenance
so as to ensure the public health, safety and welfare of the city and that such
standards shall be binding on all landowners, both public and private, with
buildings or structures lying within the city.
      (4)   This section is adopted as a comprehensive strategy consistent with
the city's concern with the deterioration of buildings, structures,
landscaping, and property buildings and structures within the city.
   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. All definitions of the Florida Building Code, (FBC), as
amended from time to time, are hereby included by reference. In cases of
conflict, or perceived conflict, between the definitions contained herein below
and that contained in the FBC the definition which affords the greatest
protection to the public shall govern.
   BUILDING. A structure which encloses space; a structure which gives
protection or shelter for any occupancy. The term BUILDING shall be construed
as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof." When separated by fire walls,
each portion so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
   BUSINESS DISTRICTS. Districts B-1, B-2, B-2A, B-3, C-1, PO-1, PO-2, M-1, M-
1B, M-2, M-3, M-4, M-5.
   COMMERCIAL BUSINESS OR ESTABLISHMENT. Any place, building, and enterprise
non-residential in nature devoted in whole or in part to a business enterprise
whether non-profit or profit making in nature.
   DETERIORATION. The condition or appearance of a building or part thereof,
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, peeling, rusting, or other
evidence of physical decay or neglect, excessive use or lack of maintenance.
   ENFORCING AGENCY. The Code Enforcement Division, and the Building, Planning
& Zoning, and Engineering Departments of the city.
   ENFORCING OFFICER. Any employee of the enforcing agency charged with the
responsibility of making inspections of buildings and premises and issuing
violation notices when necessary. The term shall be synonymous with inspection
officer.
   EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW. Any structure or any part thereof, or any building
or any part thereof, which may be lawfully viewed by the public or any member
thereof, from a sidewalk, street, alleyway, public way, licensed open air
parking lot or from any adjoining or neighboring premises.
   EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES. Those portions of a building or structure which
are exposed to public view and the open space of any premises outside of any
building or structure erected thereon.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents and vermin.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food. (See also REFUSE, RUBBISH.)
   HABITABLE ROOMS. Rooms used or designed for use by one or more persons for
living or sleeping or cooking and eating, but not including bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, serving and storage pantries. Corridors,
foyers, vestibules, cellars, heater rooms, boiler rooms, utility rooms, and
other rooms or spaces that are not used frequently or for an extended period of
time or that have less than 50 square feet of superficial floor area shall not
be considered as habitable rooms.
   INFESTATION. The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on the
premises which constitute a health hazard.
   MIXED USE. Any building containing one ore more dwelling units or rooming
units and also having a portion thereof devoted to non-dwelling uses or used as
a hotel.
   NUISANCE. The existence of excessive accumulation or untended growth of
weeds, undergrowth or other dead or living plant life, or stagnant water,
rubbish, debris, or trash, including any wrecked, derelict or partially
dismantled motor vehicle, trailer, boat, machinery, refrigerator, washing
machine, plumbing fixture, furniture or similar article, and all other
objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter upon any property within this
city to the extent and in the manner that such property is or may reasonably
become infested or inhabited by rodents, vermin or wild animals, or may furnish
a breeding place for mosquitoes, or threatens or endangers the public health,
safety or welfare, or may reasonably cause disease, or adversely affects and
impairs the economic welfare of adjacent property. In addition, NUISANCE shall
also mean any public nuisance as defined by statute or ordinance; any
attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or safety of
children, whether in a building, on the premises of a building,  or upon an
unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to: abandoned walls, shafts,
basements, excavations, abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, motor vehicles; any
structurally unsound fence or structure; lumber, trash, fences, debris or
vegetation such as poison ivy, poison oak, or poison sumac which may prove
hazardous for inquisitive minors; physical conditions dangerous to human life
or detrimental to health of persons on or near the premises where the
conditions exist; overcrowding of a room with occupants in violation of this
section, insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of this section,
or inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities in violation of this
section; unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the sense or dangerous
to health in violation of this section; whatever renders air, food, or drink
unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings; or fire hazards.
   OPERATOR/OCCUPANT. A person with legal interest in the premises or in
responsible charge, care or control of a dwelling or premises, or a part
thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner,
including, if applicable, a lessee.
   OWNER. Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have
legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof or shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling unit,
as owner or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee,
receiver, or guardian of the estate, or as a mortgagee in possession regardless
of how such possession was obtained. Any person who is leasing, subletting or
reassigning any part or all of any dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to
be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the
portion of the premises sublet or assigned by said lessee.
   PARTIES IN INTEREST. All individuals, associates, and corporations who have
interest of record in building and any who are in actual possession thereof.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereof and including the abutting street swale area.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any building, structure, yard, lot, premises or part
thereof or any other place which one or more persons are engaged in gainful
employment.
   REFUSE. Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and non-
combustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, discarded cigarettes, used
cardboard, used cans, yard clippings, leaves, scrap wood, discarded glass,
discarded bedding, broken crockery, home appliances and other similar
materials.
   STREET or RIGHT-OF-WAY. Public thoroughfare such as, but not limited to,
street, avenue, lane, place, terrace and road, and which is more than 20 feet
in width and dedicated or deeded to the public for public use.
   STRUCTURE. Anything built or constructed or erected, the use of which
requires more or less permanent location on the land, or any composition,
artificially build up or composed of parts joined together in some definite
manner or any roof-like structure or storage apparatus whether movable or
nonmovable which may or may not be self supporting or may or may not be affixed
to a STRUCTURE, as defined herein, or to a building.
   WEATHERING. Deterioration, decay or damage caused by exposure to the
elements.
   MEANING OF CERTAIN WORDS. Whenever any words are used in this subchapter,
they shall be construed, unless expressly stated to the contrary, to include
the plurals of those words and as if they were followed by the words "or any
part thereof". The word "shall" shall be applied retroactively as well as
prospectively.
   (E)   Minimum standards for private parking lots.
      (1)   All buildings and structures for private parking shall be
maintained in a secure, safe, and attractive condition. Deteriorated or rusted
metal covering on any such existing or subsequently constructed carport
structure shall be repaired or replaced so as to render same in a safe and
attractive condition that is neither physically nor visually a blighting
influence.
      (2)   The off-street parking facilities shall be identified as to purpose
and as to location when not clearly evident from a street or alley. Off-street
parking facilities including access aisles and driveways shall be surfaced with
Florida Department of Transportation Type S-3 asphaltic concrete course, and
maintained in a smooth, well-graded condition without any potholes, pavement
deterioration, surface irregularities, and any traffic/safety hazard, provided
that driveways, access aisles, and parking spaces for churches and public and
private schools and churches offering academic courses may be surfaced with
grass or lawn.
      (3)   All off-street parking facilities for the use of public shall be
drained so as not to cause any nuisance on adjacent or public property. All
surface storm water shall be drained off the pavement for proper disposal to
the designated areas or structures within a reasonable time, not to exceed six
hours. All drainage lines and structures shall be maintained properly at all
times to insure full efficiency.
      (4)   The lighting thereon shall be so arranged and designed as to
prevent any glare or excessive light on adjacent property. Such facilities
shall be arranged for convenient access and safety of pedestrians and vehicles.
The lighting shall be maintained properly to deliver an average illumination of
2.0 foot candles at any point within the parking facility for non-residential
subdivisions and an average illumination of one-half (½) foot-candle for
residential subdivisions.
      (5)   All car stops, curbing and sidewalks shall be maintained properly
to insure safe and convenient vehicle and pedestrian traffic at all times.
Broken, damaged or loose car stops and curbing and sidewalks shall immediately
be repaired/replaced.
      (6)   All pavement markings and signage shall be maintained properly at
all times to conform to the standards of "Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices." All parking spaces, stop bars, directional arrows, centerlines, edge
lines and other pavement markings shall be painted properly to be clearly
visible and well defined at all times. Stop signs and all other signs shall be
maintained properly at all times as to the size, height, material, design,
location, visibility, clarity and other features to conform to the "Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
      (7)   The off-street parking facilities shall conform at all times to the
site plan as approved by the city, including but not limited to the location
and size of all regular and handicap parking spaces.
      (8)   All private commercial parking lots shall be inspected periodically
at least once a year by the Engineering Department to insure proper maintenance
and conformity to the approved site plan. The owner, tenant, manager, or their
agent shall be notified in writing of any discrepancies and shall, within 30
calendar days from the time of notification, correct the discrepancy.
   (F)   Compliance required. Every residential, nonresidential, or mixed use
building or parcel of land located within the city shall comply with the
provisions of this section, whether or not such building shall have been
constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this section
and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for
the use or occupancy of the building or premises for the construction or repair
of the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities
prior to the effective date of this section.
   (G)   Higher standard to prevail in case of conflict. In any case where the
provisions of this section impose a higher standards than set forth in any
other local ordinances or under the laws of the state, then the standards as
set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this section impose a
lower standard than any other local ordinances or of the laws of the state,
then the higher standard contained in any such other ordinances or law shall
prevail.
   (H)   Enforcement of and compliance with other ordinances. No license or
permit or other certification of compliance with this section shall constitute
a defense against any violation of any other local ordinance applicable to any
structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein relieve any owner,
operator, or occupant from complying with any such other provision, nor any
official of the city from enforcing any such other provisions.
   (I)   Minimum standards for yards and landscaped areas.
      (1)   No yard, landscape area, or growth of landscape material shall so
encroach upon the public right-of-way as to hinder safe and convenient
vehicular or pedestrian movement in the public right-of-way.
      (2)   The owner, tenant, and their agent, if any, shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the proper maintenance and protection of landscaping
and irrigation systems existing or hereafter installed. Maintenance shall
include watering, weeding, mowing, treating, mulching, trimming, removal/
replacement of dead or diseased plants and removal of refuse and debris on a
regular basis so as to continue a health growing condition and present a neat
and well-kept appearance at all times.
      (3)   Landscaping shall be inspected periodically by the enforcing agency
to insure proper maintenance. The owner, tenant, or their agent shall be
notified in writing, of any areas which are not being properly maintained and
shall, within 30 calendar days from the time of notification, restore the
landscaping to a healthy condition.
   (J)   Maintenance of exterior of premises. The exterior of the premises and
all structures thereof shall be kept free of all nuisances, any hazards to the
safety of the occupant, pedestrians and other persons utilizing the premises
and free of unsanitary conditions. Any of the foregoing shall be promptly
removed and abated by the owner or operator. It shall be the duty of the owner
or operator to keep the premises free of hazards and unsafe or unsightly
conditions which include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Refuse. Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash, and debris shall not be permitted on the
premises.
      (2)   Natural growth. Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural
growth which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage,
constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof shall be removed. Trees
shall be kept pruned and trimmed at all times to prevent such conditions.
      (3)   Overhangings. Loose and overhanging objects which by reason of
location above ground level constitute a danger of falling on persons in the
vicinity thereof.
      (4)   Ground surface hazards or unsanitary conditions. Holes,
excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, and excretions of pets and
other animals on paths, walks, drive-ways, parking lots, and parking areas and
other parts of the premises which are accessible to the public. Holes and
excavations shall be filled and repaired, walks and steps replaced and other
conditions removed where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary
conditions with reasonable dispatch upon their discovery.
      (5)   Recurring accumulations of storm water. Adequate runoff drains
shall be provided and maintained to eliminate any recurrent or excessive
accumulation of storm water.
      (6)   Sources of infestation.
      (7)   Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally
sound, free from defects and damage and capable of bearing imposed loads
safely.
      (8)   Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto. Chimneys and
all flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained structurally sound,
free from defects, and so maintained as to capably perform at all times the
functions for which they are designed. Chimney, flues, gas vents, or other
draft- producing equipment shall provide sufficient draft to develop the rated
output of the connected equipment, shall be structurally safe, durable,
smoketight, and capable of withstanding the action of flue gases.
      (9)   Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs, and fire escapes.
Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs, and fire escapes shall be
provided with banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to
minimize the hazard of falling, and the same shall be kept structurally sound,
in good repair, and free from defects.
      (10)   Appearance of exterior premises and structures. The exterior of
the premises, the exterior of structures and the condition of accessory
structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and
structures shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining property.
   (K)   Minimum standards for exterior building walls.
      (1)   Front building walls facing the public rights-of-way shall be
maintained in a secure and attractive manner. All defective structural and
decorative elements of such building facades shall be repaired or replaced in a
workmanlike manner, to match as closely as possible the original materials and
construction of the building. All exterior walls shall have all graffiti and
loose material removed and patching or resurfacing shall be accomplished to
match the existing or adjacent surfaces as to materials, color, bond, and
joining. All cornices, trim, windows, and window frames that are damaged,
sagging, or otherwise deteriorated shall be repaired or replaced to be made
structurally sound and all exposed materials painted, stained, or otherwise
treated in a consistent manner. Provided, however, broken or damaged windows
may be repaired by replacement of painted plywood or other consistent materials
rather than replacement of the windows as provided for in the Building Code.
      (2)   Side and rear building walls not facing a public right-of-way may
be treated in a manner distinct from the building walls fronting on a public
right-of- way. Such side and rear building walls, however, shall be maintained
fee of graffiti and loose materials and kept in a safe and secure manner and
not allowed to deteriorate in a manner that endangers the structure or detracts
from the adjoining buildings or structures.
   (L)   Storage of commercial and industrial material. There shall not be
stored or used at a location visible from the sidewalk, street, or other public
areas, equipment and materials relating to commercial or industrial use unless
specifically permitted under the zoning ordinance for the premises.
   (M)   Minimum standards for door and window openings.
      (1)   All windows and doors shall be secured in a tight-fitting and
weatherproof manner and have sashes of proper size and design. Sashes with
rotten wood, broken joints or deteriorated mullions or muntins shall be
replaced.
      (2)   Storefront windows facing a public right- of-way shall be
maintained in an unbroken, clean, and harmonious condition with the use of the
public right-of- way and the remainder of the building facade. No window facing
the public right-of-way shall be permanently removed and enclosed, covered, or
boarded up unless treated as an integral part of the building facade using wall
materials and window detailing comparable with any upper floors and the
building facade in general. All damaged, broken, temporary or permanently
closed-up store front windows shall be restored, repaired, or replaced in a
satisfactory condition.
      (3)   Doors and windows not facing the public right-of-way and those
upper level window and door openings shall be similarly maintained and repaired
as for the doors and windows facing the public right-of- way, except that same
may be enclosed or removed provided the sills, lintels, and frames are removed
and the opening properly closed to match and be compatible with the design,
material, and finish of the adjoining wall of which the opening is a part
unless otherwise provided by law.
   (N)   Reconstructed walls and sidings. Reconstructed walls and siding of
structures shall be of standard quality and appearance commensurate with the
character of the properties in the same block and on both sides of the street
on which the premises front, such that the material used will not be of a kind
that by their appearance under the prevailing appraisal practices and standards
will depreciate the values of the neighboring and adjoining premises as
aforesaid.
   (O)   General maintenance. The exterior of every structure or accessory
structure (including fences, walls, pools, and pool decks) shall be maintained
in good repair. The same shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose
shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or other condition
reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that the
property itself may be preserved, safety, and fire hazards eliminated and
adjoining properties protected from blighting influences.
   (P)   Structural and sanitary maintenance.
      (1)   The outside building walls shall not have any holes, loose boards,
or any broken, cracked or damaged finish, which admits rain, cold air,
dampness, rodents, insects or vermin.
      (2)   Every dwelling shall be so maintained so as to prevent infestation.
      (3)   All parts of the premises shall be maintained so as to prevent
infestation.
      (4)   All parts of the exterior of a dwelling shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition, free of nuisance, and free from health, safety and fire
hazards.
      (5)   Every roof, roof gutter, flashing, rainwater conductor, and roof
cornice shall be weather- and rain-tight and shall be kept in good repair.
   (Q)   Minimum standards for roofs.
      (1)   All roofs shall be maintained in a safe, secure and watertight
condition.
      (2)   Roofs shall be maintained in a clean condition and kept free of
trash, debris or any other element which is not a permanent part of the
building or a functional element of its mechanical or electrical system.
      (3)   Any false roof, mansard or like roof element or other auxiliary
structure on the roof shall be maintained in a safe, secure and good condition.
   (R)   Minimum standards for appurtenant structures. Chimneys, elevator
shafts, mechanical and electrical equipment and devices shall be maintained in
a satisfactory state of repair.
   (S)   Inspections.
      (1)   The enforcing agency is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of the buildings and structures governed
by this section.
      (2)   The inspecting officers of the enforcing agency are hereby
authorized to enter the properties, buildings and structures governed by this
section to examine and survey same, at reasonable hours, to ensure compliance
with the minimum standards established by this section.
      (3)   The owner, operator, lessee, occupant or the person in charge of
every business, commercial business, or other non-residential building or
structure shall give the inspecting officer free access for the purpose of
making such inspection, examination and survey, and shall supply, as correctly
and promptly as possible, all information requested by the inspecting officer.
      (4)   Inspecting officers of the enforcing agency shall be provided with
official identification and shall exhibit such identification when making any
inspection.
   (T)   Enforcement. This section shall be enforced and administered as
provided by general, state and local laws, and ordinances. The city may choose
to enforce this section in accordance with the procedures established for
abatement of nuisances set forth in § 155.013(C) of the city code of ordinances
and if so enforced will be entitled to all rights and remedies set forth
therein.
   (U)   Nonexclusive remedy. The provisions of this section shall be in
addition to such other remedies as may be provided for by law or ordinance.
   (V)   Penalty. Any person found in violation of any provision of this
section shall be punishable as provided by law. (Ord. 987, passed 3-4-92; Am.
Ord. 1017, passed 12-16-92; Am. Ord. 1191, passed 11-20-96; Am. Ord. 1300,
passed 4-7-99; Am. Ord. 1715, passed 5-2-12)
CHAPTER 151: EXCAVATION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Application of regulations
   
151.02   Permit, bond
   
151.03   Waterway excavation
   
151.04   Restoration of land required
   
151.05   Inspection of land restoration
Cross-reference:
   Zoning regulations as to excavation activities, see §§ 155.340 through
155.349
§ 151.01 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   Any party, including natural persons, partnerships, firms, corporations, or
business entity conducting excavation, dredging, land fill activities, mining,
or related functions, (which are generally classified as excavation
activities), shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
('69 Code, § 7A-1) (Ord. 576, passed 9-16-81)
§ 151.02 PERMIT, BOND.
   (A)   At the time of obtaining a permit for the activities described in §
151.01, the applicant shall make a good faith estimate of the amount of money
required to effectuate the restoration activities necessary to create a safe
and sanitary condition at the excavation site. Thereafter, the Engineering
Department of the city shall determine the sufficiency of the estimate and
shall determine the amount of money necessary to provide for the restoration
activities.
   (B)   Upon the determination of the amount of money necessary to provide for
the restoration activities described in division (A) above, the applicant may
either post the sum in cash with the city or obtain a bond in that amount
satisfactory in form to the city, to insure the restoration activities are
completed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
('69 Code, § 7A-3) (Ord. 576, passed 9-16-81; Am. Ord. 1191, passed 11-20-96)
§ 151.03 WATERWAY EXCAVATION.
   (A)   Excavation activities conducted in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter and §
154.15(B) shall be subject to the provisions hereof.
   (B)   When waterway excavation and excavation activities are conducted in
conjunction with subdivision development activities and platting, the party
obtaining the permit for the activity shall be permitted to post letters of
credit in lieu of bonds in an amount to be established by the City Commission
for the purpose of insuring compliance with the needs of the city for
restoration and re-development. These amounts shall be submitted and applied
for to the City Commission by the party seeking the excavation activity permit.
   (C)   The bond or letter of credit posted shall be at the discretion of the
City Commission and may be allowed to be extended to further activity in lieu
of the posting of additional bonds or letters of credit.
   (D)   The City Engineer shall implement any further rules, and regulations,
and procedures that are necessary to provide for excavation activities
consistent herewith.
(Ord. 669, passed 10-5-83; Am. Ord. 1191, passed 11-20-96) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Waterway excavation conducted in conjunction with subdivision development;
preliminary and final plat requirements, see §§
154.12,
154.15,
154.30, and
154.31
§ 151.04 RESTORATION OF LAND REQUIRED.
   Those parties conducting excavations shall be fully responsible for the
restoration of the land used to a safe and sanitary condition upon completion
of the activities. Should the activities be conducted in conjunction with
development and construction activities incident to subdivision improvements,
then safe and sanitary conditions surrounding the excavation site, at the
conclusion of those activities, shall be required. Notations to this effect
should be made on the site plan or the subdivision plan at the time of its
submittal to the city.
('69 Code, § 7A-2) (Ord. 576, passed 9-16-81)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.05 INSPECTION OF LAND  RESTORATION.
   Upon application for return of the cash bond or excavation bond, the
Engineering Department shall inspect the site and determine that the
restoration activities have been satisfactorily completed. Thereupon, the
Engineering Department shall certify to the City Clerk that the cash bond or
excavation bond may be released to the applicant. In no way shall the city be
liable for any conditions created as a result of the excavation activities or
restoration activities described in this chapter.
('69 Code, § 7A-4) (Ord. 576, passed 9-16-81; Am. Ord. 1191, passed 11-20-96)
CHAPTER 152: FLOOD DAMAGE PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Title
   
152.002   Findings of fact
   
152.003   Purpose; objectives; scope
   
152.004   Intent
   
152.005   Coordination with the Florida Building Code
   
152.006   Warning
   
152.007   Disclaimer of liability
Applicability
   
152.008   General
   
152.009   Areas to which this chapter applies
   
152.010   Basis for establishing flood hazard areas
   
152.011   Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas
   
152.012   Other laws
   
152.013   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.014   Interpretation
Duties and Powers of the Floodplain Administrator
   
152.020   Designation
   
152.021   General
   
152.022   Applications and permits
   
152.023   Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations
   
152.024   Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the
Florida Building Code
   
152.025   Notice and orders
   
152.026   Inspections
   
152.027   Other duties of the Floodplain Administrator
   
152.028   Floodplain management records
Permits
   
152.030   Permits required
   
152.031   Floodplain development permits or approvals
   
152.032   Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building
Code
   
152.033   Application for a permit or approval
   
152.034   Validity of permit or approval
   
152.035   Expiration
   
152.036   Suspension or revocation
   
152.037   Other permits required
Site Plans and Construction Documents
   
152.040   Information for development in flood hazard areas
   
152.041   Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations
(approximate Zone A)
   
152.042   Additional analyses and certifications
   
152.043   Submission of additional data
Inspections
   
152.050   General
   
152.051   Development other than buildings and structures
   
152.052   Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building
Code
   
152.053   Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building
Code, lowest floor inspection
   
152.054   Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building
Code, final inspection
   
152.055   Manufactured homes
Variances and Appeals
   
152.060   General
   
152.061   Appeals
   
152.062   Limitations on authority to grant variances
   
152.063   Restrictions in floodways
   
152.064   Historic buildings
   
152.065   Functionally dependent uses
   
152.066   Considerations for issuance of variances
   
152.067   Conditions for issuance of variances
Violations
   
152.070   Violations
   
152.071   Authority
   
152.072   Unlawful continuance
   
152.073   Penalty
Definitions
   
152.080   Scope
   
152.081   Terms defined in the Florida Building Code
   
152.082   Terms not defined
   
152.083   Definitions
Flood Resistant Development; Buildings and Structures
   
152.090   Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities
exempt from the Florida Building Code
   
152.091   Specific methods of construction and requirements
   
152.092   Non-elevated accessory structures
Flood Resistant Development; Subdivisions
   
152.093   Minimum requirements
   
152.094   Subdivision plats
Site Improvements; Utilities and Limitations
   
152.100   Minimum requirements
   
152.101   Sanitary sewage facilities
   
152.102   Water supply facilities
   
152.103   Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways
   
152.104   Limitations on placement of fill
Manufactured Homes
   
152.110   General
   
152.111   Foundations
   
152.112   Anchoring
   
152.113   Elevation
   
152.114   (Reserved)
   
152.115   (Reserved)
   
152.116   Enclosures
   
152.117   Utility equipment
Recreational Vehicles and Park Trailers
   
152.120   Temporary placement
   
152.121   Permanent placement
Tanks
   
152.130   Underground tanks
   
152.131   Above-ground tanks, not elevated
   
152.132   Above-ground tanks, elevated
   
152.133   Tank inlets and vents
Other Development
   
152.140   General requirements for other development
   
152.141   Fences in regulated floodways
   
152.142   Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways
   
152.143   Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 TITLE.
   The legislature of the State of Florida has in Chapter 166, Florida
Statutes, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Commission does ordain the following
sections set forth in this chapter. Accordingly, these regulations shall be
known as the "Floodplain Management Ordinance of the City of Pembroke Pines,
Florida," hereinafter referred to as "this chapter."
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.002 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city may be subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life, property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are mainly caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities,
and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.003 PURPOSE; OBJECTIVES; SCOPE.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to
flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Control the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
flood waters;
      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To protect human life and health;
      (2)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      (5)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, and streets and bridges
located in flood plains;
      (6)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood
blight areas; and
      (7)   To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is
in a flood area.
   (C)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development that is
wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not
limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site
improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling,
enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of
buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building
Code; placement installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and
manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of
recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other
development.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.004 INTENT.
   The purposes of this chapter and the flood load and flood resistant
construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum
requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of
development in flood hazard areas to:
   (A)   Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access, and public
service during times of flooding;
   (B)   Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to
prevent or minimize future flood damage;
   (C)   Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation,
drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development
which may increase flood damage or erosion potential;
   (D)   Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and
shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial
functions of the floodplain;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood hazard areas;
   (G)   Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood
control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and
   (H)   Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for
community participation as set forth in the 44 C.F.R. 59.22.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.005 COORDINATION WITH THE FLORIDA BUILDING CODE.
   This chapter is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with
the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the
standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.006 WARNING.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter and the Florida
Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within
such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood
hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the Flood Insurance Study
and shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the requirements of 44 C.F.R. §§ 59
and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring
this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation
in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing
use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.007 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City Commission
of the City of Pembroke Pines, Florida, or by any officer or employee thereof
for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
APPLICABILITY
§ 152.008 GENERAL.
   Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific
requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.009 AREAS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of
Pembroke Pines, Florida, as established in §
152.010 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.010 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The Flood Insurance Study for Broward County. Florida and Incorporated Areas
dated July 31, 2024, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments
and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this chapter
and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas.
Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file with the City
Engineer of the City of Pembroke Pines at 8300 South Palm Drive, Pembroke
Pines, Florida.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14; Am. Ord. 2001, passed 12-14-22; Am. Ord. 2024,
passed 8-7-24)
§ 152.011 SUBMISSION OF ADDITIONAL DATA TO ESTABLISH FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to §§
152.040 through
152.043 of this chapter the Floodplain Administrator (as defined in §
152.020) may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed
topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital
topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations:
   (A)   Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas
not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be
considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this chapter
and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code.
   (B)   Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall
be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a Letter
of Map Change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.012 OTHER LAWS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions
of local, state, or federal law.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.013 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of
development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or
abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development
regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the
Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any
other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This chapter shall not
impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject
to such interests shall also be governed by this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.014 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR
§ 152.020 DESIGNATION.
   The City Engineer is designated as the Floodplain Administrator. The
Floodplain Administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other
employees.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.021 GENERAL.
   The Floodplain Administrator is authorized and directed to administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator shall have
the authority to render interpretations of this chapter consistent with the
intent and purpose of this chapter and may establish policies and procedures in
order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations,
policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements
specifically provided in this chapter without the granting of a variance
pursuant to §§
152.060 through
152.067 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.022 APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS.
   The Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices
of the community, shall:
   (A)   Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new
development will be located in flood hazard areas;
   (B)   Review applications for modification of any existing development in
flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this chapter;
   (C)   Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is
necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting
the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation;
   (D)   Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information;
   (E)   Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from
other sources, i.e. federal, state, or private agencies and entities, or shall
be developed by an applicant;
   (F)   Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be
reasonably safe from flooding;
   (G)   Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development
other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building
Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida
Building Code, when compliance with this chapter is demonstrated, or disapprove
the same in the event of noncompliance; and
   (H)   Coordinate with and provide comments to the Building Official to
assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and
structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.023 SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT AND SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS.
   For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures,
including alterations, movement enlargement, replacement, repair, change of
occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements,
repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such
buildings and structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with
the Building Official, shall:
   (A)   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made;
   (B)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
   (C)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; the determination
requires evaluation of previous permits issued for improvements and repairs as
specified in the definition of "substantial improvement;" and
   (D)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code
and this chapter is required.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.024 MODIFICATIONS OF THE STRICT APPLICATION OF THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE
FLORIDA BUILDING CODE.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall review requests submitted to the Building
Official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load
and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to
determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to
§§
152.060 through
152.067 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.025 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local
agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.026 INSPECTIONS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall make the required inspections as
specified in §§
152.050 through
152.055 of this chapter for development that is not subject to the Florida
Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the
Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect flood hazard
areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.027 OTHER DUTIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall have other duties, including but not
limited to:
   (A)   Establish, in coordination with the Building Official, procedures for
administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and
substantial damage made pursuant to §
152.023 of this chapter;
   (B)   Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify
adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State
Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);
   (C)   Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and
information necessary to maintain the Flood Insurance Rate Maps if the analyses
propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or
floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six months of such
data becoming available;
   (D)   Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations
specified by this chapter and the Florida Building Code and this chapter to
determine that such certifications and documentations are complete;
   (E)   Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate
boundaries of City of Pembroke Pines are modified; and
   (F)   Provide, in cooperation with other city departments, flood protection
assistance to its residents including site visits, technical advice, review of
plans and a list of contractors (for informational purposes only) if requested
to do so in writing by the property owner.
   (G)   Provide, upon request, flood hazard information and related data as
shown on the FIRM and Elevation Certificates, to city residents, property
owners, lending institutions, insurance agents, real estate agents, and
governmental agencies and the public in general.
   (H)   Maintain, in cooperation with other city departments, a library of
documents related to flood insurance, flood protection and floodplain
management as a source of information for city residents and the public in
general.
   (I)   Maintain and replace, in cooperation with other city departments,
elevation reference bench marks in the field whenever the city is notified that
a known benchmark is missing or has become unusable.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.028 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT RECORDS.
   Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public
records, the Floodplain Administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and
make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the
administration of this chapter and the flood resistant construction
requirements of the Florida Building Code, including Flood Insurance Rate Maps;
Letters of Change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits;
determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or
repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation
of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this chapter;
notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to
alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of
altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and
variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of
enforcement actions taken pursuant to this chapter and the flood resistant
construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be
available for public inspection at the Environmental Services Division.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
PERMITS
§ 152.030 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends
to undertake any development or construction activity within the scope of this
chapter, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida
Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area
shall first make application to the Floodplain Administrator, and the Building
Official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval
(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and all other applicable codes and regulations has
been satisfied.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.031 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS OR APPROVALS.
   Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this
chapter for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the
Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt
from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed
development that includes a building or structure, the Floodplain Administrator
may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in
addition to a building permit.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.032 BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES EXEMPT FROM THE FLORIDA BUILDING
CODE.
   Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. §§ 59 and 60), floodplain
development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings,
structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and
any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements
of this chapter:
   (A)   Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad.
   (B)   Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in § 604.50,
Florida Statutes.
   (C)   Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction
purposes.
   (D)   Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices.
   (E)   Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in §
366.02, Florida Statutes, which are directly involved in the generation,
transmission, or distribution of electricity.
   (F)   Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or
the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this section, the term "chickee"
means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or
other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical,
plumbing, or other non-wood features.
   (G)   Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are
prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and
have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced
concrete.
   (H)   Temporary housing provided by the Department of Corrections to any
prisoner in the state correctional system.
   (I)   Structures identified in § 553.73(10)(k), Florida Statutes, are not
exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood
hazard areas established on Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.033 APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT OR APPROVAL.
   (A)   To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant
shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the city.
   (B)   Application stage. The information provided shall:
      (1)   Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit
or approval.
      (2)   State the elevation in relation to the datum on the FIRM of the
proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures.
      (3)   State the elevation in relation to the datum on the FIRM to which
any nonresidential structure will be flood-proofed.
      (4)   Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be
conducted by legal description, street address, or similar description that
will readily identify and definitively locate the site.
      (5)   Provide a description of the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development.
      (6)   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development
is intended.
      (7)   Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as
specified in §§
152.040 through
152.043 of this chapter.
      (8)   State the valuation of the proposed work.
      (9)   Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent.
      (10)   Provide a certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-
proofing criteria of the Florida Building Code.
      (11)   Give such other data and information as required by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.034 VALIDITY OF PERMIT OR APPROVAL.
   The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this
chapter shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any
violation of this chapter, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance
of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications,
construction documents, and information shall not prevent the Floodplain
Administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.035 EXPIRATION.
   A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the
work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance,
or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days
after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each
shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.036 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain
development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis
of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this
chapter or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.037 OTHER PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a
condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before
commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the
following:
   (A)   The South Florida Water Management District; § 373.036, Florida
Statutes.
   (B)   Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal
systems; § 381.0065, Florida Statutes and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C.
   (C)   Florida Department of Environmental Protection for construction,
reconstruction, changes, or physical activities for shore protection or other
activities seaward of the coastal construction control line; § 161.141, Florida
Statutes.
   (D)   Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject
to the Joint Coastal Permit; § 161.055, Florida Statutes.
   (E)   Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that
affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers; § 404 of the Clean Water Act.
   (F)   Federal permits and approvals.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
SITE PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
§ 152.040 INFORMATION FOR DEVELOPMENT IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   (A)   The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to
the requirements of this chapter shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as
applicable to the proposed development:
      (1)   Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood
zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review
of the proposed development.
      (2)   Where base flood elevations, or floodway data are not included on
the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, they shall be established in
accordance with §
152.041(B) or (C) of this chapter.
      (3)   Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place
will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood
elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, such
elevations shall be established in accordance with §
152.041(A) of this chapter.
      (4)   Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and
locations of existing buildings and structures; in coastal high hazard areas,
new buildings shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide.
      (5)   Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling,
grading, or excavation; including the location of excavation that is required
to compensate for permitted fill. If excavation to compensate for permitted
fill is located on a different parcel of land, a site plan of the excavation
site shall be included, along with other documentation required by the City
Engineer.
      (6)   Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and
source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the
intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas
are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose.
      (7)   Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a
watercourse.
   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to waive the submission of
site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this
chapter but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design
professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such
that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance
with this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.041 INFORMATION IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS WITHOUT BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS
(APPROXIMATE ZONE A).
   Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation
data have not been provided, the Floodplain Administrator shall:
   (A)   Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in
accordance with currently accepted engineering practices.
   (B)   Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or
require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal or state agency or other source.
   (C)   Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from
another source, where the available data are deemed by the Floodplain
Administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the
available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or
otherwise inadequate:
      (1)   Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared
in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or
      (2)   Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest
adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no
evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet.
   (D)   Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a Letter
of Map Change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be
prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that
it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal
requirements and pay the processing fees.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.042 ADDITIONAL ANALYSES AND CERTIFICATIONS.
   As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development
activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant
shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed
engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents:
   (A)   For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory
floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the
encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base
flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development
activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit
such analysis to FEMA as specified in §
152.043 of this chapter and shall submit the Conditional Letter of Map
Revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents.
   (B)   For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood
hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the Flood Insurance
Study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard
area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one
foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in
isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in
flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH.
   (C)   For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in
accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the
flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse
will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be
maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity;
the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in §
152.043 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.043 SUBMISSION OF ADDITIONAL DATA.
   When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies,
and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant
has the right to seek a Letter of Map Change from FEMA to change the base flood
elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard
areas shown on FIRMs. and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The
analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required
by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility
of the applicant.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
INSPECTIONS
§ 152.050 GENERAL.
   Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is
required shall be subject to inspection.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.051 DEVELOPMENT OTHER THAN BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect all development to determine
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of issued
floodplain development permits or approvals.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.052 BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES EXEMPT FROM THE FLORIDA BUILDING
CODE.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and
facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with
the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of issued floodplain
development permits or approvals.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.053 BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES EXEMPT FROM THE FLORIDA BUILDING
CODE, LOWEST FLOOR INSPECTION.
   Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further
vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt
from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit
to the Floodplain Administrator:
   (A)   If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required
elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest
floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or
   (B)   If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the
lowest floor was determined in accordance with §
152.041(C)(2) of this chapter, the documentation of height of the lowest floor
above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized
agent.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.054 BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES EXEMPT FROM THE FLORIDA BUILDING
CODE, FINAL INSPECTION.
   As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a final certification of elevation of
the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above
the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be
prepared as specified in §
152.053 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.055 MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   The Floodplain Administrator or designee, as may be necessary shall inspect
manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to
determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions
of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of
the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the Floodplain
Administrator or designee, as may be necessary.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
VARIANCES AND APPEALS
§ 152.060 GENERAL.
   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and
requests for variances from the strict application of this chapter as related
to single family homes and the Planning and Zoning Board shall hear and decide
on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application
of this chapter as related to variances for all other uses and development.
Pursuant to § 553.73(5), Florida Statutes, the Board of Adjustment or Planning
and Zoning Board shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for
variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction
requirements of the Florida Building Code. This section does not apply to §
3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. Please also see
Chapter 32 of this Code for the additional duties of the Board of Adjustment
and Planning and Zoning Board.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.061 APPEALS.
   The City Commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there
is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Floodplain Administrator in the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of City Commission may appeal such
decision to the Circuit Court, as provided by Florida Statutes.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.062 LIMITATIONS ON AUTHORITY TO GRANT VARIANCES.
   The Board of Adjustment or Planning and Zoning Board shall base its
decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the
considerations for issuance in §
152.066 of this chapter, the conditions of issuance set forth in §
152.067 of this chapter, and the comments and recommendations of the Floodplain
Administrator and the Building Official. The Board of Adjustment or Planning
and Zoning Board has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary
to further the purposes and objectives of this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.063 RESTRICTIONS IN FLOODWAYS.
   A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if
any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the
applicable analyses and certifications required in §
152.042 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.064 HISTORIC BUILDINGS.
   A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or
rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the
exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida
Building Code. Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings, upon a
determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not
preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the
variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued
designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the
building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to
the requirements of the Florida Building Code.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14; Am. Ord. 2001, passed 12-14-22)
§ 152.065 FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USES.
   A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial
improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as
defined in this chapter, provided the variance meets the requirements of §
152.063, is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due
consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize
flood damage during occurrence of the base flood.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.066 CONSIDERATIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF VARIANCES.
   In reviewing requests for variances, the Board of Adjustment or Planning and
Zoning Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this chapter, and
the following:
   (A)   The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands
resulting in further injury or damage;
   (B)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   (C)   The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners;
   (D)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to
the community;
   (E)   The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development
that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion;
   (F)   The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and
anticipated development;
   (G)   The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for the area;
   (H)   The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
   (I)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable. expected at the site; and
   (J)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges.
   (K)   The necessity of the facility of a waterfront location, in the case of
a functionally-dependent facility.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.067 CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF VARIANCES.
   Variances shall be issued only upon:
   (A)   Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause
that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of
the site limit compliance with any provision of this chapter or the required
elevation standards;
   (B)   Determination by the Board of Adjustment or Planning and Zoning Board
that:
      (1)   Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship
due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot
undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do
not constitute hardship;
      (2)   The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor
create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict
with existing local laws and ordinances; and
      (3)   The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
   (C)   Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if
granted, shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Court in such a
manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land;
and
   (D)   If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest
floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the
required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the
Floodplain Administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the
difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the
lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation
(up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage), and stating that
construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and
property.
   (E)   The city shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report
any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
VIOLATIONS
§ 152.070 VIOLATIONS.
   Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code
but that is regulated by this chapter that is performed without an issued
permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully
comply with this chapter, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. A
building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest
floor, other required design certifications. or other evidence of compliance
required by this chapter or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.071 AUTHORITY.
   For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code
but that is regulated by this chapter and that is determined to be a violation,
the Floodplain Administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or
stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or
to the person or persons performing the work.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.072 UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE.
   Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a
notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall
be subject to penalties as provided herein.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.073 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a
misdemeanor. A person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of
its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500 or
be imprisoned for not more than ten days, or both, and in addition shall pay
all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day the violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the city from taking other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
DEFINITIONS
§ 152.080 SCOPE.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown in this section.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.081 TERMS DEFINED IN THE FLORIDA BUILDING CODE.
   Where terms are not defined in this chapter and are defined in the Florida
Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that
Code.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.082 TERMS NOT DEFINED.
   Where terms are not defined in this chapter or the Florida Building Code,
such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.083 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure on the same parcel of property as a
principal structure and the use of which is limited to parking and storage
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
   ALTERATION OF A WATERCOURSE. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change
in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the
channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may
alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine
flow of water during conditions of the base flood.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   ASCE 24. A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is
referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by
the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or
the "1% annual chance flood."
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the base flood, including wave
height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American
Vertical Datum (NAVP) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM).
   BASEMENT. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any
occupancy or storage.
   DESIGN FLOOD. The flood associated with the greater of the following two
areas:
      (1)   Area with a floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of
flooding in any year; or
      (2)   Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood
hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.
   DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave
height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated
flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation
shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's
perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In
areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map,
the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary
structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any
other land disturbing activities.
   ENCROACHMENT. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent
structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas.
   EXISTING BUILDING AND EXISTING STRUCTURE. Any buildings and structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before December 15,1997.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The federal agency that, in
addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS. Any construction material capable of
withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining
any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The greater of the following two areas: (also defined in
FBC, B, § 1612.2)
      (1)   The area within a floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of
flooding in any year.
      (2)   The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood
hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map of the community on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that contains the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (if applicable), the water surface elevations
of the base flood, and supporting technical data.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The office or position designated and charged with
the administration and enforcement of this chapter (may be referred to as the
Floodplain Manager).
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT OR APPROVAL. An official document or
certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or
concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities
that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant
with this chapter.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT ANALYSIS. An engineering analysis of the impact that a
proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway
boundaries and base flood elevations, the evaluation shall be prepared by a
qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and
models.
   FLORIDA BUILDING CODE ("FBC"). The family of codes adopted by the Florida
Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida
Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida
Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building
Code, Fuel Gas.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only
docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building, and ship repair
facilities; the term does not include long-term storage, or related
manufacturing facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is determined eligible for the
exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code,
Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that
amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance
Study. Letters of Map Change include:
      LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and
establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is
not located in a special flood hazard area.
      LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data that
may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area
boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features.
      LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F).  A determination that a
structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood
elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard
area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been
permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management
regulations.
      CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and comment
as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies
with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to
delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the
effective Flood Insurance Rate Map  or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission
and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may
be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM.
   LIGHT-DUTY TRUCK. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated
at 8.500 pounds Gross Vehicular Weight Rating or less which has a vehicular
curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area
of 45 square feet or less, which is:
      (1)   Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is
a derivation of such a vehicle, or
      (2)   Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity
of more than 12 persons; or
      (3)   Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway
operation and use.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or
structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building
access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the
Florida Building Code or ASCE 24.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and which is
built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park
trailer."
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and
other improvements on the parcel. Market value is the actual cash value (in-
kind replacement cost depreciated for age, wear and tear, neglect, and quality
of construction) determined by a qualified independent appraiser, or tax
assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by
the property appraiser.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of administration of this chapter and the
flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after December
15, 1977, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   PARK TRAILER. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14
feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal
or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for
operation of installed fixtures and appliances.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: (see §
320.01, Florida Statutes)
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. An area in the floodplain subject to a 1% or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are
shown on FIRMs as Zone A. AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date of issuance for new construction and
substantial improvements to existing structures, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the  issuance. The actual
start of construction means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns. Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as
clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways,
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of
temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a
substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or
structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value
of the building or structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure taking place
during a ten-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started.
For each building or structure, the ten-year period begins on the date of the
first improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to May 4,
1994. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are
considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code
violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, or the
flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which
permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this
chapter or the Florida Building Code.
   WATERCOURSE. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature
in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. (Ord. 1775,
passed 5-7-14; Am. Ord. 2001, passed 12-14-22)
FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT; BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
§ 152.090 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES
EXEMPT FROM THE FLORIDA BUILDING CODE.
   Pursuant to §
152.032 of this chapter, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt
from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of
substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant
construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida
Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the
requirements of §§
152.140 through
152.143 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.091 SPECIFIC METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION AND REQUIREMENTS.
   Pursuant to Broward County Administrative Provisions for the Florida
Building Code, the following specific methods of construction and requirements
apply:
   (A)   Additional elevation (freeboard). The minimum lowest floor elevation,
or level of dry floodproofing, of any residential, nonresidential, commercial,
or industrial structure shall be at or above the highest of the following:
      (1)   Six and one-half feet above the datum shown on the FIRM (N.A.V.D.).
      (2)   Minimum floor elevation as set forth in the South Florida Water
Management Districts' Surface water management permit.
      (3)   The elevation shown on the 100-year Flood Elevation Map, Latest
Revision, prepared by the Broward County Transportation Department.
      (4)   Eighteen inches above the highest point of the paved roadway/drive-
lane nearest to the building, except for buildings adjacent to Pines Boulevard.
      (5)    Two feet above the base flood elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
      (6)   Exceptions to the above criteria are permitted for repairs,
additions or modifications to existing structures provided the improvements are
constructed at or above the existing lowest floor elevation, the lowest floor
elevation of the improvement is a minimum 6.5 feet above the datum shown on the
FIRM (N.A.V.D.), and the repairs or improvements are valued at less than 50% of
the market value of the building prior to improvements or repairs.
   (B)   Enclosures below elevated buildings.
      (1)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow
for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
      (2)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned
or finished into separate rooms.
   (C)   Substantial improvement. In the Florida Building Code, Building and
the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, definitions for the term
"substantial improvement" shall be as follows:
      SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure taking place
during a ten-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started.
For each building or structure, the ten-year period begins on the date of the
first improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to May 4,
1994. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are
considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code
violations identified by the Building Official and that are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions.
   (D)   Design and compaction of fill. In addition to the requirements of the
Florida Building Code, the following shall apply to fill used to elevated
buildings in flood hazard areas:
      (1)   Fill shall be designed and compacted in accordance with ASTM D-698
or equivalent;
      (2)   Fill shall extend beyond the building walls before dropping below
the base flood elevation;
      (3)   Fill shall be protected from erosion and scour; and
      (4)   Designs for fill or use of an equivalent standard shall be approved
by a registered professional engineer or the City Engineer.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.092 NON-ELEVATED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   Accessory structures are permitted below elevations required by the Florida
Building Code provided the accessory structures are used only for parking or
storage and:
   (A)   Are one-story and not larger than 600 sq. ft.
   (B)   Have flood openings in accordance with § R322.2 of the Florida
Building Code, Residential.
   (C)   Are anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement
resulting from flood loads.
   (D)   Have flood damage-resistant materials used below the base flood
elevation plus one foot.
   (E)   Have mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems, including plumbing
fixtures, elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot. (Ord.
2001, passed 12-14-22)
FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT; SUBDIVISIONS
§ 152.093 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that:
   (A)   Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage
and will be reasonably safe from flooding;
   (B)   All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric,
communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and
   (C)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in
Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures.
   (D)   All new developments in the city shall conform to the regulations
developed by the South Florida Management District entitled "District Water
Management Plan" and by the South Broward Drainage District entitled "Storm
Water Management." Copies of both documents shall be available at the office of
the City Engineer.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.094 SUBDIVISION PLATS.
   Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be
required:
   (A)   Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood
zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on
preliminary plats;
   (B)   Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five
acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood
elevations determined in accordance with §
152.041(A) of this chapter; and
   (C)   Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of §§
152.100 through
152.104 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
SITE IMPROVEMENTS. UTILITIES AND LIMITATIONS
§ 152.100 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that:
   (A)   Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage
and will be reasonably safe from flooding;
   (B)   All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric,
communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and
   (C)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in
Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.101 SANITARY SEWAGE FACILITIES.
   All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment
plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site
waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for
onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE
24, Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment
of the facilities and systems. (Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.102 WATER SUPPLY FACILITIES.
   All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in
accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500,
F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.103 LIMITATIONS ON SITES IN REGULATORY FLOODWAYS.
   No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land
disturbing activity involving fill or regrading. shall be authorized in the
regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in §
152.042(A) of this chapter demonstrates that the proposed development or land
disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood
elevation.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.104 LIMITATIONS ON PLACEMENT OF FILL.
   Subject to the limitations of this chapter, fill shall be designed to be
stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of
floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion
and scour, in addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings
and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the
Florida Building Code. For all excavation and fill projects, the volume of
space occupied by the permitted fill below the base flood elevation shall be
compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent amount of excavation
taken from below the base flood elevation. All such excavation shall be
connected to a drainage canal directly or via a culvert.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
MANUFACTURED HOMES
§ 152.110 GENERAL.
   All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by
an installer that is licensed pursuant to § 320.8249, Florida Statutes, and
shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the
requirements of this chapter. If located seaward of the coastal construction
control line, all manufactured homes shall comply with the more restrictive of
the applicable requirements.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.111 FOUNDATIONS.
   All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in
flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that
are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida
Building Code Residential § R322.2 and this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.112 ANCHORING.
   All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be
installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are
not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring
requirements for wind resistance.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.113 ELEVATION.
   All manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved
in flood hazard areas shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at
or above the elevation required in the Florida Building Code, Residential, §
R3222.2 (Zone A). (Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14; Am. Ord. 2001, passed 12-14-22)
§ 152.114 (RESERVED).
§ 152.115 (RESERVED).
§ 152.116 ENCLOSURES.
   Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the
requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential § R322 for such enclosed
areas, as applicable to the flood hazard area.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.117 UTILITY EQUIPMENT.
   Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other
service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building
Code, Residential § R322, as applicable to the flood hazard area.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND PARK TRAILERS
§ 152.120 TEMPORARY PLACEMENT.
   Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard
areas shall:
   (A)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
   (B)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the
recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and
porches.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.121 PERMANENT PLACEMENT.
   Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in
§
152.120 of this chapter for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of
§§
152.110 through
152.113,
152.116, and
152.117 of this chapter for manufactured homes. (Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14; Am.
Ord. 2001, passed 12-14-22)
TANKS
§ 152.130 UNDERGROUND TANKS.
   Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects
of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.131 ABOVE-GROUND TANKS, NOT ELEVATED.
   Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of §
152.132 of this chapter shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the
tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads
during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy
assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.132 ABOVE-GROUND TANKS, ELEVATED.
   Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated
to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is
designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions
of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation
requirements of the applicable flood hazard area.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.133 TANK INLETS AND VENTS.
   Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
   (A)   At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed
to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks
during conditions of the design flood; and
   (B)   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the
design flood.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
OTHER DEVELOPMENT
§ 152.140 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR OTHER DEVELOPMENT.
   All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real
estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this chapter or the
Florida Building Code, shall:
   (A)   Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
   (B)   Meet the limitations of §
152.103 of this chapter if located in a regulated floodway;
   (C)   Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the design flood;
   (D)   Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and
   (E)   Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design
flood elevation, except that minimum electric service required to address life
safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood
elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of
building code for wet locations.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.141 FENCES IN REGULATED FLOODWAYS.
   Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage
of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the
limitations of §
152.103 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.142 RETAINING WALLS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS IN REGULATED FLOODWAYS.
   Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of
fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of §
152.103 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
§ 152.143 ROADS AND WATERCOURSE CROSSINGS IN REGULATED FLOODWAYS.
   Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-
water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from
one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated
floodways shall meet the limitations of §
152.103 of this chapter. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or
watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of §
152.042(C) of this chapter.
(Ord. 1775, passed 5-7-14)
CHAPTER 153: (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Purpose
   
154.02   Definitions
Preliminary Plats
   
154.10   Sketch plats
   
154.11   Required information on preliminary plat
   
154.12   Required information as to waterways excavations; waiver of
regulations by city
   
154.13   Standards to be met before plat may be approved
   
154.14   Flood damage
   
154.15   Performance bond, waterways excavation bond
   
154.16   Cost of street markers
   
154.17   Street lights
   
154.18   Filing of preliminary plat with city; fee
   
154.19   Review of preliminary plat
   
154.20   Public hearing on plat by Planning and Zoning Board; approval
Final Plat
   
154.30   Waterway excavations
   
154.31   Design standards for waterways
   
154.32   Design standards for streets and alleys
   
154.33   Design standards for blocks
   
154.34   Design standards for lots
   
154.35   Design standards for parking areas
   
154.36   Area to be set aside for parks, playgrounds, or the like
   
154.37   Review, approval of final plat by city
   
154.38   Acceptance of improvements by city; maintenance
   
154.39   Certain property to be replatted
Construction and Use Standards
   
154.45   Permit, fee required
   
154.46   Streets, alleys, and the like to be paved
   
154.47   Underground installation of public utilities; waiver of regulations by
city
   
154.48   Primary electrical feeders, cables, or wires
   
154.49   Adult subdivisions; sale, rental, or lease to family with children
Excavation of Public Rights-of-Way
   
154.60   Title of subchapter
   
154.61   Intent of standards
   
154.62   Permits required
   
154.63   Emergency work
   
154.64   Permit fee
   
154.65   Availability of approved plans and permit
   
154.66   Ownership of facilities
   
154.67   Underground facilities
   
154.68   Utility crossings
   
154.69   Driving pipe under existing pavements (bore and jack method)
   
154.70   Notice required
   
154.71   Inspections, tests and certifications
   
154.72   Supervision of construction
   
154.73   Interruption and restoration of services
   
154.74   Disposal of water from excavation
   
154.75   Maintenance of traffic
   
154.76   Job site safety
   
154.77   Removal of pavement, drives, sidewalks, curbs and gutters
   
154.78   Disposition of excavated materials
   
154.79   Bracing and shoring
   
154.80   Traffic and utility controls
   
154.81   Backfilling and compaction in roadway
   
154.82   Pits and trenches in roadway
   
154.83   Narrow trenches in roadway
   
154.84   Restoration of right-of-way
   
154.85   Record drawings
   
154.86   Abandoned facilities
   
154.87   Procedure for restoration of flexible pavement
 
   
154.99   Penalty
   
Appendix: Typical Waterway Bank Slopes
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of the regulations contained in this chapter are as follows.
   (A)   To establish uniform standards for the design of subdivisions and the
preparation of subdivision plats.
   (B)   To bring together in coordinated and convenient form, all official
requirements pertaining to plats.
   (C)   To facilitate coordination and equitable treatment for engineers,
surveyors, and subdividers in the review of their plats.
('69 Code, § 14-1) (Ord. 69, passed 11-5-62; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21;
sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A minor right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the side
or rear of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
   ARTERIAL STREET. See STREET, ARTERIAL, as defined below.
   BOARD. The Planning and Zoning Board of the city.
   BUILDING. Includes STRUCTURE and shall be construed as if followed by the
phrase, "or part thereof."
   BUILDING LINE. See SETBACK LINE, defined below.
   COLLECTOR STREET. See STREET, COLLECTOR, defined below.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street intersecting another street at one end and
terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround.
   DEVELOPER. A person or his agent, who undertakes the activities covered by
the regulations provided in this chapter, particularly drawing up a subdivision
plat showing the layout of the land and the public improvements therein.
Inasmuch as the subdivision plat is merely a necessary means to the end of
assuring a satisfactory development, the term SUBDIVIDER is synonymous with the
term DEVELOPER, even though the persons involved in successive stages of the
project may vary.
   EASEMENT. A right-of-way granted for limited use of private property for a
public or quasi-public purpose.
   EXCAVATION. The digging, stripping, or removal, by any process, of natural
materials or deposits from their natural state and location. EXCAVATION shall
not include digging for foundations, fences, or structures where no materials
are removed from the premises except surplus not required for backfill or
grading of the premises.
   EXPRESSWAY STREET. See STREET, EXPRESSWAY, defined below.
   FINAL PLAT. A complete and exact subdivision plan, prepared for official
recording as required by statute, to identify and define property rights,
dedications, and public improvements.
   FLOOD CRITERIA. The minimum elevation to which street center line grades
shall be constructed. The FLOOD CRITERIA for a particular area shall be that
established by the local control districts and the Hollywood Reclamation
District, its successors and assigns.
   HALF STREET or PARTIAL STREET. A street, generally parallel and adjacent to
the boundary line of a tract, having a lesser right-of-way width than required
for a full width street or type involved.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Director of the County Health Department.
   IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC. See PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, as defined below.
   LOT. A tract or parcel of land identified as a single unit in a subdivision,
and intended for transfer of ownership, use, or improvement.
   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lines of a
lot.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot at the
front building line, or at the front lot line where no front setback is
required.
   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. See STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS, defined below.
   MAY. May is permissive; shall and will are mandatory and not merely
directory.
   MINOR STREET. See STREET, MINOR, defined below.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. A building which provides separate living quarters for
three or more families.
   PARTIAL STREET. See HALF STREET, defined above.
   PLAT, FINAL. See FINAL PLAT, defined above.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A tentative subdivision plan, in lesser detail than a
final plat, showing approximately proposed street and lot layout as a basis for
consideration prior to preparation of a "final plat".
   PLAT SKETCH. An informal plan not necessarily to scale, indicating salient
existing features of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of a
proposed subdivision.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. Includes street pavement, with or without curbs and
gutters; sidewalks; alley pavement; walkway pavement; drains; street signs;
street name signs; streets; or trees.
   REVERSE FRONTAGE. A lot extending between and having frontage on a major
traffic street and a minor street and with no vehicular access from the major
traffic street.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land reserved, used, or to be used for a street, alley,
walkway, drainage facility, or other public purpose.
   SETBACK LINE or BUILDING LINE. The line within a property defining the
required minimum distance between any enclosed structure and the adjacent
right-of-way.
   SHALL. See MAY, defined above.
   SIGHT DISTANCE. The minimum extent of unobstructed vision in a horizontal or
vertical plane along a street from a vehicle located at any given point on the
street.
   STREET. Includes avenue, boulevard, parkway, court, highway, lane, roadway,
and expressway.
      (1)   STREET, ARTERIAL. A street or highway used primarily for fast and
heavy traffic traveling considerable distances.
      (2)   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which, in addition to giving access to
abutting properties, carries traffic from minor streets to the major system of
arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance street of a
residential development and streets for circulation within the development.
      (3)   STREET, EXPRESSWAY. A street or highway intended for fast and heavy
traffic traveling considerable distances, on which points of ingress and egress
are limited and crossings are separated.
      (4)   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS. A minor street parallel to and adjacent to
arterial streets, highways, or expressways, which provides access to abutting
property and protection from through traffic.
      (5)   STREET, MINOR. A street used primarily for access to abutting
properties.
   SUBDIVIDER. See DEVELOPER, defined above.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of land into two or more lots or parcels for the
purpose of transfer of ownership or development. If a new street is involved,
any division of any parcel of land and a tract of land upon which a hotel, an
apartment, or a multiple dwelling is to be constructed.
   WALKWAY. A right-of-way intended primarily for pedestrians, excluding self-
propelled vehicles, which cuts across a block to improve circulation and access
to adjacent streets, services, or properties.
   WATERCOURSE. Includes channel, creek, ditch, drain, dry run, spring, stream,
and canal, but does not include a lake, pond, or pool without outlet.
   WATERWAYS. Canals, ditches, ponds, lakes, or other watercourses whether
naturally formed or created for the purpose of obtaining landfill, storage, or
natural, pumped, or excess storm water runoff, or for drainage of adjacent
land.
   WILL. See MAY, defined above.
('69 Code, § 14-2) (Ord. 69, passed 11-5-62; Am. Ord. 127, passed 11-15-65; Am.
Ord. 489, passed 1-22-79; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
PRELIMINARY PLATS
§ 154.10 SKETCH PLATS.
   (A)   Subdividers are invited to prepare, for review with the Planning and
Zoning Board staff, subdivision sketch plats as further described in divisions
(D) and (E) of this section.
   (B)   Sketch plats will be considered as submitted for informal and
confidential discussion between the subdivider and the Board staff. Submission
of a subdivision sketch plat shall not constitute formal filing of a plat.
   (C)   As far as may be practicable on the basis of a sketch plat, the Board
staff will informally advise the subdivider as promptly as possible of the
extent to which the proposed subdivision conforms to the regulations of this
chapter and will discuss possible plat modifications necessary to secure
conformance.
('69 Code, § 14-3)
   (D)   Data furnished in a sketch plat shall be at the discretion of the
subdivider. For maximum service it is suggested that a sketch plat should
include the following information.
      (1)   Tract boundaries.
      (2)   Location with respect to section lines.
      (3)   Streets on and adjacent to the tract.
      (4)   Proposed general street layout.
      (5)   Significant topographical and physical features.
      (6)   Proposed general lot layout.
   (E)   A sketch plat need not be to scale nor are precise dimensions
required.
('69 Code, § 14-4) (Ord. 69, passed 11-5-62; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21;
sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.11 REQUIRED INFORMATION ON PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   The preliminary plat shall be at a scale of not more than 100 feet to
the inch. However, a scale of 200 feet to the inch may be used for large areas.
   (B)   The preliminary plat shall show or be accomplished by the following
information.
      (1)   Proposed subdivision name or identifying title which shall not
duplicate or closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in the city.
      (2)   Sketch of location within the section.
      (3)   North point, graphic scale, and date.
      (4)   Name of the owner of the property or his authorized agent.
      (5)   Name of the registered engineer or surveyor responsible for the
plat.
      (6)   Locations and names of adjacent subdivisions.
      (7)   Tract boundaries with angles and distances.
      (8)   All existing watercourses, canals, bodies of water, and major
drainage districts.
      (9)   All existing streets and alleys on or adjacent to the tract,
including names and right-of-way widths.
      (10)   All existing property lines, easements, and rights-of-way and the
purpose for which the easements or rights-of-way have been established.
      (11)   Location and width of all proposed streets, alleys, rights-of-way,
and easements; proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions; and playgrounds,
public buildings, public areas, and parcels of land proposed or reserved for
public use.
      (12)   A written statement from the County Board of Public Instruction
regarding public school facilities made necessary by the proposed development,
stating whether the facilities are available in the area which is proposed for
development or are planned to be constructed in the area concurrently with the
development.
('69 Code, § 14-6) (Ord. 69, passed 11-5-62; Am. Ord. 458, passed 11-21-77; Am.
Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 154.12 REQUIRED INFORMATION AS TO WATERWAYS EXCAVATIONS; WAIVER OF
REGULATIONS BY CITY.
   (A)   Where a preliminary plat is presented to the Planning and Zoning Board
showing that the developer proposes to excavate or create waterways in
connection with the development concerned in the plat, the developer shall
submit, along with the preliminary plat, the following data.
      (1)   Locations and dimensions of the excavations or waterways.
      (2)   Typical cross section showing the elevation of perimeter or banks,
grade of slopes, water level at mean low water, depth of excavation, and bottom
width.
      (3)   A topographical survey of the subject property prepared by a
registered land surveyor licensed to practice in the state.
      (4)   An estimate of the amount of material to be excavated certified by
a registered engineer licensed to practice in the state.
('69 Code, § 14-7)
   (B)   The City Commission may waive or vary the strict requirements of the
waterways regulations of this chapter by five affirmative votes when it deems
it to be in the public interest or where unnecessary hardship would occur to
the landowner because of the strict enforcement of these regulations.
('69 Code, § 14-10)
(Ord. 127, passed 11-15-65; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
Cross-reference:
   Waterways excavation bond, see §
154.15
   Final plat requirements, see §
154.30
   Design standards for waterways, see §
154.31
   Waterway excavation conducted in conjunction with subdivision development,
see §
151.03
§ 154.13 STANDARDS TO BE MET BEFORE PLAT MAY BE APPROVED.
   No plat shall be approved by the City Commission unless it shows the
following.
   (A)   The plat conforms to all of the ordinances and charter requirements of
the city and the laws of the state.
   (B)   The grades, as specified by the city, of all roads, streets, alleys,
and other rights-of-way, as designated herein, and the elevations of the
several portions of the land depicted on the plat, by contour lines or
otherwise. However, the grades and elevations may be shown on a separate
instrument, which shall be attached to and made a part by reference, of the
plat, and which shall show such information thereon as may be required by the
City Commission.
   (C)   A dedication to the public by the owners of the lands involved, of all
roads, streets, alleys, and other rights-of-way, however designated, shown on
the plat, for perpetual use for public road and street purposes and other
purposes incidental thereto. The effect of this dedication shall be to vest in
the city full, complete, and exclusive possession, control, and jurisdiction of
the roads, streets, alleys, and other rights-of-way, and of all trees,
shrubbery, and other plantings and installations therein for the full width
thereof as shown on the plat. It is specifically provided, however, that the
owners may reserve unto themselves, their heirs, successors, and assigns, the
reversion thereof whenever the roads, streets, alleys, and other rights-of-way
should be discontinued by law. It is further provided that the dedication by
the owners may be by separate instrument duly executed and acknowledged as
required by law, recorded concurrently with the recording of the plat.
   (D)   Accompanying such plat shall be any letters, reports, or comments
concerning the plat received from Broward County, including but not limited to,
staff reports, letters, or comments made in connection with the county's
preliminary plat review process, and letters, comments or reports from any
other pertinent agencies. Furthermore, the applicant shall notify city in
writing within ten days following receipt of any letters, reports or comments
relating to the plat petition from Broward County or any other pertinent
agencies. Alternatively, if applicable, applicant shall provide city with
letters from Broward County and any other pertinent agencies indicating they
have no comments regarding such plat petition.
('69 Code, § 14-12) (Ord. 73, passed 3-1-62; Am. Ord. 1019, passed 12-16-92;
Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed
4-21-2021)
§ 154.14 FLOOD DAMAGE.
   No plat of lands subject to periodic or frequent flooding or standing water
shall be approved, unless a suitable agreement is entered into with the city by
the person seeking approval of a plat of the lands, that adequate provisions
will be made to prevent any periodic or frequent flooding or standing water
thereon. The City Commission may require the party seeking approval of a plat
to raise and fill the lands to prescribed heights and contours and to provide
drainage canals or watercourses, culverts, gutters, sewers, and other drainage
facilities necessary to adequately drain the platted lands.
('69 Code, § 14-13) (Ord. 73, passed 3-1-62; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21;
sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.15 PERFORMANCE BOND, WATERWAYS EXCAVATION BOND.
   (A)   No plat of lands shall be approved unless the person seeking the
approval of the plat first furnishes the city with a good and sufficient
performance bond, letter of credit, cash bond or subdivision improvement
agreement, in a form approved by the City Commission after review by the City
Attorney (hereinafter referred to collectively as the "Security"). If a bond is
selected as the form of security to be provided to the city the bond shall be
executed by the owner and a corporate surety company, satisfactory to the city.
The amount of the security shall be in a sum equal to, or greater than, the
estimated cost of the improvement, as a guarantee bond, plus 10%, conditional
upon the construction and paving of streets, alleys, and other improvements and
rights-of way shown on the plat, the installation and furnishing of street
markers, necessary fill, drainage wells, culverts, gutters, sewers, and other
necessary drainage facilities in accordance with the specifications of the city
and within such time as may be required by the City Commission.
('69 Code, § 14-14) (Ord. 73, passed 3-1-62; Am. Ord. 995, passed 5-20-92)
   (B)   A bond executed by a surety company, letter of credit, cash bond or
subdivision improvement agreement, in a form approved by the City Commission
after review by the City Attorney (hereinafter referred to collectively as the
"Security), based on an estimate by the petitioner's engineers and the city
Building and Zoning Department shall be furnished by the subdivider in an
amount equal to 110% of the cost of the waterway excavation. The security will
be subject to the condition that the excavation will be completed within the
time limit set by the City Commission for approval of the final plat and in
accordance with other applicable city ordinances, including but not limited to
hours of operation. In the event it is not completed, the city may proceed with
the work and hold the owner and the security jointly responsible for the costs
thereof. This security bond shall be in addition to the bond for improvements
as set forth in division (A) of this section, shall be in a form approved by
the City Commission after review by the City Attorney. If a bond is selected as
the form of security to be provided to the city it shall be underwritten by a
surety company satisfactory to the city.
('69 Code, § 14-15) (Ord. 127, passed 11-15-65; Am. Ord. 995, passed 5-20-92;
Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed
4-21-2021)
§ 154.16 COST OF STREET MARKERS.
   The party seeking approval of a plat shall pay the cost of necessary street
markers and their installation. The street markers shall be required where two
or more streets intersect and one street marker shall be required where the
streets join in a "T".
('69 Code, § 14-16) (Ord. 73, passed 3-1-62; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21;
sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.17 STREET LIGHTS.
   (A)   The city shall provide street lights for all new subdivisions within
the city. The developer shall pay to the city, at the time that his plat is
approved by the City Commission, the sum of $1,000 per pole for the street
lights. In the case of nonplatted developments, the $1,000 per pole shall be
paid by the developer at the time the streets are dedicated to the city. For
the purpose of this section, the term developer shall be synonymous with the
term subidivider as provided in §
154.02.
   (B)   All subdivision plats submitted to the City Commission for approval
shall provide the necessary easements for installation and maintenance of
street lights within the subdivision.
   (C)   The street light poles shall be cement poles, with underground wiring.
The design and spacing of the street lights shall conform to the remainder of
the city's overhead street lighting system.
('69 Code, § 14-16.1) (Ord. 231, passed 7-6-70; Am. Ord. 302, passed 12-18-72;
Am. Ord. 1191, passed 11-20-96; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.18 FILING OF PRELIMINARY PLAT WITH CITY; FEE.
   (A)   Preliminary plats for all proposed subdivisions of land lying wholly
or partially within the city, and lying partially in the county or other
municipalities, shall be filed with the City Planner for review. Simultaneously
with the application for plat review by the city the applicant shall
demonstrate to the city that applications for plat approval have been filed or
are about to be filed with Broward County and any other pertinent    agencies,
if applicable.
('69 Code, § 14-5(a))
   (B)   Developers shall pay to the city at the time of submitting a
preliminary plat a fee in the amount of $800 for each plat submitted, to cover
the cost of processing the plat. The developer shall be refunded any amount of
the $800 not expended by the city as cost for processing the plat.
('69 Code, § 14-8(g))
(Ord. 69, passed 11-5-62; Am. Ord. 453, passed 9-19-77; Am. Ord. 458, passed
11-21-77; Am. Ord. 585, passed 1-7-82; Am. Ord. 1019, passed 12-16-92; Am. Ord.
2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-
2021) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.19 REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   A subdivider seeking approval of a subdivision plat shall submit six
copies of the preliminary plat to the City Planner. A copy of this preliminary
plat shall then be referred to the City Engineer, County Board of Public
Instruction, City Recreation Department, and City Building and Zoning
Department for review and criticism. The officials involved shall report their
comments and recommendations to the City Planner within seven calendar days of
their receipt of the plats.
   (B)   The City Engineer shall examine and check the preliminary plat for
general engineering and overall drainage requirements.
   (C)   The City Building and Zoning Department shall check the preliminary
plats for street numbering and naming.
   (D)   The County Board of Public Instruction shall review the preliminary
plat in relation to its needs for school sites and shall, upon request therefor
by the City Planner, submit an official written statement to the Planning and
Zoning Board clearly showing the following.
      (1)   The capability, or lack thereof, of the existing public school
facilities in a proposed development to absorb additional students without
overcrowding such facilities.
      (2)   In the event no public school facilities exist in the area of
proposed development, the projected delivery date of these facilities in the
area.
      (3)   The City Recreation Department shall review the preliminary plat in
relation to city park and recreation needs, and in relation to proposed
dedications in the plat for park and recreation purposes.
   (F)   The City Planner shall report the recommendations of the several
agencies referred to in divisions (A) through (E) of this section to the
Planning and Zoning Board, together with an analysis of the conformance or
nonconformance of the preliminary plat to these regulations.
('69 Code, § 14-8(a)-(f)) (Ord. 69, passed 11-5-62; Am. Ord. 453, passed 9-19-
77; Am. Ord. 458, passed 11-21-77; Am. Ord. 585, passed 1-7-82; Am. Ord. 2021-
02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.20 PUBLIC HEARING ON PLAT BY PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD; APPROVAL.
   (A)   Plats and other necessary supporting data shall be considered at a
public meeting of the Planning and Zoning Board within 60 days from the date of
filing with the City Planner.
('69 Code, § 14-5(b)) (Ord. 69, passed 11-5-62; Am. Ord. 453, passed 9-19-77)
   (B)   At the scheduled public meeting the Board shall receive reports on and
review the preliminary plat to determine its conformance to the regulations of
this chapter. The subdivider and any other persons interested in or affected by
the proposed subdivision shall have a right to be heard by the Board either in
person or by letter.
('69 Code, § 14-11(a)) (Ord. 69, passed 11-5-62)
   (C)   The Planning and Zoning Board, in studying the preliminary plat, will
take into consideration the requirements of the community and the best use of
the land being subdivided. Particular attention will be given to width,
arrangement, and location of streets; surface drainage; lot sizes and
arrangements; as well as requirements for parks, playfields, playgrounds,
school sites, public building sites, parkways, and highways. Adequate street
connection will be required to ensure free access to and circulation for
adjoining subdivisions and lands. The City Commission, upon recommendation by
the Planning and Zoning Board, may reject development plans when public school
facilities made necessary by the proposed development are not available in the
area which is proposed for development or are not planned to be constructed in
that area concurrently with the development.
   (D)   In cases where the proposed subdivision plat is a resubdivision of
portions of an existing subdivision or a replat in connection with the
abandonment of a portion of existing public streets and public places, or there
are existing conditions on the subject property or on nearby property which
unduly affect the platting and development of the subject property, the Board
shall have the right to vary the strict application of these subdivision
regulations in appropriate cases in such a manner as to carry out the spirit
and purpose of these regulations.
('69 Code, § 14-9) (Ord. 69, passed 11-5-62; Am. Ord. 458, passed 11-21-77)
   (E)   The Board may approve the preliminary plat as presented, or with minor
modifications, if found to be in conformance with the regulations of this
chapter, or may disapprove the plat when not found to be in conformance or
readily capable of being revised to conform. Approval of the preliminary plat
subject to conditions, revisions, and modifications as stipulated by the Board,
shall constitute conditional Board approval of the subdivision as to the
character and intensity of development, the general layout, the approximate
dimensions of streets and lots, and other proposed features.
   (F)   The recommended approval of the Planning and Zoning Board on a
preliminary plat shall become null and void unless a final plat conforming to
the preliminary plat is finally approved by the City Commission and recorded
within six months of the date of the preliminary plat recommended for approval.
However, the Board's approval for an additional period up to six months, if no
preliminary plat for a contiguous area that is inconsistent with the previously
approved plat has been filed with the Board.
('69 Code, § 14-11(b),(c)) (Ord. 69, passed 11-5-62; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted
3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
FINAL PLAT
§ 154.30 WATERWAY EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   Plats submitted for approval showing either the excavations are to be
made on waterways existing or are to be created shall be accompanied with or
have appearing on the final plat the following.
      (1)   A dedication or declaration of restrictions establishing the
ownership; right to use; provisions for maintenance, including provisions for
financial responsibility for maintenance; limitations; reversary rights if any;
easements necessary for the maintenance of the waterway and access thereto from
public ways; prohibitions against alteration of the shoreline contours without
prior city approval; provisions for the control and subdual of aquatic growth
and for the imposition of lines for the cost of such control by the city in the
event
the adjacent property owners or those receiving beneficial use of the waterway
fail to perform the necessary work; and restrictions and limitations on the
right of riparian owners to build and erect any improvement or structure on the
waterway without prior consent of the city.
      (2)   Any other and further deed restrictions, covenants, limitations,
easements, or conditions that shall be required by the city prior to its
approval of the plat.
   (B)   The requirements of division (A) of this section shall be in
recordable form and shall be worded so that it constitutes a covenant running
with the land, which shall be binding and enforceable against the developers
and their heirs, successors, and assigns.
('69 Code, § 14-18) (Ord. 127, passed 11-15-65; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-
21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
Cross-reference:
   Waterway excavation conducted in conjunction with subdivision development,
see §
151.03
   Preliminary plat requirement, see §
154.12
   Waterways excavation bond, see §
154.15
§ 154.31 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR WATERWAYS.
   (A)   Clearing and grubbing. All timber, brush, roots, debris, junk,
rubbish, or other objectionable material resulting from clearing or cleaning
and grubbing operations shall be disposed of outside of the city limits or as
directed by the Engineering Department. Burning of combustible material may be
permitted, subject to the approval of the Fire Department. No material shall be
buried on the site or disposed of in the excavation.
   (B)   Cleanup and drainage. During and after completion of excavation
operations, no water shall be permitted to stand in low areas or ponds on the
site of the work. Any grading necessary to effect positive drainage shall be
done. Drainage may be to the excavation or as directed by the City Engineer. On
completion of the work no material shall be left in piles or windrows unless
specifically permitted by the city.
   (C)   Use of explosives. Explosives shall be used only as permitted by the
city, and their use shall be subject to such conditions as may be imposed by
the city.
   (D)   Working hours. The city reserves the right to regulate the excavator's
working hours and may, at its discretion, prohibit night work.
   (E)   Design standards for waterways and canals, and offsets and slopes. No
excavation shall be permitted closer than 100 feet to an adjoining property
line or closer than 50 feet to a dedicated street or road. For purposes of this
section, CANALS shall be defined as water bodies of total right-of-way of 100
feet or less and which are used for the conveyance of stormwater and are not
used for storage as detention/retention basins.
      (1)   The excavations for all waterways located within the city limits
permitted after the effective date of Ordinance 886 shall have the following
minimum slopes, and in no case shall the bank be steeper than these allowable
slopes:
         (a)   From the top of the slope line (maximum six inches below
finished floor elevation) to the top of the bank (elevation no less than plus
5.5 feet MSL), the slope shall not be steeper than ten horizontal to one
vertical.
         (b)   From the top of the bank to minus 0.5 feet MSL, or to an
elevation three feet below the design water table elevation, as established in
the South Florida Water Management District's Permit, the slope of a waterway
or canal shall not be steeper than four foot horizontal to one foot vertical,
except in commercial, industrial and agricultural zoning districts of the city
where canal bank slopes shall be permitted on a slope of two foot horizontal to
one foot vertical only if a permanent six-foot chain line fence is erected at
the maintenance easement line within 30 days of completion and acceptance by
the City Commission, provided, however, if and when such land is thereafter
rezoned to residential, then as a condition of the rezoning, the bank slopes
shall be reconstructed so that the bank slopes shall not be steeper than four
foot horizontal to one foot vertical.
         (c)   From minus 0.5 feet MSL, or from an elevation three feet below
the design water table elevation to the minimum depth required by the South
Florida Water Management District up to the maximum depth allowed by the
appropriate governing body, the slope shall not be steeper than two horizontal
to one vertical or to the angle of repose of the material encountered.
         (d)   For the purposes of this section, all land lying between top of
slopeline to the top of the bank shall be considered filled land as designated
in § 155.058.
         (e)   The sketch entitled "Typical Waterway Bank Slopes", attached
hereto as an appendix is an example of the method by which waterway bank slopes
shall be excavated and shall be available at the office of the City Engineer
for review.
      (2)   The excavation for all waterways located within the city limits
permitted prior to the effective date of Ordinance 886 shall be in accordance
with previously approved plans, provided such plans have been designed in
accordance with South Florida Water Management's criteria at the time of
permitting.
   (F)   Depth of excavation. No excavation, when completed, shall have a
minimum depth inside the limits of the deep cut line of less than minus 12 feet
USC & GS, MSL datum.
   (G)   Storm drainage. Drainage of storm waters into the lake shall be
permitted.
   (H)   Lake permit fee. Lake permits will be required, the minimum fee to be
as established in §
150.43.
   (I)   Maintenance easement. An easement with a right-of-way 15 feet wide
must be provided to permit entrance of equipment to the waterway for
maintenance.
('69 Code, § 14-22) (Ord. 127, passed 11-15-65; Am. Ord. 296, passed 10-16-72;
Am. Ord. 886, passed 4-5-89; Am. Ord. 923, passed 5-2-90; Am. Ord. 1059, passed
1-5-94; Am. Ord. 1191, passed 11-20-96; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21;
sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.32 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   Conformity to trafficways plan. The location, direction, and width of
all streets, roads, and highways shall conform to the official trafficways plan
where such a plan is in existence and is applicable.
   (B)   Relation to existing street system. The arrangement of streets in new
subdivisions shall make provisions for the proper extension of existing
dedicated streets in existing subdivisions, where such extension is
appropriate.
   (C)   Provisions for platting adjoining unplatted areas. The arrangement of
streets in new subdivisions shall be such as to facilitate, and coordinate
with, the desirable future platting of adjoining unplatted property of a
similar character, and to provide for local circulation and convenient access
to neighborhood facilities.
   (D)   Protection from through traffic. Minor and collector residential
streets shall be laid out and arranged so as to discourage their use by through
traffic. Residential streets shall not connect with industrial areas unless it
is unavoidable.
   (E)   Arterial street frontage.
      (1)   Residential lots, zoned or intended to be zoned in an R-1A, R-1B,
R-1C, R-1P, R-2U, R-3, R-3A, or R-3U zoning district shall not be designed to
front on an arterial street or trafficway. These lots shall be designed as
reverse frontage lots with a planting strip at least ten feet in width on the
rear end of the lots on the arterial street or trafficway. The planting strip
shall be restricted against use for vehicular access to the arterial street or
trafficway.
      (2)   The regulations provided in this division (E)(2) shall apply to all
areas of the city, except for areas lying within county territory or other
incorporated municipalities. Where a residential subdivision or residential
property abuts an existing or proposed arterial street, the Board may require
marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a
nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with or without
rear service alleys, or any other treatment that may be necessary for adequate
protection of residential properties and to ensure separation of through and
local traffic.
   (F)   Plats adjacent to railroad or expressway right-of-way. Where a
subdivision borders on or contains a right-of-way for a railroad, expressway,
drainage canal, or waterway, the Board may require a street or a fence
approximately parallel to and on each side of the right-of-way, at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land. The distances shall
be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades for
future grade separations. All alleys must be paved.
   (G)   Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited, except where their control is definitely placed in the city under
conditions approved by the Board.
   (H)   Private roads: Private roads in residential zoning districts shall be
allowed in accordance with the following criteria:
      (1)   The term "roadway" shall include the driving lanes, curbings,
landscaping strips, and sidewalks.
      (2)   Private roadway shall have a minimum width of 40 feet.
      (3)   The roadway width shall include minimum 24 feet of asphaltic
pavement for vehicular traffic, curb and gutter along each edge of roadway
pavement for drainage and four feet of concrete sidewalk along each side of
roadway pavement for pedestrian traffic. Roadways, with a minimum width of 50
feet, shall not be required to have concrete curb and gutter for drainage. The
City Commission may waive the requirements for sidewalks along one or both
sides of a private road. Curb and gutter shall not be required when sidewalks
are not required, or where sidewalks are located outside the 40 foot roadway
width.
      (4)   The roadway pavement shall be constructed of minimum 12 inches
stabilized subgrade (minimum 40 LBR) minimum eight inches compacted limerock
basecourse and minimum 1½ inches asphaltic surface course (in two lifts). No
muck or other organic material shall not be allowed in the roadway pavement.
      (5)   Where individual mail boxes are desirable, they shall be installed
in a 2.5 foot wide grass strip to be provided between the curb and the
sidewalk.
      (6)   Unless otherwise provided for herein, all pavement markings and
signage shall conform to "Broward County Traffic Engineering Division
Standards" and "The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices" standards. All
pavement markings shall be of thermoplastic material. Private roads located
within private communities which were constructed pursuant to a construction
permit with an application date prior to December 31, 1992 are not required to
conform to these requirements as long as the communities do not have memoranda
of understanding for traffic enforcement with the city. The city may reject
future memoranda of understanding for traffic enforcement with those
communities who do not conform to "Broward County Traffic Engineering Division
Standards" and "The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices" standards for
all pavement markings and signs and who do not use thermoplastic material for
pavement markings.
         (a)   Speed humps shall be allowed on private streets as long as their
length, width, height and other specifications are in compliance with the
"Broward County Traffic Engineering Division Standards" and "The Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices."
      (7)   No street names shall be allowed. Street number signs shall be
provided at each intersection and other locations, and shall conform to Broward
County Standards.
      (8)   Sod and irrigation shall be provided, as needed, in the 2½ foot
strips in the 40-foot roadway. No trees shall be allowed.
      (9)   Street lighting shall be provided to deliver an illumination equal
to that provided for public roads but not less than an average illumination of
one-half footcandle within the roadway. The street light poles shall be made of
concrete, fiberglass, or metal poles which meet the standards set forth below,
and all cables and wires shall be underground. The poles and lines shall be
located outside the roadway width.
         (a)   Standards for light poles. Light poles shall withstand wind
loads as required by Florida Building Code, as amended by Broward County. The
pole shall be non-conductive, non-corrosive, and shall be able to carry a
minimum weight of 100 pounds at its top. Installation shall be done by direct
burial. The pole material shall meet the following ASTM standards: D635, A153,
A356, A319, A307.
         (b)   Design and style standards for light poles. The design and style
of decorative light poles shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Board in
the same fashion as site development plans are currently reviewed under §
155.395.
      (10)   Sketches entitled "Typical Section for Private Roads" shall be
available in the Engineering Department for inspection and may provide guidance
to builders of private roads.
      (11)   The city will not accept the conveyance and/or the maintenance
responsibility for any private road unless the private road has been inspected
by the city and found to comply fully with the city's standards for public
roads existing at the time of acceptance as set forth in §
154.32.
   (I)   Half streets. New half or partial streets shall not be permitted,
except where essential to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with
these regulations or where satisfactory assurance for dedication of the
remaining part of the street is provided. Wherever a tract to be subdivided
borders on an existing half or partial street, the other part of the street
shall be dedicated and paved within the tract.
   (J)   Future resubdivision. If lots resulting from original subdivision are
large enough to permit or require resubdivision, or if a portion of a tract is
not subdivided, adequate street rights-of-way to permit further subdivision
shall be provided as necessary.
   (K)   Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except where
appropriate as stubs to permit future street extension into adjoining
unsubdivided tracts, or when designed as cul-de-sacs.
   (L)   Cul-de-sac streets.
      (1)   Cul-de-sacs, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed 400
feet in length, except on finger islands.
      (2)   Cul-de-sacs shall be provided at the closed end with a circular
dedicated area not less than 80 feet in diameter for turnaround purposes,
except that on finger islands the diameter of a turnaround may be reduced to 70
feet.
   (M)   Street rights-of way.
      (1)   Unless otherwise indicated or required by the trafficways plan, or
for sufficient reasons shown that exceptions should be made in specific cases,
street rights-of-way shall not be less than the following.
 
Street Type                                                Right-of-Way Feet
Major arterial thoroughfare of through section-line road.  106
Secondary arterial thoroughfare or nonthrough section-line 80
road.
Collector.                                                 60
Minor, for apartments, business, industrial.               60
Minor, for one- and two-family dwellings.                  50
Marginal access.                                           40
 
      (2)   Additional right-of-way width may be required to promote public
safety and convenience, or to ensure adequate access, circulation, and parking
in high-density residential areas, commercial areas, and industrial areas.
      (3)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of
inadequate right-of-way width, additional right-of-way in conformance with the
above standards may be required.
   (N)   Alleys.
      (1)   Alleys shall be provided to serve multiple-dwelling, business,
commercial, and industrial areas. The Board may waive this requirement where
some other definite and ensured provision is made for service access, off-
street loading and unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the
uses permissible on the property involved.
      (2)   The width of any alley shall be at least 20 feet.
      (3)   Changes in alignment of alleys shall be made on a center line
radius of not less than 37 feet.
      (4)   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible. However, if
unavoidable dead-end alleys shall be provided with adequate turnaround
facilities for service trucks at the dead end, but with the minimum external
diameter of 94 feet, or as determined to be adequate by the Board.
   (O)   Easements.
      (1)   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall
be provided for public utilities where necessary and shall be at least 15 feet
in total width.
      (2)   Where the subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
canal, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right- of-way conforming substantially with the line of the watercourses, and
such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate, for the
purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith
where necessary for service or maintenance.
      (3)   Easements may be required for drainage purposes of such size and
location as may be determined by the City Engineer.
   (P)   Street alignment.
      (1)   Curvilinear streets are recommended for residential, minor, and
collector streets in order to discourage excessive vehicular speeds and to
provide attractive vistas.
      (2)   Whenever a street changes direction, or connecting street lines
deflect from each other, by more than ten degrees, there shall be a horizontal
curve.
      (3)   To ensure adequate sight distance, minimum center line radii for
horizontal curves shall be as follows.
 
Street Type                                       Feet
Minor streets                                     150
Collector streets                                 300
Secondary arterial streets and section-line roads 500
Major arterial thoroughfares.                     750
 
      (4)   A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be provided between reverse
curves on collector streets, and at least 250 feet long on major and secondary
thoroughfares and section-line roads.
   (Q)   Street intersections.
      (1)   Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles. No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 60
degrees, except at a "Y" intersection of two minor streets.
      (2)   Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two
streets shall be prohibited, except where found to be unavoidable by the Board.
      (3)   "T" intersections of minor and collector streets are to be
encouraged.
      (4)   As far as possible, intersections with arterial streets shall be
located not less than 800 feet apart, measured from center line to center line.
      (5)   Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out
directly opposite each other or with a minimum offset of 125 feet between their
center lines.
      (6)   Property line radii at street intersections shall be 15 feet for
minor streets. Where the angle of intersection is less than 60 degrees, a
greater radii may be required by the Planning and Zoning Board.
   (R)   Excessive street widths. Streets shall not be platted to a width more
than 150% of the minimum width specified in these regulations for the type of
street involved. No street shall be platted for center island development,
except where the center islands may be desirable or necessary for traffic.
   (S)   Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks shall be required in all residential,
multiple-family, and business areas, except as specifically exempted herein
below, and along all arterial highways, and shall be constructed along that
side of any lot which faces a street between the lot line of the side of the
lot which faces the street and the swale area of right-of-way. Sidewalks shall
be constructed in conformity with those ordinances, rules, and regulations of
the city relating to the specifications for the construction of sidewalks.
      (1)   Sidewalks six feet in width shall be provided on all streets that
meet the requirements of being classified as major arterial thoroughfares of
through section-line roads and secondary arterial thoroughfares of nonthrough
section-line roads. The streets shall meet the right-of-way requirements of
division (M)(1) of this section.
      (2)   Sidewalks five feet in width shall be provided on all streets that
meet the requirements of being classified as collector and minor streets, and
for apartment, business, and industrial areas. The streets shall meet the
right-of-way requirements of division (M)(1) of this section.
      (3)   Sidewalks four feet in width shall be provided on all streets that
meet the requirements of being classified as minor streets, for one- and two-
family dwelling areas, and on marginal-access streets. The streets shall meet
the right-of-way requirements of division (M)(1) of this section.
      (4)   Sidewalk construction on internal streets in M-3, M-4 and M-
5 zoning districts may be waived by the City Commission upon (a) recommendation
from the Growth Management and Engineering Departments taking into
consideration pedestrian safety due to potential conflicts with motor vehicle,
bicycle and other traffic, and (b) an applicant's petition wherein the
applicant agrees to and actually contributes an amount equal to the estimated
cost of the sidewalk improvements (as determined by the city) to fund sidewalk
construction or maintenance by the city.
   (T)   Minimum street grade and elevation. All roads in new subdivisions
within the city shall have a minimum crown of road elevation of six feet MSL.
The longitudinal slope criteria shall be 0.3% for valley-gutter sections and
curb and gutter sections, and 0.5% for swale section. These minimum
requirements shall also apply to nonplatted subdivisions which include private
streets or ways.
   (U)   Review and approval of as-built road rock grades by the Engineering
Department prior to paving shall be part of the inspection criteria.
('69 Code, § 14-19) (Ord. 69, passed 11-5-62; Am. Ord. 455, passed 9-19-77; Am.
Ord. 500, passed 2-26-79; Am. Ord. 901, passed 9-6-89; Am. Ord. 922, passed 4-
2-90; Am. Ord. 977, passed 11-20-91; Am. Ord. 1018, passed 12-16-92; Am. Ord.
1061, passed 1-5-94; Am. Ord. 1150, passed 2-21-96; Am. Ord. 1191, passed 11-
20-96; Am. Ord. 1300, passed 4-7-99; Am. Ord. 1540, passed 4-19-06; Am. Ord.
1715, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1718, passed 5-16-12; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted
3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.33 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BLOCKS.
   (A)   The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to the following.
      (1)   The provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special
needs of the type of use contemplated.
      (2)   The zoning requirements, as to lot sizes and dimensions.
      (3)   The needs for convenient and safe access, circulation, and control
of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
      (4)   The limitations and opportunities of topographic features.
   (B)   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,320 feet nor be less than 500 feet,
unless found unavoidable by the Planning and Zoning Board.
   (C)   Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than ten feet in width, may be
required through blocks over 1,000 feet in length, where necessary in the
judgment of the Board to provide safe and convenient access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community facilities.
('69 Code, § 14-20) (Ord. 69, passed 11-5-62; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-
21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.34 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR LOTS.
   (A)   The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will
provide satisfactory and desirable building sites, properly related to
topography and to the character of surrounding development.
   (B)   Lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than specified by
applicable provisions of the zoning regulations in effect, and shall further
conform to the requirements of the regulations of this chapter.
   (C)   Lots shall be not less in size than the following.
      (1)   In R-1A zoning districts, a width of 100 feet and an area of 10,000
square feet.
      (2)   In R-1B zoning districts, a width of 75 feet and an area of 7,500
square feet.
      (3)   In R-1C zoning districts, a width of 70 feet and an area of 7,000
square feet.
      (4)   In R-1P zoning district, a width of 60 feet and an area of 6,000
square feet.
      (5)   In R-2U zoning district, a width of 60 feet and an area of 6,000
square feet.
      (6)   In R-3, R-3A, and R-3U zoning districts, a width of 60 feet and an
area of 6,000 square feet.
   (D)   Corner lots for residential use shall have an additional width,
greater than a corresponding interior lot, that may be necessary to provide
appropriate building sites which are not smaller than a minimum interior lot
provides.
   (E)   The minimum longitudinal slope criteria for side and rear lot swales
shall be 0.5% where a complete rear yard positive drainage system is provided
and shall be minimum 1% where such drainage system is not provided. The use of
rear lot swales is discouraged.
   (F)   A lot grading plan shall be submitted for review and approval as part
of the paving and drainage plan.
   (G)   The Engineering Department shall review and approve as-built lot
grades prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
('69 Code, § 14-21) (Ord. 69, passed 11-5-62; Am. Ord. 977, passed 11-20-91;
Am. Ord. 1191, passed 11-20-96; Am. Ord. 1300, passed 4-7-99; Am. Ord. 2021-02,
adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.35 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   Parking lots for industrial, commercial and recreational subdivisions
and for residential subdivisions with multi-family units or single-family
attached units shall be constructed in accordance with the following criteria:
      (1)   Parking area. The term "Parking Area" shall include the driving
lanes, parking spaces, curbing, landscaping, lighting signs, pavement markings,
guardrails and drainage.
      (2)   Sketches. The sketches entitled "Standard Parking Area Details",
City Standards R-22, R-23 and R-24 shall be a part of these minimum standards
and shall be available in the Environmental Services Division for inspection.
      (3)   Pavement construction. The parking area pavement shall be
constructed of 12 inches compacted and stabilized subgrade (minimum 40 LBR),
minimum six inches compacted limerock basecourse and minimum (1½ inches)
compacted F.D.O.T. Type S-3 asphaltic surface course (in two lifts for
residential subdivisions). No muck or other organic material shall be allowed
under the pavement. The pavement shall have a cross slope of 2% and a
longitudinal slope of 0.5% minimum for normal crown section. The pavement shall
have a crown slope of 2.0% and a longitudinal slope of 1.0% minimum for
inverted crown section on runs greater than 100 feet. The pavement shall have a
crown slope of not less than 1.0% with an average slope of not less than 2.0%
and a longitudinal slope of not less than 0.5% on runs less than 100 feet. The
run is defined as the length of pavement between high and low elevation points.
The lowest point in the pavement shall not be lower than an elevation of 6.0
feet MSL. All centerline turning radii must be minimum 50 feet.
      (4)   Curbing. All landscaped areas shall be provided with continuous
concrete curbing around them. Extruded curbing, poured on top of the pavement
shall be allowed provided that the pavement extends at least three inches
behind the curb, the ends of the asphaltic surface course and limerock
basecourse layers behind and underneath the curb are completely wrapped around
by a heavy duty moisture barrier, material and installation to be approved by
the City Engineer, and the curbing is anchored to the pavement with number four
steel bars at ten foot intervals. Otherwise, F.D.O.T. Type D 6"x18" or 16"x12"
curbing shall be provided.
      (5)   Driving lanes. Driving lanes shall have a minimum clear width of 24
feet for two-way traffic and parking spaces at 90 degree angles, 15 feet for
one-way traffic and parking spaces at 30 and 45 degree angles and 12 feet for
drive-thru/drop-off traffic. When parking spaces are provided at 60 degrees
angle, the one-way driving lane shall be minimum 18 feet clear. A 24 inches
wide white stop bar, along with 25 feet of double yellow lines, shall be
provided at the end of each driving lane.
      (6)   Parking spaces. Standard parking spaces shall be minimum nine feet
wide and 19 feet long including a three foot overhang from inside the wheel
stop. Angle parking shall be designed to provide a clear nine feet by 19 feet
rectangle for each parking space. Handicapped parking space shall be 12 feet by
19 feet minimum. Parking spaces for parallel parking shall be a minimum of nine
feet by 25 feet rectangle for each parking space. Continuous concrete curbing
or individual six feet long wheel stops shall be installed for each space.
Provide four inches wide white lines on either side of each space identifying
the limits of the space.
      (7)   Pavement markings and signs. All pavement markings and signs shall
conform to "Broward County Traffic Engineering" and "Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices" standards. All pavement markings shall be of thermoplastic
material, except the four-inch white lines on either side of a parking space
unless otherwise provided for herein. The requirement for all pavement markings
and signs to conform to "Broward County Traffic Engineering" and "Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices" standards and for all markings except the
four-inch white lines on either side of a parking space to be thermoplastic
material shall not apply to those private parking areas constructed pursuant to
a construction permit with an application date prior to December 31, 1992.
      (8)   Landscaping. All landscaping shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 153. All landscaped areas shall be provided with automatic lawn
irrigation systems.
      (9)   Lighting. Lighting shall be provided in accordance with §§
150.95(D)(4) and
154.32(H)(9).
      (10)   Drainage. All drainage lines and structures shall be installed in
accordance with South Broward Drainage District Minimum Standards, as amended
from time to time. Surface water along inverted crown shall be allowed to
travel only in straight lines. Catch basins shall be provided at each change of
direction.
      (11)   Guardrails. F.D.O.T. type guardrails shall be provided where the
edge of the parking area pavement is closer then 14 feet from the top of the
bank of a lake, canal or other waterway. The guardrail shall be installed along
the full length of such pavement, at a minimum clear distance of four feet.
      (12)   Enforcement. The city's Environmental Services Division shall be
responsible to review plans, issue construction permits, conduct inspections
and approve all parking areas in the city.
(Ord. 912, passed 12-6-89; Am. Ord. 921, passed 5-2-90; Am. Ord. 1018, passed
12-16-92; Am. Ord. 1191, passed 11-20-96; Am. Ord. 1718, passed 5-16-12; Am.
Ord. 1738, passed 9-19-12; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.36 AREA TO BE SET ASIDE FOR PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, OR THE LIKE.
   (A)   Any person who proposes to develop or subdivide any parcel or tract
within the city shall show on the plat or site development plan submitted for
approval an area to be set aside for parks, playgrounds, recreational
facilities, or other municipal purposes within the subdivision. This area shall
be equal to 6% of the entire area to be platted. The locations of these areas
shall be subject to the approval of the City Commission.
   (B)   Any person who has previously made dedications prior to May 5, 1980,
shall be given credit for the prior dedications. Any future development must
comply with the provisions of this section.
   (C)   The plat shall also show a dedication to the public by the owners of
the land involved of the area set aside for parks, playgrounds, recreational
facilities, or other municipal purposes. The effect of the dedication shall be
to vest in the city full, complete, and exclusive possession and control of the
area.
   (D)   The developer may pay the city a sum equal to the value of the land in
lieu of conveying the land as provided in division (C) of this section. This
money shall be segregated from the general funds of the city and shall be
devoted solely for the purpose and development of parks, public recreational
facilities, or other municipal purposes.
   (E)   Credits toward cash donations made pursuant to division (D) of this
section may be accepted by the city, at the city's discretion, in lieu of a
straight cash donation. A developer may receive credit, in whole, or toward
partial satisfaction of a cash donation required pursuant to division (D) of
this section by making valuable dedications of land, including easements, or
contributions of services, materials, improvements, or any combination of the
foregoing. However, the credits and the values assigned thereto must be
acceptable to the city and the total value assigned to the credits together
with any cash contributions must meet or exceed a sum equal to the value of the
land required to be dedicated pursuant to this section. The City Commission
shall have the sole authority to accept or reject the value assigned to
dedications of land, including easements, or contributions of services,
materials, improvements, or any combination of the foregoing and shall not be
bound to the values assigned by a developer, his agents, or any other party.
   (F)   The City Commission shall be the sole judge of which of the
alternatives described in division (C), (D), or (E) of this section it deems
suitable or acceptable. However, where single-family residences are to be
developed, the option of parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, or other
municipal purposes shall be mutually agreed upon by the city and the
developers.
('69 Code, § 14-23) (Ord. 114, passed 3-1-65; Am. Ord. 364, passed 5-30-74; Am.
Ord. 489, passed 1-22-79; Am. Ord. 532, passed 5-5-80; Am. Ord. 786, passed 4-
2-86)
   (G)   Any person who proposes to plat or subdivide any parcel or tract of
land of an area containing not less than five nor more than 15 acres shall,
prior to obtaining the approval of the plat or subdivision, do one of the
following. The City Commission shall be the sole judge of which of the
following alternatives it deems suitable or acceptable. The boundaries and
location of the land to be conveyed shall be subject to City Commission
approval.
      (1)   Convey to the city by warranty deed the fee simple title to a
portion of land to be subdivided equal in area to not less than 11,500 square
feet.
      (2)   Pay to the city a sum equal to the value of the land in lieu of
conveying the land as provided in division (G)(1) of this section. The value of
the land shall be based upon the fair market value of the land within the area
to be subdivided.
      (3)   Convey to the city by warranty deed in fee simple a parcel of land
located within the city and acceptable to the city.
('69 Code, § 14-24) (Ord. 114, passed 3-1-65)
   (H)   Any lands donated to the city pursuant to divisions (A) through (G) of
this section, shall be drained, demucked, and filled as needed for their
intended use for parks, recreational purposes, or other municipal purposes.
This shall be done in accordance with specifications established by the City
Engineer and ratified and accepted by the City Commission at the time that the
plat or subdivision is submitted for approval to the City Commission by the
city administration. The standards for the grade level of the land shall be
established by the City Engineer at the time that the lands are proposed to be
donated. The requirement of demucking may be waived by the city if the
developers provide the engineering to provide adequate drainage to the
property.
('69 Code, § 14-21.1) (Ord. 462, passed 2-21-78; Am. Ord. 497, passed 2-25-79;
Am. Ord. 769, passed 1-8-86; Am. Ord. 884, passed 2-1-89; Am. Ord. 2021-02,
adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.37 REVIEW, APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT BY CITY.
   (A)   The Building and Zoning Department shall review all final plats to
verify the conformity of the final plat with the preliminary plat as approved
by the Board. When the final plat is found to comply with all applicable zoning
regulations and to be in conformity with the preliminary plat as approved by
the Board, the approval of the Director of the Building and Zoning Department
shall be endorsed on the final plat.
   (B)   After approval by the Building and Zoning Director, the final plat
shall be resubmitted to the City Engineer for approval. Thereafter, provided
the plat satisfies the standards set forth in §
154.13, the final plat shall be submitted to the City Commission.
   (C)   The City Commission may, by specific action in individual cases,
authorize and direct the Director of the Zoning and Building Department to
approve a final plat which is not in conformity with a preliminary plat
approved by the Board.
('69 Code, § 14-17) (Ord. 69, passed 11-5-62; Am. Ord. 1019, passed 12-16-92;
Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed
4-21-2021)
§ 154.38 ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS BY CITY; MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Approval of improvements by the City Inspector shall not be deemed
acceptance by the city. Acceptance shall be only by action of the City
Commission, and shall be contingent upon a favorable inspection report. The
subdivider shall remain responsible for all maintenance of any improvements for
a period of not less than 12 months following completion of construction of the
improvement. The guarantee bond, as required in §
154.15, shall provide for reimbursement to the city for any maintenance expense
incurred by the city in correcting or curing any defects in the improvements
installed or constructed by the subdivider or upon the failure of the
subdivider or his contractors to perform the work after due notice. The
subdivider shall be allowed no less than 15 days after notice to comply with
the notice. An improvement shall not be accepted until all improvement and
maintenance work is complete.
   (B)   Acceptance of an improvement for the city shall be solely by a
resolution of the City Commission upon recommendation of the various
departments that the improvements are in good repair and in accordance to city
standards and specifications.
   (C)   Acceptance of an improvement by appropriate City Commission action
shall constitute release of the performance bond.
('69 Code, § 14-27) (Ord. 73, passed 3-1-62; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21;
sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.39 CERTAIN PROPERTY TO BE REPLATTED.
   All lands that are a division of a larger parcel of platted property must be
replatted in accordance with the requirements set forth by the city in §§
154.30 through
154.36.
(Ord. 761, passed 11-13-85; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
CONSTRUCTION AND USE STANDARDS
§ 154.45 PERMIT, FEE REQUIRED.
   The owner of the platted lands shall obtain a permit from the Building and
Zoning Department before commencing construction and paving of streets, and
shall pay a permit fee in accordance with the schedule in §
150.43.
('69 Code, § 14-26) (Ord. 73, passed 3-1-62; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21;
sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.46 STREETS, ALLEYS, AND THE LIKE TO BE PAVED.
   The streets, alleys, and rights-of-way, however designated, shown on the
plat, shall be paved in accordance with the city's specifications contained in
§
150.40.
('69 Code, § 14-25) (Ord. 73, passed 3-1-62; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21;
sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.47 UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC UTILITIES; WAIVER OF REGULATIONS BY
CITY.
   (A)   In new residential subdivisions and mobile home parks platted after
the effective date of this section, all wires, cables, and equipment for the
transmission of electrical impulses, sounds, voices, or communications shall be
installed underground, except as provided herein. ('69 Code, § 14-29)
   (B)   All facilities referred to in division (A) of this section shall be
installed underground in such a manner so that they shall not constitute a
hazard to public safety and shall not be visible from the land surface.
      (1)   Cost. The cost of installation shall be borne by the developer or
the owner of the land being developed or subdivided, or by the utility company
installing the facility or furnishing the utility service in keeping with
standard utility company policies.
      (2)   Permits. No building permit shall be issued to an applicant until
the Building and Zoning Department has been furnished evidence that
arrangements have been made for each of the utilities involved for the
installment of underground utility services.
('69 Code, § 14-30)
   (C)   The City Commission may waive the requirements of underground utility
installation of all or part of any utility transmission facilities in such
cases where the cost will be substantially in excess of above ground or
conventional installation or where topographical or surface conditions may make
such installation impossible or create a severe hardship on the subdivider or
developer. The developer or utility seeking a waiver of the requirement of
underground utility installation or relief from the provisions of the
requirements of this chapter may petition the City Commission for such relief.
The petition shall set forth supporting engineering data, cost estimates, and
any other information which would substantiate the claim for relief. The
petition shall be filed with the City Engineer who shall proceed to investigate
the matter set forth in the petition and may request further information should
he feel it to be necessary. The City Engineer, after examining the petition and
making an independent determination of the situation shall submit his
recommendation to the City Commission. The City Commission may then conduct
hearings as it deems fit to determine whether it shall grant the relief
requested or grant any other and further relief it may deem prudent under the
circumstances.
('69 Code, § 14-32)
(Ord. 223, passed 3-16-70; Am. Ord. 898, passed 8-16-89; Am. Ord. 2021-02,
adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.48 PRIMARY ELECTRICAL FEEDERS, CABLES, OR WIRES.
   The primary feeders, cables, and wires carrying in excess of 7,000 volts
single phase or 12,000 volts three phase may be suspended above the surface.
These facilities, including the necessary poles, which shall be constructed of
reinforced concrete shall be placed or installed in such a manner so as not to
be unsightly. A currently existing wooden pole may be replaced by another
wooden pole with the approval of the City Manager, his designee, or the City
Commissioner. All other electrical transmission facilities, with the exception
of appurtenances thereto such as transformer boxes, pedestal-mounted terminal
boxes, meter cabinets, and street lighting poles and fixtures, shall be placed
or installed under the surface of the land.
('69 Code, § 14-31) (Ord. 223, passed 3-16-70; Am. Ord. 898, passed 8-16-89;
Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed
4-21-2021)
§ 154.49 ADULT SUBDIVISIONS; SALE, RENTAL, OR LEASE TO FAMILY WITH CHILDREN.
   No person shall sell his property to another in violation of a valid
restrictive covenant against the sale of the property to persons who have a
child or children living with them. No person shall rent or lease his property
to persons who have a child or children living with them when his property lies
within a subdivision, that is presently designed, advertised, and used as an
exclusive adult subdivision.
('69 Code, § 14-33(a)) (Ord. 418, passed 4-5-76; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-
17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021) Penalty, see §
154.99
EXCAVATION IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 154.60 TITLE OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This body of regulations shall be known as the "Minimum standards applicable
to all excavation operations in all public rights-of-way and ingress/egress
easements dedicated for the use of pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the
corporate limits of the City of Pembroke Pines, Florida."
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.61 INTENT OF STANDARDS.
   (A)   The intent of these standards is to provide for the safe and orderly
use and development of public rights-of-way in the city, to the end that the
needs and interests of the public are served as fully and efficiently as
possible.
   (B)   The term right-of-way shall include all rights-of-way dedicated for
public use and all ingress/egress easements dedicated for the use of pedestrian
and vehicular traffic.
   (C)   The regulations embodied herein have been made as broad as possible to
serve as standards of quality to maintain the necessary uniformity in the
utilization of the public traffic corridors.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.62 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   A permit is required for all excavation operations in public rights-
of-way or ingress/egress easements dedicated for the use of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, such permits shall only be issued by the Engineering
Department. The permit shall expire if permitted work is not commenced within
90 calendar days.
   (B)   No excavation shall be started until a permit for the proposed
installation has been granted by the Engineering Department. Violation of this
subchapter shall be punishable as provided in §
154.99.
   (C)   Permits will not be required for work inside of existing manholes.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.63 EMERGENCY WORK.
   (A)   None of the above permit procedures shall apply to emergency repair
work. Emergency repair work is defined as work which must be done immediately
upon discovery, in order to safeguard the public from immediate danger to life
or limb, to safeguard public health or welfare, or to restore interrupted
utility services. In the event of an emergency as defined above, repair work
may be started without a permit upon verbal notification being given to the
Engineering Department. If the Engineering Department offices are closed, then
notification must be given as early as possible on the next regular work day.
   (B)   After the emergency repair is completed and the right-of-way is
restored, a record location/restoration drawing must be submitted to the
Engineering Department. Work that can be scheduled ahead of time is not
emergency work.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.64 PERMIT FEE.
   Unless otherwise provided for by state law, permit fees shall be as follows:
   (A)   The permit fee to open cut road in dedicated public rights-of-way
shall be $100 per linear foot of the open cut of the pavement.
   (B)   Permit fee to dig trenches, pits, ditches and other excavation
operations outside the roadway pavement to install or repair utility lines, or
to install pipe underneath the roadway by bore and jack method shall be as
follows:
 
Linear Feet Cost
0 - 100     $100
101 - 500   200
501 - 1,000 250
over 1,000  250 plus .10 per linear feet over 1,000 linear feet
 
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.65 AVAILABILITY OF APPROVED PLANS AND PERMIT.
   A set of plans and city's permit for the project, bearing the Engineering
Department approval stamp must be located on the job site whenever work is in
progress.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.66 OWNERSHIP OF FACILITIES.
   All facilities within public rights-of-way must be owned and maintained by a
public service utility or franchisee or by a political entity competent to
function within the state. Facilities shall remain the liability of the last
operating entity until removed.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.67 UNDERGROUND FACILITIES.
   All underground and in-ground facilities in public rights-of-way and
ingress/egress easements dedicated for the use of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic shall be designed and installed so as to safely sustain any vehicular
loads that might be placed upon them.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.68 UTILITY CROSSINGS.
   Each underground utility crossing of paved roads shall be made by the "bore
and jack" method, as approved by the Engineering Department, unless an
alternate method is approved by the Engineering Department. Proposed open cuts
shall be shown on the drawings submitted for approval.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.69 DRIVING PIPE UNDER EXISTING PAVEMENTS (BORE AND JACK METHOD).
   When a pipe is driven through the earth under pavement, jetting, or the use
of air or water forced into direct contact with the earth shall be prohibited.
Pipe driving shall leave no voids in the underlying earth. This requirement
does not prohibit the use of air hammers for driving.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.70 NOTICE REQUIRED.
   Twenty-four hours minimum notice must be given to the Engineering Department
prior to the start of excavation, and when scheduling any required tests and/or
inspections.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.71 INSPECTIONS, TESTS AND CERTIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All inspections and tests necessary to insure construction in
conformity with the plans and specifications as approved by the Engineering
Department shall be made by or under the direct supervision of an engineer of
record, his representative or an engineer registered in the state, unless
exempt under state law.
   (B)   The engineer of record or his representative shall carefully observe
and inspect all portions of the permitted installation sufficiently to
determine that the contractor has substantially complied with all approved
plans and specifications related thereto, and the engineer of record shall so
certify at the completion of work.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.72 SUPERVISION OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The permittee shall provide sufficient competent supervision while work is
in progress to ensure that the work is being performed properly and in a safe
and orderly manner.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.73 INTERRUPTION AND RESTORATION OF SERVICES.
   Adequate provision shall be made for the safe, continuous operation of any
utilities, drainage facilities or water courses encountered during
construction, unless other approved arrangements have been made. The operators
of all such services and all structures altered or damaged during construction
shall be notified immediately, and all such services and structures shall be
satisfactorily restored immediately.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.74 DISPOSAL OF WATER FROM EXCAVATION.
   Adequate provision shall be made for the satisfactory disposal of water
resulting from de- watering or pumping operation or from encounter with water
in any manner. The method of handling or disposing of such water shall be in
accordance with applicable regulations of all agencies having jurisdiction
including, but not limited to, the State Health Department, State Department of
Environmental Regulation and Broward County Water Resources Management
Division.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.75 MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC.
   (A)   When a plan is required for maintenance of traffic, the contractor
shall adhere to such plan as approved, in strict accordance with the provisions
of the Traffic Control Manual, throughout the construction period. Temporary
measures must be taken, if necessary, to provide a minimum of one lane of
traffic in each direction on each affected road at all times, unless specific
permission is obtained from the Engineering Department to deviate from this
requirement. Contractor must also provide for vehicular access to each home and
place of business or assembly abutting the affected right-of-way.
   (B)   The right-of-way must be maintained by the contractor in safe and
driveable condition until the permitted work is complete and the right-of-way
is restored and accepted for maintenance by the Engineering Department.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.76 JOB SITE SAFETY.
   All permitted work in rights-of-way must be done in strict accordance with
the provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
Regulations, and all other applicable codes.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.77 REMOVAL OF PAVEMENT, DRIVES, SIDEWALKS, CURBS, AND GUTTERS.
   Edges of permanent type pavement shall be pre- cut straight, clean and
square beyond any damaged base area including well point locations. Utility
cuts in existing pavement shall be restored as indicated on City Standards R-
26, R-27, R-28, R-29 and R-30 attached herewith. When the removal of sidewalks,
curbs or gutters is necessary for construction, they shall be removed in full
sections or a minimum of five feet in length, and all broken edges cut smooth
by use of a suitable power saw or other appropriate means.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.78 DISPOSITION OF EXCAVATED MATERIALS.
   Broken pavement and other debris shall be removed from the site as soon as
practical, unless otherwise directed by the Engineering Department. Excavated
materials shall not be stockpiled in the rights-of-way during construction
without specific approval of the Engineering Department. All excess material
shall be removed from the work site and disposed of legally at the permittee's
expense.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.79 BRACING AND SHORING.
   Sheeting, bracing, and other approved materials shall be used as required to
support the sides of the excavation. Sheeting, bracing and other approved
materials shall be used to prevent movement which can in any way, alter the
grade or disturb the facility being installed, diminish the width of
excavation, delay the work, or otherwise endanger personnel, adjacent pavement
or other structures. Safety procedures shall be followed and adequate
protection shall be furnished to all personnel as required by OSHA. All
sheeting or bracing which is not left in place shall be removed in a manner
that will not endanger the work, personnel or adjacent structures.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.80 TRAFFIC AND UTILITY CONTROLS.
   Excavation for pipe, structures or cable laying operations shall be
conducted in a manner that will cause the least interruption to traffic. Fire
hydrants, valve boxes, fire and police call boxes shall be left unobstructed
and accessible during the construction period. When such obstruction is
unavoidable, it must be held to the minimum, and the contractor shall give
immediate notice to the city and all other affected parties.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.81 BACKFILLING AND COMPACTION IN ROADWAY.
   Backfill material shall be placed in layers not to exceed eight inches in
thickness, with each layer carefully compacted to 100% of maximum density, per
American Association for State Highway and Testing Offices (AASFTO) T-99-C and
each layer shall be tested, before placing succeeding layers. Swale area need
only be compacted to 98% of maximum density, per AASHTO (T-99-C). Density tests
shall be taken in each lane and shoulders at intervals of 200 feet or less, as
approved by the Engineering Department.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.82 PITS AND TRENCHES IN ROADWAY.
   In dry trenches, backfill materials shall be placed evenly and carefully
around and over pipe in 12-inch maximum layers, each layer being thoroughly
compacted, until one foot of cover exists above the crown of the pipe. The
remaining trench portion up to the pavement base shall be back-filled in layers
not exceeding eight inches with each layer being compacted to 100% and tested
at intervals of 100 feet maximum before placing succeeding layers. Swale area
shall be compacted to 98% of maximum. Testing shall be conducted by the City
Inspector as necessary. All materials shall be able to pass through a six-inch
ring. Laboratory testing for the optimum moisture and maximum soil density
shall conform to the specifications of AASHTO T-99-C (Standard Proctor).
Restoration of the roadway shall be in accordance with City Standards R-26, R-
27, R-28, R-29 and R-20 attached herewith.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.83 NARROW TRENCHES IN ROADWAY.
   Narrow trenches, not greater than six inches in width, containing not more
than two three-inch cables or one four-inch pipe or conduit may be backfilled
with clean sand to a point two inches above the cable or conduit. The remainder
of the trench shall be filled to a point two to three inches below the finished
roadway surface with a 1 to 10 mixture of Portland cement and sand, placed wet
and allowed to set for 12 hours. The top three inches of the trench shall be
removed within 24 hours an permanent asphalt patch shall be placed and rolled
in.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.84 RESTORATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The entire work area utilized for the performance of permitted work
shall be restored by the permittee to the condition that existed before work
began, except as required by the nature of the permitted work and as shown on
the approved plans.
   (B)   Paved sections shall conform in type, shape, elevation and texture
with adjacent paved areas and shall be of at least equal quality. Design mixes
for flexible pavements shall be subject to approval by the Engineering
Department. All damaged or undermined areas of existing pavement, nor
previously removed, shall be removed and restored in the specified manner.
Where pavement is removed for installation, maintenance or removal of any
underground facility, restoration shall be in accordance with City Standards R-
26, R-27, R-28, R-29 and R-30, attached herewith. Equipment shall not travel
over loose rock fragments or other hard material lying on sections of pavement
which are not to be removed.
   (C)   Swale areas, medians, sidewalks, driveways, and similar structures
shall be restored in kind to a condition equal to or better than that which was
disturbed.
   (D)   All benchmarks and permanent reference survey markers disturbed during
the course of construction shall be replaced at an equal or better level of
precision, at the permittee's expense, by a professional land surveyor
registered in the state.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.85 RECORD DRAWINGS.
   (A)   When applicable, upon completion of construction and prior to final
inspection or commencement of any bonded maintenance period, the engineer of
record shall furnish to the Engineering Department, two sets of "Record"
drawings.
   (B)   The permit drawing may become the record drawing if the actual work
performed conforms 100% to the permit drawing. In such case, a statement from
the engineer of record must be declared on the drawing.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.86 ABANDONED FACILITIES.
   All exposed facilities and such underground facilities as may be designated
by the Engineering Department, that are abandoned within the public right-of-
way, shall be removed by the owner of the facility unless other provision is
approved by the Engineering Department. An abandoned facility allowed to remain
in the right-of-way shall continue to be the responsibility of the owner or
operator by whom last used. Such owner or operator shall be liable for all
costs arising from the presence of the abandoned facility in the right-of-way.
The section does not apply to facilities required to remain in place by the
Engineering Department.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.87 PROCEDURE FOR RESTORATION OF FLEXIBLE PAVEMENT.
   The procedure for backfill and pavement restoration shall be as follows.
Density test of compacted fill, backfill and/or base shall be taken at each
six-inch lift, prior to placement of the succeeding lift of material according
to the following schedule.
   (A)   For any road crossing in which the road is cut and restored one lane
at a time, one density test shall be taken in each lane at each six-inch lift.
   (B)   For any road crossing in which the road is cut and restored two lanes
at a time, densities shall be tested in one lane per lift, alternating lanes
with each lift.
   (C)   For any road crossing in which the road is cut and restored three
lanes at a time, densities shall be tested in two locations per six-inch lift,
staggering locations with each successive lift.
   (D)   Cuts across roads shall not be left open overnight unless absolutely
necessary. Trenches shall be backfilled and a temporary asphalt applied to make
a smooth level patch. The trenches shall then be excavated the next day and
permanent backfill and pavement installed in accordance with these standards.
The only exception will be when the installed facility must be tested before
the road is restored. In these cases, the permanent restoration must be
performed on the day of testing or the next day.
   (E)   When the installation parallels the roadway and damages the pavement,
the density tests shall be made every 100 l.f. at six-inch layers, with test
locations staggered 25 inches each lift. A copy of all Proctor and Field
Density Tests shall be furnished to the Engineering Department.
   (F)   Roadway base material shall be compacted to a minimum of 98% of
maximum dry density, as determined by AASHTO T-180 (Modified Proctor Test).
Subgrade material under paved areas shall by compacted to a minimum of 100% of
maximum dry density. Shoulder area and swale area beyond shoulders shall be
compacted to a minimum of 98% of maximum dry density, as determined by AASHTO
T-99-C (Standard Proctor Test).
   (G)   Restoration of striping, signing and signalization devices shall be
accomplished immediately after pavement restoration is completed.
(Ord. 972, passed 11-6-91; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, including agents, servants, and employees, found guilty of
violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished as provided in §
10.99. Each day that a violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense. The imposition of any fine or penalty shall not be construed
as excusing or permitting the continuance of any violation of this chapter.
('69 Code, § 14-28) (Ord. 73, passed 3-1-62)
   (B)   A person who sells, rents, or leases his property in violation of §
154.49 shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment
for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both.
('69 Code, § 14-33(b)) (Ord. 418, passed 4-5-76; Am. Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-
17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
APPENDIX: TYPICAL WATERWAY BANK SLOPES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6669.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 3-3-21)
CHAPTER 155: LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Section
Article 1: Purpose
   
155.100   Title
   
155.101   Authority
   
155.102   General applicability, annexation and vested rights
   
155.103   Consistency with comprehensive plan
   
155.104   Purpose
   
155.105   Interpretation
   
155.106   Severability
   
155.107   Use of property in government capacity
   
155.108   Effective date
Article 2: Definitions
   
155.200   Purpose
   
155.201   Rules of construction
   
155.202   Terms not defined
   
155.203   Definitions
   
155.204   Acronyms
Article 3: Administration
   
155.300   Purpose and applicability
   
155.301   Development applications
   
155.302   Notice requirements
   
155.303   Review and decision-making authorities
   
155.304   Quasi-judicial proceedings
   
155.305   Zoning in progress
   
155.306   Application submittal procedures
   
155.307   Staff review and action
   
155.308   Post decision actions and limitations
   
155.309   Application withdrawal process
   
155.310   Application refunds
   
155.311   Application appeal process
   
155.312   Application deferral process
   
155.313   Enforcement
Article 4: Zoning Districts
   
155.400   General provisions
   
155.401   Zoning map
   
155.402   District classifications
   
155.403   Zoning districts comparative table
Agriculture, Community Facilities and Recreation
   
155.410   Agriculture (A)
   
155.411   Agriculture Excavation (A-E)
   
155.412   Resource Recovery (R-R)
   
155.413   Utility (U)
   
155.414   Community Facility (CF)
   
155.415   Recreation (REC)
Residential Districts
   
155.420   Residential Estate (R-E)
   
155.421   Residential Single-family (R-1A, R-1B, R-1C)
   
155.422   Residential Single-family Zero Lot Line (R-1Z)
   
155.423   Residential Mobile Home (R-MH)
   
155.424   Residential Two-family (R-2)
   
155.425   Residential Townhouse (R-TH)
   
155.426   Residential Multi-family (R-MF)
Commercial Districts
   
155.430   Neighborhood Business (B-1)
   
155.431   Community Business (B-2)
   
155.432   General Business (B-3)
   
155.433   Commercial (C-1)
   
155.434   Professional Office (PO)
Industrial Districts
   
155.440   Industrial-Light (I-L)
   
155.441   Industrial-Medium (I-M)
   
155.442   Industrial-Heavy (I-H)
Planned Districts
   
155.450   Development procedures for planned districts
   
155.451   Planned unit development (PUD)
   
155.452   Planned development small lot (PD-SL)
   
155.453   Mixed use development (MXD)
   
155.454   Planned commercial development (PCD)
   
155.455   Planned industrial development (PID)
   
155.456   Hospital District (HD)
Article 5: Use Regulations
   
155.500   Overview of use regulations
   
155.501   Permitted use table
Specific Use Regulations
   
155.509   Child care centers
   
155.510   Domesticated livestock and poultry
   
155.511   Dry cleaners
   
155.512   Electronic nicotine device retail sales
   
155.513   Hotels
   
155.514   Industrial use separation from residential property
   
155.515   Junkyards
   
155.516   Medical marijuana dispensing facilities
   
155.517   Microbreweries, microwineries, and brewpubs
   
155.518   Mobile food dispensing vehicles
   
155.519   Outdoor dining
   
155.520   Outdoor display and sales
   
155.521   Pawn shops
   
155.522   Pet hotels, dog daycare
   
155.523   Recreational uses
   
155.524   Religious institution, house of worship
   
155.525   Resource recovery
   
155.526   Schools
   
155.527   Self-service laundry/laundromat
   
155.528   Service stations
   
155.529   Sign shop/manufacturing
   
155.530   Special residential facilities
   
155.531   Storage of rental vehicles
   
155.532   Tattoo parlors
   
155.533   Telecommunication towers and antennas
   
155.534   Seasonal merchandise storage
Nonconforming Uses
   
155.535   Scope, application of regulations
   
155.536   Existing uses
   
155.537   Extension of nonconforming use
    
155.538   Change of nonconforming use
   
155.539   Discontinuance, abandonment
   
155.540   Continuance
   
155.541   Change in zoning classification or regulation
   
155.542   Unlawful use not authorized
   
155.543   Illegal use
   
155.544   Nuisances prohibited
   
155.550   Limitations of uses
Article 6: Development Standards
   
155.600   General provisions
Access, Loading and Parking
   
155.601   General - access, loading and parking
   
155.602   Access to gated communities for emergency vehicles
   
155.603   General - off-street loading and parking
   
155.604   Identification of facilities; required surface
   
155.605   Minimum off-street parking requirements
   
155.606   Parking space dimensions
   
155.607   Bicycle parking facility required
   
155.608   Short-term parking
   
155.609   Non-concurrent parking
   
155.610   Off-street loading
   
155.611   Drive-thru stacking spaces
   
155.612   Valet parking regulations
   
155.613   Commercial vehicle parking
   
155.614   Electric vehicle parking
   
155.615   Recreational vehicles - parking
Accessory Buildings and Structures
   
155.620   General - accessory buildings and structures
   
155.621   Supplemental regulations for accessory buildings and structures
   
155.622   Docks
   
155.623   Trash and recycling facilities
   
155.624   House trailers
   
155.625   Portable storage units
   
155.626   Sculptures and statues
   
155.627   Nonconforming structures
Bufferyards, Encroachment and Screening
   
155.630   General - bufferyards and encroachment
   
155.631   Minimum bufferyard requirement - non-residential
   
155.632   Bufferyard between residential and non-residential
   
155.633   Pines Boulevard Corridor - bufferyard
   
155.634   Setback encroachment regulations
   
155.635   Encroachment of accessory building and structures within easements
   
155.636   Height limitation encroachment specifications
   
155.637   Screening of service and mechanical equipment
Development Design Guidelines
   
155.640   General - development design guidelines
   
155.641   General - commercial outbuildings
   
155.642   Commercial outbuilding standards
   
155.643   General - commercial outparcels
   
155.644   Commercial outparcel standards
   
155.645   Guiding principles - regional mall outparcel development
   
155.646   Site development standards for regional mall outparcels
   
155.647   Use restrictions - regional mall outparcels
   
155.648   Architectural compatibility - regional mall outparcels
   
155.649   Scope of application - regional mall
   
155.650   Multi-family - apartments and condominiums
   
155.651   Townhouses
   
155.652   Zero lot line homes
   
155.653   Open space regulations
Fences, Walls and Hedges
   
155.655   Fences, walls, and hedges
Landscaping
   
155.656   Purpose - landscaping
   
155.657   Landscape plan requirements
   
155.658   Landscape plan review and acceptance procedures
   
155.659   Issuance of certificate of occupancy or final landscape inspection
approval
   
155.660   Landscape parameters - general considerations
   
155.661   Minimum landscape requirements - all properties
   
155.662   Specific minimum landscape requirements
   
155.663   Parking islands
   
155.664   Plant material design and installation standards
   
155.665   Non-living durable landscape material design and installation
standards
   
155.666   Irrigation standards
Landscaping - Tree Preservation
   
155.668   General intent standards and duties - landscaping
   
155.669   Maintenance standards - all properties
   
155.670   Duties of property owner for general landscape maintenance
   
155.671   Tree maintenance companies working in Pembroke Pines
   
155.672   Improper tree maintenance
   
155.673   Remedial measures for tree abuse by property owners
   
155.674   Tree removal or relocation permit
   
155.675   Standards for tree removal or relocation permit issuance
   
155.676   Conditions for tree removal and relocation permits
   
155.677   Canopy tree and palm replacement
   
155.678   Relocation of trees
   
155.679   Enforcement - landscaping
   
155.680   Mitigation plan
   
155.681   Landscape Fund
   
155.682   Exemptions - landscaping
Lighting
   
155.685   Purpose and intent - lighting
   
155.686   General lighting standards
   
155.687   Non-residential lighting standards
   
155.688   Outdoor dining and retail lighting
   
155.689   Lighting of residential common areas
   
155.690   Lighting of natural areas, preserves and environmentally sensitive
areas
   
155.691   Prohibited lighting
   
155.692   Exemptions - lighting
Signs
   
155.695   Purpose - signs
   
155.696   General standards - signs
   
155.697   Location - signs
   
155.698   Sign plans
   
155.699   Permanent signs
   
155.6100   Permanent signs - supplemental regulations
   
155.6101   Temporary signs
   
155.6102   Temporary signs - supplemental regulations
   
155.6103   Signs on rights-of-way and public property
   
155.6104   Nonconforming signs
   
155.6105   Exempt signs
   
155.6106   Permit and fee required; exemptions - signs
   
155.6107   Prohibited signs
   
155.6108   Inspection of signs by city; signs in violation
Supplemental Site Development Standards
   
155.6110   Supplemental site development standards - general
   
155.6111   Elevation of filled land
   
155.6112   Excavation
   
155.6113   Floor area ratio - non-residential
   
155.6114   Relation of grade of floors to crown of street
   
155.6115   Residential use in non-residential districts
   
155.6116   Sewage disposal
   
155.6117   Waterways
Sustainability
   
155.6120   Purpose and intent - sustainability
   
155.6121   Applicability - sustainability
   
155.6122   Site plan submittal requirements - sustainability
   
155.6123   Sustainable options
ARTICLE 1: PURPOSE
§ 155.100 TITLE.
   This Code shall be officially entitled the "Land Development Code of the
City of Pembroke Pines, Florida", and may be referred to as the "Pembroke Pines
Land Development Code," the "Land Development Code," the "LDC," or "this Code".
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.101 AUTHORITY.
   This Code is enacted pursuant to the requirements and authority of F.S. Ch.
163, Pt. II (the "Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development
Regulation Act"), the general powers confirmed in F.S. Ch. 166 ("Home Rules
Powers Act") and the Constitution of the State.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-21)
§ 155.102 GENERAL APPLICABILITY, ANNEXATION AND VESTED RIGHTS.
   (A)   General applicability. Unless otherwise permitted as an exception
under division (C) below or allowed to continue as a nonconforming use, all
existing, proposed and new development and uses of land in the city shall
conform strictly to the provisions of this Code. Except as expressly provided
in this Code, no development or use of land shall be undertaken without prior
approval and issuance of a development order pursuant to the provisions of this
LDC. The fact that a development order, permit or decision has been issued by
an officer or employee with ostensible authority over the interpretation or
enforcement of this Code shall not stop or otherwise prevent the city from
strict enforcement of the provisions of this Code. If provisions of this LDC
are inconsistent with one another, or with provisions of other adopted codes or
ordinances of the city, or with provisions of applicable county, state, and
federal laws, the more restrictive provision shall govern to the extent
permitted by law unless the terms of the more restrictive provision specify
otherwise. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater
restrictions, or more stringent controls.
   (B)   Annexation agreements. Nothing in this LDC is intended to supersede,
annul, or interfere with any rights, covenant, or other agreements provided for
in any currently effective annexation agreement between the city and any
private parties, but such annexation agreements shall not excuse any failure to
comply with any applicable provisions of this LDC.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   The provisions of this LDC and any amendments hereto, shall not
affect existing development which has been previously approved and is otherwise
exempted in accordance with the provisions of this division, or the
nonconformity section of this Code.
      (2)   The provisions of this LDC shall not affect development, or
portions thereof, which has gained a vested right to complete development
pursuant to Florida law, prior to the effective date of this Code. Upon
completion of such vested development, or portions thereof, each non-vested and
vested development project with regard to future development expansion or
redevelopment will be subject to the then currently effective provisions of
this Code. If a vested right expires, is revoked, or otherwise becomes invalid,
any subsequent development of the site shall be subject to the procedures and
standards of this Code.
      (3)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Code, properties
zoned prior to the effective date of this Code shall be permitted to complete
development of the portion(s) of the project having a valid and current master
site plan that includes specific land development standards adopted by the City
Commission. If no such master site plan exists, or such plan has expired, such
development shall conform to the provisions of this Code.
      (4)   A development application accepted as complete under the prior
regulations, but still pending a final decision as of the effective date of
this Code, shall be reviewed and decided, at the applicant's option as stated
in writing, wholly under the development regulations in effect when the
application was accepted, or wholly under this Code (but not under a mix of
provisions from both sets of regulations).
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.103 CONSISTENCY WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to authorize development that
is inconsistent with the city's comprehensive plan, as may be amended from time
to time.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.104 PURPOSE.
   The purpose and intent of the LDC is to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare, and to implement the goals, objectives, and policies in
the City of Pembroke Pines Comprehensive Plan. More specifically, the LDC is
intended to do the following:
   (A)   Establish comprehensive, consistent, effective, and equitable
standards, processes and procedures for the review and approval of development
which implement the comprehensive plan and other adopted plans, respect the
right of landowners, and consider the interest of the city's citizens.
   (B)   Enhance the quality of life of all residents and property owners of
the city.
   (C)   Establish rules of procedure for land development approvals.
   (D)   Promote the orderly development of land within the city.
   (E)   Strengthen the value of land, buildings and resources, by protecting
landowners from adverse impacts of adjoining developments.
   (F)   Support economic development that is consistent with the city's
mission.
   (G)   Provide diverse housing opportunities.
   (H)   Support and encourage green building practices.
   (I)   Provide for safe and efficient traffic circulation of pedestrian and
vehicles.
   (J)   Establish an overall sense of place for the city.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.105 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   The interpretation and application of the provisions of this Code will
be construed broadly to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the city, its residents, and businesses.
   (B)   Responsibility for interpretation. In the event that any question
arises concerning the application of regulations, performance standards,
definitions, development criteria, or any other provision of this Code, the
Director of the Planning and Economic Development Department shall be
responsible for interpretation and shall look to the city comprehensive plan
for guidance. Responsibility for interpretation by the Director shall be
limited to standards, regulations, and requirements of this Code, but shall not
be construed to include interpretation of any technical codes adopted by
reference in this Code, not be construed as overriding the responsibilities
given to any commission, board or official named in other sections or articles
of this Code.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.106 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any provision of
this Code, such judgment shall not affect the validity of any other provision
of this Code.
   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates the application of
any provision of this Code to a development, such judgment shall not affect the
application of that provision to any other development not specifically
included in the judgment.
   (C)   If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any condition
attached to a development approval granted under this Code, such judgment shall
not affect the validity of any other condition attached to the approval that is
not specifically included in the judgment.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.107 USE OF PROPERTY IN GOVERNMENT CAPACITY.
   The provisions of this Code are not intended, and shall not be construed, to
preclude the use of any property by the city in any city government capacity,
function, or purpose.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.108 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The effective date of the Land Development Code of the City of Pembroke
Pines, Florida is March 22, 2021.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
§ 155.200 PURPOSE.
   For the purposes of this LDC, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the meanings attached to them, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning or where a specific definition is contained within an
individual article or section.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.201 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the interpretation of the language of this LDC, the rules set out in this
section shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with
an ordinance or resolution of the city.
   (A)   Generally. Terms used in these regulations, unless otherwise
specifically provided, shall have the commonly understood meanings, per
definition contained within the LDC or the meaning reasonably ascribed to them
by the City Commission.
   (B)   Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be performed
and completed shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last
day. If the deadline or required date of action is a Friday, Saturday, Sunday
or legal holiday recognized by the city, then the deadline or required date of
action shall be the next day that is not a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, or holiday
observed by the city.
   (C)   Administrative delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this
LDC requires any city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty,
these land development regulations shall be construed to authorize delegation
to professional-level subordinates to perform the required act or duty unless
the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. Following any
reorganization of the structure or duties of existing departments, authority
shall be delegated to the appropriate successor department or division.
   (D)   Gender. Words importing the masculine or feminine gender shall be
construed to include all genders.
   (E)   Non-technical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language. Technical
words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a particular and
appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such
meaning.
   (F)   Number. A word importing the singular number may extend and be applied
to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing, unless the
context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. The use of the
plural number shall be deemed to include any single person or thing.
   (G)   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The words "shall," "must," and
"will" are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or duty to comply
with the particular provision. The words "may" and "should" are permissive in
nature.
   (H)   Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past or present, unless the context of the particular usage clearly
indicates otherwise.
   (I)   Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be
construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether
by printing, electronic or otherwise.
   (J)   Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, unless otherwise
indicated.
   (K)   Day. The word "day" shall mean a calendar day, unless otherwise
indicated.
   (L)   Headings, illustrations, and text. In the event of a conflict or
inconsistency between the text of this Code and any heading, caption, figure,
illustration, table, or map, the text shall control.
   (M)   Lists and examples. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of
items or examples that use terms such as "for example," "including," and "such
as," or similar language are intended to provide examples and are not
exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
   (N)   References to other regulations/publications. Whenever reference is
made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, it shall be
construed as a reference to the most recent edition of such regulation,
resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, unless otherwise
specifically stated.
   (O)   Public officials and agencies. All public officials, bodies, and
agencies to which references are made are those of the City of Pembroke Pines,
Florida, unless otherwise indicated.
   (P)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
      (1)   "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or
events apply; and
      (2)   "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events apply.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.202 TERMS NOT DEFINED.
   Words and phrases inherent to the regulation and legislation of land uses
and the land development process in the state, and that are not defined below,
shall use those definitions contained in the applicable sections of the Florida
Statutes. If said term is not defined in the Florida state statutes, the
Director shall provide a definition.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.203 DEFINITIONS.
   ABRASIVE PRODUCTS: A material used for the shaping or finishing of ceramics,
wood, and other previously prepared materials.
   ACCENT PLANTS: Singular plant material that enhances landscape value that
might include, but not limited, to colorful flowers, colorful vegetation, and
distinctive form.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building or structure on the same lot as a principal
or primary building including roofed structures such as gazebos, pergolas,
sheds, Chickee Huts and the like.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: An ancillary or secondary living unit, that has a
separate kitchen, bathroom, and sleeping area, existing either within the same
structure, or on the same lot, as the primary dwelling unit. Accessory dwelling
units are commonly referred to as granny or mother-in law flats and are also
sometimes referred to as accessory apartments, garage apartments, carriage
houses, and backyard cottages.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A non-habitable structure incidental to the primary
building on a lot.
   ACCESSORY USE: A use that is located on the same lot as the principal use;
contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of the principal use.
   ADDITION: Any walled or roofed extension that increases the floor area,
number of stories or height of a building or structure.
   ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW: The process by which staff of the Planning and
Economic Development Department consider modifications to an existing site
development plan.
   ADULT DAYCARE: A use in which non-medical care, supervision, planned
activities, and guidance is provided on a regular basis in a non-
institutionalized setting for part of the 24-hour day to three or more adults
18 years or older, not related to the owner or caregiver who require
specialized activities and attention.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: Without limitation, any place of business
which advertises or conducts activities for compensation that is designated or
intended to establish a sexual or social communication, engagement or
relationship, whether on or off the premises, between its adult clients and its
employees.
   ADULT MATERIAL: Without limitation on media and technologies, new or used
books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, photographs, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations;
recordings, other audio matter; and novelties or devices that have, as their
primary or dominant theme, subject matter depicting, exhibiting, illustrating,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas. It may also be instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia which
are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities; or live
exhibitions or performances that have as their primary or dominant theme the
display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADVERTISING: Any form of public announcement intended to aid, directly or
indirectly, in the sale, use, or promotion of product, commodity, service,
activity, or entertainment.
   AERIAL ROOTS: Any root structure growing in a vertical arrangement towards
the soil, extending downward from any above ground portion of a tree,
especially found on ficus species. Used for support and assistance in
maintaining stability during strong winds.
   AFFECTED PERSON: A person or persons, natural or corporate, who is a member
of the City Commission or who is the owner of the subject property or who owns
property within 500 feet of the subject property as listed in the records of
the county property appraiser.
   ALCOHOL, BARREL: A container holding ten gallons of alcohol which may be
made of wood or other material.
   ALCOHOL, CASE: Package(s) of wine containing up to 12 bottles of wine with
each bottle containing 750 mL or packages of beer containing up to 24 bottles
with each bottle containing up to 385 mL.
   ALCOHOL, PACKAGE STORE: A place where alcoholic beverages are dispensed or
sold in container for consumption off of the premises.
   ALCOHOL, SMALL SCALE PRODUCTION: Beer that is produced in an amount no
greater than 15,000 barrels per year and wine that is produced in an amount no
greater than 3,000 cases per year.
   ALLEY: A right-of-way providing a secondary means of access and service to
abutting property.
   ALTERATION: Any construction or renovation to an existing structure other
than a repair or addition.
   AMERICAN'S WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA): ADA became law in 1990 and has been
amended from time to time. The ADA is a civil rights law that prohibits
discrimination against individuals with disabilities in all areas of public
life, including jobs, schools, transportation, and all public and private
places that are open to the general public. The purpose of the law is to make
sure that people with disabilities have the same rights and opportunities as
everyone else.
   ANNEXATION: Addition of real property to the boundaries of an incorporated
municipality.
   ANTENNA: A transmitting and/or receiving device used for wireless services
that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves, including directional
antennas, such as panel and microwave dish antennas, and Omni-directional
antennas, such as whips, excluding radar antennas, amateur radio antennas, and
satellite earth stations.
   APPLICANT: The owner of land, or the authorized representative of the
landowner who is applying for a development application or landscape permit
within the city.
   ARCHITECTURAL COMPATIBILITY: The design of a building or structure utilizing
similar elements including colors or materials that are similar to the
principal building or structure on a particular site.
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: A state licensed building or buildings, section or
distinct part of a building, private home, boarding home, home for the aged, or
other residential facility, regardless of whether operated for profit, which
through its ownership or management provides housing, meals, and one or more
personal services for a period exceeding 24 hours to one or more adults who are
not relatives of the owner or administrator.
   AUTO REPAIR, MAJOR: General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of
engines, motor vehicles, or trailers; collision service including body, frame,
or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop; vehicle
steam cleaning.
   AUTO REPAIR, MINOR: Incidental body or fender work, other minor repairs and
maintenance such as painting and upholstering, replacement of parts, oil
changes, and motor services to passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one-half
tons capacity.
   AUTOMOTIVE DEALERSHIP: Facility that specializes in the sale of automobiles
and vehicles, service and repair of automobiles and vehicles, and the retail
sales of related goods and parts.
   AWNING: An architectural projection that provides weather protection,
identity or decoration and is partially or wholly supported by the building to
which it is attached. It is comprised of a lightweight frame structure of which
a covering is attached. It may be cantilevered, fixed, moveable, retractable,
or otherwise entirely supported from a building.
   BALCONY: An exterior platform at an opening in a building facade which is
enclosed by a railing, balustrade, or parapet. It may project from the building
facade and may or may not be covered or it may be inset into the volume of the
building.
   BANQUET HALL: An establishment that consists of an enclosed building, or
portion of a building, available for the purpose of holding banquets, dinners,
entertainment, luncheons, sports events or other similar social events.
   BAR OR LOUNGE: An establishment having as its principal or predominant use
the serving of alcoholic beverages (e.g., beer, wine, or liquor) for
consumption on the premises, and which sets a minimum age requirement for
entrance, consistent with all applicable state laws. The primary source of
revenue for such use is derived from alcoholic beverage sales, and the
secondary source from the serving of food.
   BICYCLE PARKING FACILITY: A roofed or unroofed structure for the keeping of
bicycles.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (BOA): A quasi-judicial board tasked with hearing and
interpreting regulation of the Land Development Code including but not limited
to appeals and residential variances.
   BOAT: Any watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of
transportation on water.
   BODY ART STUDIO: A use that is accessory to a personal care service or
medical and health care facility; involves the practice of tattooing, permanent
make-up, micro blading and micropigmentation and the like which most frequently
features custom, fine art design and "by appointment" services only.
   BOLLARDS: Low, single posts typically composed of stone or concrete to
prevent vehicles from entering an area.
   BOULEVARD STRIP: Landscaped area between a curbed roadway and a sidewalk
that is usually contoured to insure surface water runoff with little water
collection and is less than five feet wide.
   BREWPUB: An establishment where food, beer and malt beverages are dually
licensed to be made on the premises where beer and malt beverages are produced
on site and sold and/or consumed on site.
   BROWARD COUNTY: Political subdivision of the State of Florida.
   BROWARD COUNTY LAND USE PLAN: The future land use plan element for all
Broward County, Florida adopted by the Broward County Commission in conformance
with the requirements of the Broward County Charter and the Community Planning
Act.
   BUFFERYARD: A unit of land, together with a specified type and amount of
planting thereof, and any structure, as defined in this section, which may be
required between land uses to eliminate or minimize conflicts between them.
   BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
   BULB OR LAMP: The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light.
   CANOPY: A permanent fixture made of metal or glass that is attached to a
structure and is not intended to provide shade.
   CANOPY TREE: Are trees with thick canopies or foliage coverings. Typical to
having a single trunk growing to a considerable height and bearing lateral
branches at some distance from the ground. Canopy trees may also be referred to
as hardwood or shade trees.
   CAR GALLERY: Retail facility that specializes in the direct-to-consumer sale
of new cars; car galleries shall not have on-site inventory.
   CARPORTS: A covered private garage not completely enclosed by walls and
doors.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A document issued by the Building Official
pursuant to the Building Code that allows the occupancy and use of the building
(s) and structure(s) and certifying that said building(s) and structure(s) and
use(s) have been constructed and will be used in compliance with all applicable
municipal codes.
   CITY: The City of Pembroke Pines
   CITY COMMISSION OR COMMISSION: The governing body for the City of Pembroke
Pines.
   CLUB, NIGHT: A place of entertainment with a restaurant, bar, or other
similar establishment providing food or refreshments, wherein floor shows or
other forms of entertainment by persons are provided for guests.
   CLUB, PRIVATE: Associations and organizations of a fraternal or social
character, not operated or maintained for profit. This shall not include
casinos, night clubs, or other institutions operated as a business.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES: Any vehicle designed, intended, or used for the
transportation of people, goods, or things other than private passenger
vehicles and trailers for private nonprofit transport of goods and boats; and
as defined further by the State Division of Motor Vehicles as any vehicle which
exceeds Class 32 for licensing purposes.
   COMMON AREA: Land within or related to a development, not individually owned
or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the common use
or enjoyment of the residents of the development.
   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (CDD): A local, special-purpose government
alternative to a municipality for managing and financing infrastructure
required to support the development of a community, pursuant to F.S. Ch. 190.
   COMPLIMENTARY AMENITIES: Roadways, parking areas, pedestrian connections and
bicycle facilities used in connection with the operations of the development
which it is located.
   COMPLETE: The determination on whether the information required for
development application submission is sufficient enough to allow further
processing and evaluation.
   COMPLETELY ENCLOSED BUILDINGS: A building separated on all sides from
adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows
and normal entrance or exit doors.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The principles, guidelines, standards, and strategies
for the orderly and balanced future economic, social, physical, environmental,
and fiscal development of the area that reflects community commitments to
implement the plan and its elements.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT: A text or map amendment to the future land use
element of the city's comprehensive plan which includes land use plan
amendments.
   CONSTRUCTION: Any improvement, development, or change of the land from its
present state, or building, repairing, relocating, demolishing a structure.
   CONSTRUCTION FENCE: A temporary artificial freestanding barrier used to
enclose, restrict or prevent access to, conceal or screen a construction area
with an active building permit.
   CONTENT NEUTRAL: Expression without the regard to the substance or message
of expression.
   CORNICE: Projecting ornamental molding along the top of a building or a
wall.
   CORRELATED COLOR TEMPERATURE (CCT): Defines the color appearance of a white
LED, it is defined in degrees of kelvin (K).
   CORRIDOR: Any land area designated by the state, county or municipality
which is used or suitable for the movement of people and goods by one or more
modes of transportation.
   COVERAGE: The percentage of lot area covered or occupied by buildings or
roofed portions of structures.
   CRIME PREVENTION THROUGH ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN (CPTED): The use of design and
the built environment as a means to reduce incidence and fear of crime.
   CROWN OF ROAD: A surface shape that allows water to travel downward toward
both sides of the road from a highpoint at the road center.
   DECK: A structure constructed of concrete, pavers, tile, wood, composite
materials and the like upland of the mean water's edge which is not considered
a building.
   DECK, PATIO: A structure including pavers, concrete, stone, or other
composite material.
   DELEGATION REQUEST: The official consideration of amendments to a
restrictive note or condition on a recorded plat.
   DENSITY: An objective measurement of the number of people or residential
units allowed per unit of land, such as residents per acre as defined in F.S.
Ch. 163.
   DESIGN GUIDELINES: Guidelines for a planned development which include but
are not limited to buffers, landscaping, lighting, required yards, setbacks,
signage or other guidelines as established herein.
   DESIGNATED USES: A use identified as either permitted, accessory, or
prohibited within the Land Development Code.
   DEVELOPER: Any person, including a governmental agency, undertaking land
development.
   DEVELOPMENT: The carrying out of any building activity or mining operation,
the making of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure or
land, or the dividing of land into three or more parcels and other acts as
defined in F.S. § 380.04.
   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: An agreement entered into by a developer, the city,
or other relevant parties, pursuant to F.S. Ch. 163.
   DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL IMPACT (DRI): Any development that, because of its
character, magnitude, or location, would have a substantial effect upon the
health, safety, or welfare of citizens of more than one county, pursuant to
F.S. Ch. 163.
   DEVELOPMENT ORDER (DO): Any order granting, denying, or granting with
conditions an application for a development permit as defined in F.S. Ch. 163.
   DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: Includes any building permit, engineering permit, zoning
permit, plat approval, or rezoning, certification, variance, or other action
having the effect of permitting development as defined in F.S. Ch. 163.
   DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE (DRC): An advisory group of city staff members
and outside agencies (as necessary) who meet to review and comment on
development applications.
   DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH): The diameter of the trunk of a tree measured
at breast height approximately four and one-half feet. The DBH of trees with
multiple trunks shall be the sum of the individual trunk diameters at breast
height. Trees with less than four and one-half feet of clear trunk shall be
measured at the diameter of the largest vertical branch or leader at breast
height.
   DIMMER: Reduces the input power requirements and the rated lumen output
levels of lights.
   DIRECTOR: The Director of the Planning and Economic Development Department.
   DISTRICT: A portion of the territory of the city which certain uniform
regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the
provisions of this Code.
   DOCK: A structure, floating or fixed, constructed beyond the mean water's
edge.
   DOMESTICATED LIVESTOCK: Grazing animals such as cattle, horses, sheep,
goats, pigs and hogs.
   DOMESTICATED POULTRY: Any chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, or other domestic
fowl.
   DRIP LINE: The area defined by the outermost circumference of a tree canopy
where water drips from and onto the ground.
   DRIVE AISLE: Areas that provide circulation, ingress, and egress for
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
   DRIVE-THRU FACILITIES: The use of land, buildings, and structures, of parts
thereof, to provide or dispense products or services, either wholly or in part,
through an attendant, window, or automated machine, to persons remaining in
motorized vehicles that are in a designated stacking lane.
   DRIVEWAY: A private drive aisle providing access between a street and origin
and destination points within an adjacent property.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building containing three or more dwelling units,
each unit designed for or occupied exclusively by one family.
   DRIVEWAY, RESIDENTIAL: A private vehicular access way to a dwelling unit
which is primarily utilized to park motor vehicles. Driveways may be
constructed of asphalt, concrete, pavers, or like material.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building containing only one dwelling unit
designed for or occupied exclusively by one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building containing two dwelling units, each
designed for or occupied exclusively by one family.
   DWELLING: A building used, intended or designed to be used, rented, leased,
let or hired out to be occupied for living purposes.
   DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   EASEMENT: A grant by a landowner to another landowner or to the public, for
the right to occupy or use designated land for specific purposes, such as
access, drainage, conservation, the location of public improvements, or other
specified purpose.
   EAVE: The projecting overhang at the lower edge of a roof.
   EGRESS: Exit location for vehicular access on a site.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION: An electric vehicle supply equipment
station in a private or public parking space which delivers electricity or
transfers electric energy to a battery or other energy storage device in an
electric vehicle.
   ELEVATION: A drawing showing an external face of a building.
   ENCROACHMENT: The maximum allowed projection of a building element beyond
the minimum setback or into an adjacent public right-of-way.
   ENERGY EFFICIENCY: The ratio of useful energy output of a system, conversion
process or activity to its energy input.
   ENFORCING OFFICER: The officers and employees of the department or agency of
the city to whom the duty of enforcing the terms of this Code assigned under
this Code.
   ENTITLEMENT: Legal rights conveyed by approvals from government entities to
develop a property for a certain use, intensity building type or building
placement.
   ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT: A document that must be submitted for
approval by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Department of
Transportation for transportation projects that significantly affect the human
environment as defined by CEQ (Council on Environmental Quality) regulations.
   ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS: Those lands defined as environmentally
sensitive in the current Broward County Land Use Plan.
   ERECTED: Includes built, constructed, reconstructed, or any physical
operations on the premises required for building. This may include excavation
and ground remediation.
   EXCAVATION: The digging, stripping, or removal by any process of natural
materials and deposits from their natural state and location.
   EXPANSION: An increase in the size of an existing structure or use,
including the physical size of the land, building, parking, and other
improvements or structures.
   FACADE: The entire exterior wall of a building facing a lot line measured
from the grade to the eave or highest point of a flat or mansard roof. Facades
may be on any elevation of the building.
   FAMILY: Persons who are related by blood or marriage, former spouses,
persons currently residing together in a unified dwelling unit, persons who are
parents of a child in common regardless of marital status.
   FASCIA: The part of a building that extends vertically from the grade to the
top wall or eaves and horizontally across the width of the building.
   FENCE: An artificially erected freestanding barrier used to enclose (and
protect) an area, restrict or prevent access to an area, to conceal or screen
an area, and/or for decorative purposes. A fence may be open or solid and
generally consists of wood, metal, concrete, or plastic posts connected by
boards, rails, panels, wire, or mesh.
   FIXTURE: The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps, and may include all or
some of the following parts; reflector (mirror), refractor (lens), ballast,
housing, and other attachment parts.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID: Any liquid, which under operating conditions gives off
vapor, which, when mixed with air is combustible and explosive.
   FLEXIBILITY ALLOCATION: The assignment of flexibility units assigned by the
county but administrated by the city.
   FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of each floor of the
principal building and any accessory buildings or structures, measured from the
exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls. The term does not include
any area used exclusively for the surface parking of motor vehicles (e.g.,
garage) or for building or equipment access, such as stairs, elevator shafts,
and maintenance crawl space.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO: The gross floor area of all buildings or structures on a
lot divided by the total lot area.
   FLORIDA BUILDING CODE (FBC): All building construction regulations for
public and private buildings in the State of Florida.
   FLORIDA FRIENDLY LANDSCAPING: Landscaping principles that include planting
the right plant in the right place, efficient watering, appropriate
fertilization, mulching, attraction of wildlife, responsible management of yard
pests, recycling yard waste, reduction of storm water runoff, and waterfront
protection. Additional components include planning and design, soil analysis,
the use of solid waste compost, practical use of turf, and proper maintenance.
   FLORIDA GREEN BUILDING COALITION (FGBC): The FGBC is a Florida nonprofit
corporation dedicated to improving the built environment. The FGBC administers
the green design standards of the FGBC's building and community rating systems
and administers the FGBC Certifying Agents accreditation program.
   FOOD COURT OR HALL: A collection of restaurants either take-out or dine in
that share a common seating area within the same lot.
   FOOD PRODUCTION: A facility intended for production of food products for
sale either offsite or on-site via a drive-thru, pickup window or other similar
method. A food production facility may also be referred to as a production
kitchen and may include a restaurant component.
   FOOD TRUCK: A mobile kitchen, canteen, or catering truck that serves as a
mobile venue which transports and sells food.
   FOOTCANDLE (F.C): A measure of light noted as a unit of illuminance
amounting to one lumen per square foot at grade.
   FREESTANDING EMERGENCY FACILITY: Also known as a hospital-based off-campus
emergency department, is a facility that provides emergency services and care,
is owned and operated by a licensed hospital and operates under the license of
the hospital; and is located on separate premises from the hospital as defined
and regulated in F.S. Ch. 395.
   FRONTAGE OF A BUILDING: The wall of a building approximately parallel and
nearest to a street.
   FRONTAGE OF A PROPERTY: The lot line which abuts a street or separates the
lot from the street.
   FULL CUTOFF FIXTURE: A lighting fixture manufactured and installed so that
all the light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or a
diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from a part of the
luminaire (except only incidental reflections from supporting brackets or arms)
is projected below the horizontal as determined by photometric test or
certified by the manufacturer. Any structural part of the light fixture
providing this shielding must be permanently affixed.
   FULFILLMENT CENTER: A location typically a warehouse intended to fill
customer orders for ecommerce retailers. The type of fulfillment may include
business to consumer or business to business orders.
   FUTURE LAND USE: The identification of the intended use of land.
   FUTURE LAND USE MAP: A depiction of the proposed general distribution,
location and extent of the land uses described in the future land use element
of the comprehensive plan.
   GARAGE, PARKING: A building or other structure which provides parking for
motor vehicles, excluding storage of inoperative motor vehicles. It may provide
required off-street parking space for uses located on the same lot or on a lot
contiguous to the use of the parking lot it is intended to serve.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE: An enclosed accessory building or an enclosed portion of a
main building used for the parking or storage of automobiles owned by the
occupants of the main building, excludes a carport.
   GAZEBO: An ornamental garden pavilion with a covered roof and open sides,
constructed of wood, metal, or vinyl.
   GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS (GIS): An arrangement of computer hardware,
software, and geographic data that people interact with to integrate, analyze,
and visualize the data; identify relationships, patterns, and trends; and find
solutions to the problems. The system is designed to capture, store, and
update, manipulate, analyze, and display the geographic information. A GIS is
typically used to represent maps as data layers that can be studied and used to
perform analyses.
   GLARE: Intense and somewhat blinding light, or the sensation produced by a
brightness within the visual field that is sufficiently greater than the
intensity of light to which human eyes are accustomed or adapted, thereby
causing annoyance, discomfort, visual impairment, or loss of reduction of
visibility.
   GREEN BUILDING: Generally, the resource efficient design, construction, and
operation of buildings by employing environmentally sensible construction
practices, systems, and materials.
   GREEN ROOF: A roof of a building that is partially or completely covered
with living vegetation and a growing medium, planted over a waterproofing
membrane. Also referred to as a living roof.
   GREEN WALL: An internal or external wall partially or completely covered
with vegetation that includes a support structure, growing medium, and
integrated water delivery system. Also referred to as a living wall or vertical
garden.
   GREENHOUSE: A structure primarily made of glass in which temperature and
humidity can be controlled for the cultivation or protection of plants.
   GREENWAY: A corridor of protected open space managed for conservation or
recreation purposes. They link natural reserves, parks, cultural and historic
sites with one another and, in some cases, with populated areas.
   GROUNDCOVER: Includes both small ornamental plants that grow close to the
ground and all plant materials commonly classified as turfgrass species.
   HATRACKING: To flat-cut the top or sides of a tree, severing the leader or
leaders, internodal cuts, or pruning a tree by stubbing off mature wood larger
than three inches in diameter or to reduce the circumference or canopy spread
of a mature tree by one-third or more.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES: Any substance or material which, by reason of its
toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive, or otherwise injurious properties, may be
detrimental or deleterious to the health or safety of any person handling,
using, or otherwise dealing with such material or substances.
   HAZARDOUS TREE: Tree or part(s) of a tree that is believed by the certified
arborist or landscape architect to pose a risk to the public.
   HEDGES: A row of shrubs or small trees that are planted close to each other
in order to form a boundary.
   HEIGHT OF A BUILDING: The vertical distance from grade plane to the average
height of the highest roof surface.
   HOME IMPROVEMENT CENTER: The sale of a diverse range of hardware, building
supplies and related materials, including lawn and garden supplies.
   HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION (HOA): A Florida corporation responsible for the
operation of a community or a mobile home subdivision in which the voting
membership is made up of parcel owners or their agents, or a combination
thereof, and in which membership is a mandatory condition of parcel ownership,
and which is authorized to impose assessments that, if unpaid, may become a
lien on the parcel. The term HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION does not include a
community development district or other similar special taxing district created
pursuant to F.S. Ch. 163.
   HOSPITAL: A hospital is a specialized medical facility dedicated to
providing comprehensive diagnosis, treatment, and care for patients suffering
from various illnesses, injuries, or medical conditions, as defined and
regulated in F.S. Ch. 395. Hospitals typically offer a range of medical
services including but not limited to emergency care, surgery, diagnostics,
therapy, and ongoing medical management, including inpatient accommodations for
patients requiring overnight care and support.
   HOT SPOT: An area of very high illumination above normal foot-candle levels,
typically found in an area underneath a luminaire, making normal foot-candle
levels appear relatively dark.
   HOTEL: A building, or part thereof, in which sleeping accommodation are
offered to the public, with no cooking facilities for use by the occupants, and
in which there may be a public dining room for the convenience of the guests.
Access to the sleeping rooms shall be through an inside lobby or office.
   HOTEL, EXTENDED STAY: Hotel that offers self service facilities such as
laundry, kitchens with limited food and beverage service.
   HOTEL, FULL SERVICE: Upscale, or luxury hotels including a restaurant,
meeting space and often room service accessible by the public.
   HOTEL, LIMITED SERVICE: Hotels that have basic amenities which may include a
restaurant and limited conference or meeting space intended for those staying
in the hotel.
   HOTEL BAR: A bar operated in connection with a hotel, apartment hotel, or
motel of more than 50 hotel rooms, motel rooms, or separate apartments, and
operated by the same owner or management company. It shall be directly
connected with the inside of the hotel.
   ILLUMINANCE: The quantity of light arriving at a surface divided by the area
of the lighted surface, measured in footcandles.
   ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING SOCIETY OF NORTH AMERICA (IES OR IESNA): The
professional society of lighting engineers, including those from manufacturing
companies, and others professionally involved in lighting.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any nonorganic material which prohibits penetration by
liquids and other soluble materials.
   INDUSTRIAL CLEANING OF MATERIALS: A process by which filter bags, filtration
machines or hazardous areas in industrial sites are cleaned using high power
water and sanitation.
   INGRESS: Entry location for vehicular access to a site.
   INTERNAL ILLUMINATION: A light source concealed or contained within the sign
which becomes visible by shining through a translucent surface.
   INTERPRETATION: The official determination if a use not listed is permitted
within the city.
   INVASIVE SPECIES: A species defined as an organism (plant, animal, fungus,
or bacterium) that is not native and has negative impacts on our economy, our
environment, or our health.
   JUNKYARD: Place, structure, or lot where junk, waste, discarded, salvaged,
or similar materials such as old metals, wood, slush, lumber, glass, paper,
rags, cloth, bagging, cordage, barrels, containers, and the like, are bought,
sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including auto
wrecking yards, used lumber yards, house-wrecking yards, and yards or places
for storage or handling of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel
materials.
   KENNEL: Any place or premise where four or more domesticated dogs or cats
over four months of age are kept.
   LAND: The surface of the earth and all substances forming that surface which
may include water and vegetation.
   LAND USE: The development that has occurred on the land, the development
that is proposed by a developer on the land, or the use that is permitted or
permissible on the land under an adopted comprehensive plan or element or
portion thereof, or the Land Development Code, as the context may indicate.
   LANDOWNER: The person(s) reflected as the property owner on the current
deed.
   LANDSCAPE LIGHTING: Lighting of trees, shrubs, or other plant material as
well as ponds and other landscape features.
   LANDSCAPING: Includes any of the following or combination of material such
as, but not limited to grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees, or
palms; and nonliving durable material commonly used in landscaping such as, but
not limited to rocks, pebbles, walls, hedges, or fences.
   LED: Light emitting diode.
   LIGHT POLLUTION: Any adverse effects of manmade light, often used to denote
a brightness of the night sky, otherwise known as urban sky glow.
   LIGHT TRESPASS: Light falling where it is not desired, wanted or needed.
   LIQUID CRYSTAL DISPLAY (LCD): Electronic device that channels light through
tubes to create patterns that can produce sharp video displays.
   LOCAL PLANNING AGENCY (LPA): The agency designated to prepare the
comprehensive plan or plan amendments as defined in F.S. Ch. 163.
   LOCAL PUBLIC OFFICIAL: Any elected or appointed public official holding a
city office and who recommends or takes quasi-judicial action as a member of a
board or commission.
   LOGO: An approved trademark design or symbol that represents a product,
identity, or service.
   LOT: A portion or parcel of land considered as a unit.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot of which at least two adjacent sides abut for the full
length upon a street; provided that the two sides intersect at an interior
angle of not more than 135 degrees. With a curved street line, the corner shall
be considered to be that point on the street line nearest to the point of
intersection of the tangents herein.
   LOT, DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT, KEY: A residential corner lot in which the rear lot lines abut the side
lot lines of the adjacent lot.
   LOT LINE, FRONT: The line dividing a lot from a street or base building
line, whichever results in the lesser depth of the lot.
   LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line. In a triangular or gore shaped lot, the rear line shall be considered a
line ten feet in length parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front
lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot other than the front or rear lot line.
   LOT LINE, STREET SIDE: A side lot line that is adjacent to a street.
   LOT, THROUGH: A lot abutting on two side streets, not at their intersection
which may be a corner lot.
   LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines at the depth
of the required front yard.
   LUMEN: A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light emitted by a lamp
or luminaire.
   MANSARD: A false roof projecting over the front of a building.
   MARQUEE: A permanent canopy often of metal and glass projecting over an
entrance.
   MASONRY: Stone work or brick work used in wall construction.
   MASTER PLAN: A conceptual document that guides future growth, development
and redevelopment of a specified area.
   MEAN WATER'S EDGE: The edge of the water that would exist if the water
elevation was plus 2.0 North American Vertical Datum (NAVD).
   MEDIAN: The center portion of land of a public right-of-way lying between
two paved roads.
   MICROBREWERY and MICROWINERY: An establishment primarily engaged in the
small scale production, distribution, and wholesale of beer, ale, or other malt
beverages, or wine and shall be permitted only in conjunction with in-house
food service.
   MITIGATION: Measures taken to avoid, minimize, or reduce the severity of
environmental impacts.
   MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT: The practice of incorporating more than one land use
designation into a single planning location. Can be specific to a development
site (vertical mixed use) or a zoning district which allows for a variety of
uses within the district (horizontal mixed use).
   MOBILE FOOD DISPENSING VEHICLE: Means any vehicle that is a public food
service establishment and that is self-propelled or otherwise movable from
place to place and includes self-contained utilities, as defined by F.S. §
509.102.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR UNIT: A self-contained mobile unit independent with
respect to water, sewer and power utilities, capable of moving or being moved,
consisting of an enclosed truck, enclosed trailer or similar vehicle mounted
unit that contains equipment, used for the preparation and/or sale of single-
serving food products and is closed up when not in operation.
   MOBILE HOME: A residential structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is eight feet or more in width, over 35 feet in length with the hitch,
built on an integral chassis, designed to be used as a dwelling when connected
to the required utilities, and not originally sold as a recreational vehicle,
and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems
contained therein.
   MOTEL: A building or part thereof, in which sleeping or living
accommodations are offered to the public primarily on a short term or transient
basis, with access to the individual units from the exterior of the building,
and parking facilities for use of guests near their quarters.
   MOTOR HOME: A structure built on and made an integral part of a self-
propelled motor vehicle chassis, primarily designed to provide temporary living
quarters for recreation, camping, or travel use.
   MOTOR VEHICLES: An automobile, motorcycle, truck, trailer, semitrailer,
truck tractor and semitrailer combination, or any other vehicle operated on the
roads of this state, used to transport persons or property, and propelled by
power other than muscular power, but the term does not include traction
engines, road rollers, motorized scooters, micro mobility devices, personal
delivery devices and mobile carriers.
   MULTI-USE PATH OR TRAIL: A path intended for use by pedestrians, cyclists
and other users within or adjacent to a public right-of-way located on public
property.
   NATIONAL GREEN BUILDING STANDARD™ (NGBS): The NGBS is a green building
certification program that provides independent, third-party verification that
a home, apartment building, or land development is designed and built to
achieve high performance in six key areas: Site Design, Resource Efficiency,
Water Efficiency, Energy Efficiency, Indoor Environmental Quality, and Building
Operation and Maintenance. The NGBS administers the NGBS Green Verifier
program.
   NATIVE TREES: Trees and palms which are found indigenous or are an original
inhabitant of this area.
   NATIVE VEGETATION: Any species of plant considered to be indigenous to South
Florida.
   NEIGHBORING ASSOCIATION: Any condominium or homeowners association which
represents any property located within 500 feet of property which is the
subject of the petition which is registered with the City Clerk.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES: A structure or portion thereof existing at the
effective date of this Code, or any amendment thereto, which was occupied,
designed, erected, intended, or structurally altered for a use not permitted at
its location by the provisions of this Code for a new use, or which does not
conform to all of the regulations applicable to the district in which it is
located.
   NONCONFORMING USE: The use of a structure or premises existing at the
effective date of this Code, or any amendment thereto, for any purpose not
permitted for a new use in the district in which it is located.
   NON-LIVING DURABLE LANDSCAPE MATERIAL: Includes but not limited to materials
such as rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, artificial turf or pervious decorative
paving materials.
   NUISANCE: A person, thing, or circumstance causing inconvenience or
annoyance.
   NURSING HOME FACILITY: A state-licensed facility or any identifiable
component of any facility in which the primary function is the provision, on a
continuing basis, of nursing services and health-related services for the
treatment and inpatient care of two or more non-related individuals, including
facilities known by varying designations such as rest homes, convalescent
homes, skilled care facilities, intermediate care facilities, extended care
facilities, and infirmaries. Accessory uses may include dining rooms and
recreation and physical therapy facilities for residents, and offices and
storage facilities for professional and supervisory staff. This use type does
not include the home or residence of any individual who cares for or maintains
only persons related to them by blood or marriage. It also does not include
assisted living facilities or community residences.
   OBTRUSIVE LIGHT: Light which causes annoyance, discomfort, visual
impairment, or loss of reduction of visibility.
   OCCUPIED: Includes arranged, designed, built, altered, converted, rented,
leased or otherwise intended to be used.
   OFF-STREET LOADING: The loading and unloading of materials, goods or
merchandise, in designated areas that do not interfere with the public use of
streets or alleys.
   OFF-STREET PARKING: Parking which is not located on a street, generally
found within a parking lot or garage.
   OPEN SPACE: A parcel or parcels of land, or water area, or a combination of
land and water, within the site and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of occupants of the surrounding developments. It may contain
complimentary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for
the benefit and enjoyment of occupants.
   OPERATOR: The auto manufacturer, representative of auto manufacturer,
developer, electric vehicle kiosk owner, shopping center property management
company, freestanding building owner or lessee, responsible for the
installation, management and operation of electric vehicle service and charging
stations.
   ORDINANCE: A set of regulations enforceable as municipal law.
   OUTBUILDING: A free-standing building which adheres to the regulations of
the center in which it is located.
   OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND SALES: Display of merchandise using an adjacent outside
area to the business which it is intended for.
   OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITY: A facility that is privately owned or
operated that provides outdoor recreation activities, including athletic courts
or fields, golf, swimming, riding, or the like. These facilities may include
accessory structures for incidental services.
   OUTPARCEL: A parcel of land situated away from and being external to the
main parcel, which allows for an open, non-cluttered, and unobstructed business
street frontage equal to or exceeding an open area 150 feet of frontage.
   OUTDOOR DINING: Use of an adjacent outside area by a food or beverage
establishment for service of patrons.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE: The keeping, in an area that is not completely and
permanently enclosed, of any finished goods, material, merchandise, boats, or
vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. It may be the principal use
of a lot or an accessory use.
   OVERLIFT: The removal of the majority of the inner lateral branches and
foliage thereby displacing weigh and mass to the ends of branches. The
alteration of the tree's live crown ration may be considered as evidence of
over lifting.
   PALM: An unbranched monocot with a crown of long feathered or fan-shaped
leaves and typically having old leaf scars forming a regular pattern on the
trunk and is not considered a canopy tree.
   PALM PRUNING: Fronds shall not be removed until all traces of green are one
unless removal is to prevent hazardous situations. The fronds shall be cut
close to the trunk with a sharp pruning saw or looping shears and at no more
than a 9 to 3 view.
   PARAPET: A wall extension above the roof line of a building.
   PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are
intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body an illegal or controlled substance or herbs.
   PARCEL: A tract or lot of land as identified by the Broward County Property
Appraiser.
   PARKING: The temporary, transient storage of private passenger automobiles
used for personal transportation, while their operators are engaged in other
activities. This shall apply only to open-air storage of automobiles.
   PARKING LOT: An off- street, ground level area used for the temporary
storage of motor vehicles.
   PARKING SPACE: A surfaced area, accessible from but not located on a street
that is intended for the parking of a motor vehicle.
   PARTY OR PARTIES: The petitioner, city and any affected person who has
requested to be heard at the proceeding.
   PAVING: Hard-surfaced, erosion resistant material such as asphalt, concrete,
pavers, bricks, or like material.
   PAVED SURFACE: Hard-surfaced, stabilized area, section or segment formed and
built with asphalt, concrete, pavers, bricks or like material.
   PENAL OR CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION: Any institution used to house or detain a
person who is convicted of a crime.
   PERVIOUS OR PERMEABLE SURFACE: A material which allows liquids or gases to
pass through to another layer.
   PET HOTELS: An establishment that provides exercise and training facilities,
social and play areas, styling and massage salon facilities, and weight loss
centers for use by and for the benefit of domesticated household pet animals.
   PHOTOVOLTAIC SOLAR SYSTEMS: Also referred to as solar cells or PV cells
convert sunlight into electricity. They are a power system designed to generate
useable electricity from sunlight through the process of converting light
(photons) to electricity (voltage), which is called the PV effect.
   PILASTER: A pier or pillar with a capital and base that may serve as
decorative features, rather than supporting structures.
   PINES BOULEVARD CORRIDOR: This corridor is referring to State Road 820 which
is measured from Florida's Turnpike to Highway U.S. 27.
   PLACE OF ASSEMBLY: A space where groups of people gather for a specified
activity.
   PLAN: The written and graphic submission for a development application
including but not limited to all covenants related to the use, location, and
bulk of buildings and other structures, density of development, private
streets, alleyways, parking facilities, open space, and public facilities.
   PLANNED DISTRICT: A type of zoning district which may provide flexible
development standards that are different that the city's LDC. Specific
guidelines shall be established for a planned district which illustrate and
address land uses, circulation, utilities, parking, setbacks, densities and
intensities, land coverage, landscaping and buffers, open space, building form
and design, and similar features of the project.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): An area of land, controlled by landowner, to
be developed as a primarily residential and a mixture nonresidential use, the
plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk or type of dwelling,
density, lot coverage, and required open space to the regulations established
in any one zoning district created, from time to time, under the provisions of
the zoning ordinance enacted by the City Commission.
   PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD (PZB): The city's Planning and Zoning Board.
   PLAT: A map or delineated representation of the subdivision of lands, being
a complete exact representation of the subdivision and other information in
compliance with the requirement of all applicable sections of this part and of
any local ordinances.
   PLAYGROUND or PLAYFIELD: A tract of land devoted for passive or active
recreational purposes. The area may contain play apparatus and facilities for
organized or unorganized sports, and may or may not include community buildings
or structures.
   POOL, SWIMMING: A body of water, which is deeper than six inches at its
deepest point, which is wider than three feet, and which is contained in an
artificially created or built receptacle affixed to the earth or resting on the
ground, used or intended to be used for swimming or wading. The terms of this
section shall apply to all portable pools while containing water. This shall
include any body of water located on private property of the depth and width
herein provided, such as, but not limited to, ponds, brooks, fish ponds, and
ponds for growing aquatic plants.
   POOL, THERAPEUTIC: A pool a maximum of eight feet in diameter and three
feet, six inches in depth, built either above or in the ground, and primarily
designed for passive, nonintensive use.
   PORCH: A roofed over space attached to the outside of an exterior wall of a
building, which has no enclosure other than the exterior walls of the building.
   PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT: Any container designed for the outdoor storage of
personal property which is typically rented or owners or occupants of property
for their temporary use and which is delivered and removed by vehicle.
   POULTRY: Any chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, or other domestic fowl.
   PRE-APPLICATION MEETING: A meeting between a prospective applicant and staff
prior to the submittal of a development application. The goal of the meeting is
to review the submittal requirements, review procedures and standards
applicable to an anticipated application for a development permit reviewed
under this Code.
   PREVIOUSLY PREPARED MATERIALS: Including but not limited to bone,
cellophane, cork, feathers, fur, felt, rubber, glass, horn, hair, leather,
plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, shells.
   PRIMARY BUILDING: A building or structure in which the principal use of the
property is conducted.
   PRIMARY BUILDING FACADE: The front of the building or the face of the
building that provides primary customer access.
   PRIMARY FRONTAGE: The frontage designated by the owner/occupant to be the
primary use when the business faces two streets of secondary arterial
designation.
   PRINCIPAL USE: The primary use of the lot as distinguished from secondary or
accessory uses. There may be more than one principal use.
   PROJECT MANAGER: A member of staff who processes a development application
for the city.
   PROPERTY OWNER: The person who, with their address, it so shown on the tax
roll of the Broward County Tax Collector.
   PUBLIC HEARING: A public hearing advertised to the public that focuses on
providing members of the public the opportunity to present information and
comments related to certain types of application, with such information and
comments available for consideration as subsequent recommendations and
decisions are made.
   PUBLIC HEARING, QUASI-JUDICIAL: A public hearing, which comports with due
process requirements, where public officers of bodies are required to exercise
discretion of a judicial nature as a basis for official action, including
weighing evidence and making findings of facts and drawing conclusions of law.
   PUBLIC NOTICE: Information given to the public alerting them of government
or government-related activities that may cause a citizen to take action.
Notice may be either mailed, published (newspaper), posted and the like, or any
combination thereof.
   QUASI-JUDICIAL IN NATURE: The application of general rule or policy to
specific individuals, interests, or activities.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own motive power
or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. This includes: travel trailers,
camping trailers, truck campers, motor homes, private motor coaches, van
conversions, park trailers, and fifth wheel trailers.
   REDEVELOPMENT: The conversion, relocation, construction, structural
alteration, or enlargement of any structure or structures on an existing
development.
   REFUSE OR WASTE: Unused or discarded matter and material having no
substantial market value, which consists of such materials as: rubbish, debris,
and matter of any kind, including but not limited to rubble, asphalt, concrete,
plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, soil, building materials, crates, cartons,
containers, boxes, machinery or parts thereof, scrap metal and any other pieces
of metal, ferrous or nonferrous, furniture, trimmings from plants and trees,
cans, bottles, and barrels.
   REGIONAL MALL: A commercial development of not less than 600,000 square feet
containing not less than two department stores.
   REGIONAL MALL, OUTPARCEL DEVELOPMENT: Development of a freestanding
commercial building containing no more than 15,000 square feet of gross floor
area, occupied by a single tenant which is often not constructed concurrently
with the principal structure on the parcel.
   REGIONAL MALL, SECONDARY BUILDING: A commercial, detached building, greater
than 15,000 square feet in size and occupied by either single or multiple
tenants, which is constructed within the mall property. The building shall be
architecturally compatible with but subordinate to, the principal building on
site.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A building or structure together with its accessory
buildings and uses, where people regularly assemble to conduct religious
worship, ceremonies, rituals, and education. This includes: chapels, churches,
mosques, shrines, synagogues, tabernacles, temples, and other similar religious
places of assembly.
   REMODELING: Any renovation or remodeling project that includes a total cost
greater than 51% of the appraised value of the property.
   RENOVATION: The removal, replacement, or covering of existing interior and
exterior finish, trim, doors, windows or other materials with new materials
that serve the same purpose and do not change the configuration of space. It
includes the replacement of equipment or fixtures.
   REPAIR: The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building
for the purpose of its maintenance or to correct damage.
   RESIDENTIALLY ZONED PROPERTY: Any property zoned A, R-E, R-1A, R-1B, R-1C,
R-1Z, R-MH, R-TH, R-2, and R-MF.
   RESOLUTION: An expression of a governing body concerning matters of
administration, an expression of temporary character, or a provision for the
disposition of a particular item of the administrative business of the
governing body.
   RESOURCE RECOVERY: When energy, a material or a product is taken from waste
and used.
   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THRU: Any place or premise used for the sale, dispensing,
or serving of food, refreshments, or beverages to patrons who enter upon the
premises by automobile and receive service through a window without leaving
their automobiles.
   RESTAURANT: A business where food is prepared for paying customers to be
consumed on or off site.
   RESTAURANT BAR: A bar operated in connection with a restaurant by the same
owner or management in a business zoned area, which restaurant has all
necessary equipment and supplies for and serves full-course meals regularly,
and where the principal business is the serving of meals.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: Land in which the state, the department, a county, or a
municipality owns the fee or has an easement devoted to or required for use as
a transportation facility.
   ROOM: A habitable place in the interior of a building used for living,
dining, sleeping and cooking purposes.
   SAG LENS, CONVEX LENS, OR DROP LENS: A clear or prismatic refracting lens
that extends below the lowest opaque portion of a light fixture.
   SATELLITE EARTH STATION: Ground-based antenna used for reception of
satellite transmitted audio and radio signals.
   SCULPTURE/STATUE: A free-standing, three-dimensional form designed solely
for the purpose of art.
   SEASONAL LIGHTING: Temporary lighting installed and operated in connection
with seasons or traditions.
   SEASONAL MERCHANDISE STORAGE: Temporary storage of merchandise in connection
with seasons or traditions.
   SEATING OR SEATING CAPACITY: Shall include all table seating, and stools/bar
seating when full meal service is available at the counter/bar.
   SELF-SUPPORT/LATTICE TOWER: A telecommunication tower that is constructed
without guy wires and ground anchors.
   SERVICE STATION: Any building, lot, structure, or facility having pumps and
storage tanks where fuel, gasoline, and other similar products are dispensed,
sold, or offered for sale at retail only.
   SETBACK: The minimum distance between the street line, or base building
line, and the front line or side line of the building or any projection
thereof, excluding projections specifically permitted.
   SHARED PARKING: A parking space that is utilized for multiple uses occurring
at different times, where persons utilizing the spaces are unlikely to need the
spaces at the same time of the day.
   SHIELDING: An opaque material that blocks the transmission of light.
   SHOPPING CENTER: A group of three or more retail stores, service
establishments or any other business planned to serve the community or
neighborhood, not necessarily owned by one party or a single land owner, which
are adjacent to and utilizing a common parking area or areas.
   SHORT TERM PARKING: Parking spaces that are restricted to limited duration/
time.
   SHRUBS: Any self-supporting, woody, deciduous or evergreen species whose
trunk diameter and mature height does not meet standards for a tree. All plant
materials commonly classified as ornamental grasses shall be considered shrubs
for this Code's purpose.
   SIDEWALK: The portion of a street between the curb or roadway and the
adjacent property lines intended for use of pedestrians.
   SIGN: A device or representation for visual communication that is used for
the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others.
   SIGN AREA: The square-foot area enclosed by the perimeter of the aggregate
sign face. When a sign, composed of letters only, is designed to be compatible
with a particular architectural style, the sign area is the sum of the area of
the smallest contiguous rectangles or circles capable of containing one letter.
In all other cases, the area is enclosed by the perimeter line enclosing all
letters.
   SIGN BAND: The horizontal area above a tenant building entrance,
architecturally designed to accommodate signage.
   SIGN FACE: The part of the sign that is or can be used for communication
purposes visible from one direction.
   SIGN, ADVERTISING: Any sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, product, or activity not conducted, sold, offered, or
available on the premises where the sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
   SIGN, ANIMATED: A sign which utilizes action, motion, lights or color change
and features graphics and illustrations.
   SIGN, ANNOUNCING: A sign informing the public about a project to be under
construction or an intended use of the premises in the immediate future.
   SIGN, ANNOUNCING BANNER: Banners displayed in conjunction with a forthcoming
opening, a new business or multi-family community, or change of ownership of a
business or multi-family community.
   SIGN, BALLOON: A sign supported by wind or air and attached to the ground, a
building, or structure.
   SIGN, BANNER: A sign having the characters, letters, or illustrations
applied to cloth, plastic, vinyl, paper, or fabric of any kind, with only such
material specified herein.
   SIGN, BILLBOARD: A sign designed for the application of letters, numerals,
symbols, characters, or illustrations by painting, light projection, bills, or
posters, which is to be changed regularly, periodically, or frequently.
   SIGN, BLADE: A sign designed to serve pedestrians extended from the face of
structure.
   SIGN, BOX OR CABINET: Any sign of which the face is enclosed, bordered, or
contained within a box-like structure, frame, or other device.
   SIGN, BUS BENCH ADVERTISING: A bench of any fashion, size, or construction
that contains advertising. The sign may be located on the back or front of a
bench placed near a public right-of-way, such as a transit stop.
   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY: A manual or digital sign composed of individual
letters or numbers.
   SIGN, CHANNEL LETTER: A sign with a three-dimensional letter that may
include a light source.
   SIGN, CONFORMING: A sign that meets the federal, state and local laws and
ordinances.
   SIGN, CONSTRUCTION: A sign which identifies the construction of a building
or a building complex.
   SIGN, COPY: The words displayed on a sign.
   SIGN, DIGITAL: A large screen or series of screens which display a message,
image, or series of images.
   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: A sign indicating the direction or location of a facility
or service incidental to a use. Copy may include, but is not limited to
"Entrance", "Exit", "Caution", and "No Trespassing".
   SIGN, DIRECTORY: A sign that identifies tenants in shopping centers, office,
and/or industrial parks both as to identify location and functional use. They
shall be designed to accommodate either pedestrians or motorists, or both.
   SIGN, DOUBLE FACE: A sign with back to back faces.
   SIGN, EXTERIOR ILLUMINATED: A sign that is illuminated by a light that is
directed towards and shines on the face of a sign.
   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A sign which indicates the name of a use, owner,
activity, business, or enterprise.
   SIGN, ILLUMINATED: Any sign having characters, letters, figures, designs, or
outlines illuminated by lights or luminous tubes designed for that purpose,
whether or not the lights or tubes are physically attached to the sign.
   SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED: A sign that is illuminated by an internal
light source.
   SIGN, MARQUEE: A sign attached and mounted on a permanent canopy.
   SIGN, MENU BOARD: A variable message sign that allows a retailer to list
products and prices.
   SIGN, MOBILE BILLBOARD: A sign placed on a vehicle which carries,
transports, pulls, or displays a sign or billboard in any form including
physical and electronic and is for the primary purpose of advertising.
   SIGN, MODEL: A sign which designates a particular dwelling unit design which
is not for sale, but rather represents other units of similar design that are
for sale.
   SIGN, MONUMENT: A self- supported structure not attached or affixed in any
way to a building or any structure, the face of which is enclosed, bordered, or
contained within a box-like structure, frame, or other device, with no visible
means of support.
   SIGN, NONCONFORMING: A permitted sign existing within the city limits on the
effective date of this section, or a sign existing in an area annexed to the
city after its effective date of this section.
   SIGN, NON-ILLUMINATED: A sign which is not illuminated by lights designed or
provided for that purpose, either external or internal.
   SIGN, PAINTED WALL: A sign painted directly on a building's exterior
surface.
   SIGN, PARKING IDENTIFICATION: A sign used to denote parking spaces with a
specific purpose.
   SIGN, PERMANENT: A sign, which when installed, is intended for permanent
use. Any sign with an intended use in excess of three months from the date of
installation.
   SIGN, POLE: A sign erected upon or printed on any material attached to a
pole(s), stand, tent or frame which is visible and which is wholly independent
of any building or other structure for support.
   SIGN, POSTED NOTICE: A sign intended to inform the public of development
applications under review for a subject property.
   SIGN, PROJECTED: A sign projected onto a building, screen or other
structure.
   SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign attached to and supported by a building or other
structure, which extends at angle therefrom.
   SIGN, PUBLIC SAFETY: Sign regarding the amount of cash in the register or
safe, as well as the hours of operation, open/closed, and emergency
notification phone numbers, which are required by the city. Shall not exceed
three square feet.
   SIGN, PUSH-THROUGH: A letter or logo that is cut out of a backing material
as thick or thicker than the sign face. The material is then mounted on the
inside of the sign face so that it is flush with or extends through and beyond
the first front of the sign face.
   SIGN, PYLON: A sign on the wall of an enclosed structure, which is erected
above the ground or as an extension above or an addition to a building,
primarily for the purpose of providing support or background for the sign copy.
   SIGN, RACEWAY: An electrical enclosure which can also be used to attach a
sign to the structure.
   SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A sign erected by the owner or an agent, indicating
property which is for rent, sale, or lease.
   SIGN, RETURN: The side of a channel letter.
   SIGN, REVERSED CHANNEL: A sign with letters mounted away from a wall, with
the illumination forming a halo behind the letters.
   SIGN, ROOF: A sign erected over or on the roof, extending above the roof
line, which is dependent upon the roof, parapet, or upper walls of any building
for support.
   SIGN, SANDWICH/A-FRAME: A temporary sign that is supported by its own frame
forming the cross- sectional shape of the letter "A" and is oriented for
pedestrians.
   SIGN, SIDEWALK: A moveable sign not secured or attached to the ground.
   SIGN, SINGLE-FACE: A sign with only one face plane.
   SIGN, SNIPE: A sign which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or
otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, or to other objects, with
the message appearing thereon not applicable to the present use of the premises
or structures upon which the sign is located.
   SIGN, SPECIAL EVENT BANNER: A banner used in accordance with a special event
permit issued by the city.
   SIGN, SUBDIVISION: A sign designating subdivision, plat, or other division
of real property.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any sign intended for use not permanent in nature.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY BANNER: Any banner intended for commercial use including but
not limited to grand openings, business announcements, and the like.
   SIGN, TRAILER: A portable sign placed in or attached to a trailer.
   SIGN, TRIM CAP: The plastic molding that affixes the acrylic channel letter
face to the return.
   SIGN, UNDER CANOPY: A sign attached to or hung from a canopy or covered
structure projecting from and supported by a building, when that canopy or
covered structure extends beyond the building, building line, or property line.
   SIGN, VEHICLE: A sign which includes but is not limited to tinting or
wrapping that is permanently attached or integrated into an automobile or
recreational vehicle.
   SIGN, VEHICLE REMOVABLE: A sign temporarily affixed to a transportation
vehicle, inside or outside.
   SIGN, WALL: A sign which is approximately parallel to and supported by any
wall or other enclosure.
   SIGN, WINDOW: Any sign mounted to the interior or exterior of a window or
any sign greater than three square feet in size which is mounted within three
feet of the window surface, in the interior of a building and located or
lighted so as to attract attention from the exterior of the business.
   SIGN, WRAP: A vinyl graphic applied to a surface such as an automobile,
recreational vehicle or utility box.
   SIGN, YARD: A temporary sign placed in the ground intended to display an
opinion or viewpoint, typically affixed to a wire frame.
   SIGN PLAN, MASTER: A sign plan intended for regional malls, hospitals,
commercial and other mixed use developments.
   SIGN PLAN, UNIFORM: A sign plan intended for a single shopping center which
establishes specific requirements for shopping center signage.
   SHARED PARKING: Parking space that is utilized for multiple users occurring
at different times, where persons utilizing the spaces are unlikely to need the
spaces at the same time of day.
   SILL: The lowermost member of a frame house. The large dimension wooden
element resting directly on the foundation.
   SITE: A piece, parcel, tract bounded by a lot line or a designated portion
of a public right-of-way.
   SITE PLAN: A plan showing uses and structures proposed for a legal lot; also
a development application which is processed through the Planning and Economic
Development Department.
   SITE PLAN AMENDMENT: An amendment to a previously approved site plan by the
city which is processed through the Planning and Economic Development
Department.
   SITE SPECIFIC: An individual piece of real estate which can be clearly
defined by street address, legal description or similar means at a single
identifiable location.
   SOLAR WATER HEATERS: The heating of water through solar collector tubes
typically located on a roof. Includes storage tanks and solar collectors. There
are two types of solar water heating systems: active, which have circulating
pumps and controls, and passive, which do not.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION: A use of property that is allowed under a zoning
ordinance under specified conditions.
   SPECIAL MASTER OR MAGISTRATE: Individuals retained by the city to conduct
quasi-judicial hearings that would otherwise come before the City Commission
for hearings as contemplated in this Code.
   SPECIAL PURPOSE VEHICLE: A vehicle designed primarily for unusual terrain
and conditions, and not typically licensed for or used on public roads;
including but not limited to swamp buggies, all-terrain vehicles (ATV's), and
other tracked vehicles.
   SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES: Group homes, nursing homes, foster care
facilities, life care facilities and adult congregate living facilities are
defined by three category types as more fully set forth in the data and
analysis section of the city comprehensive plan future land use element, as may
be amended from time to time.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Human genitals, public region, buttock, and
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and male
genitals in a turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Includes human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal, acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, and
fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or
female breast.
   SPECIMEN TREE: Any tree which has a diameter breast height of 18 inches or
greater, with the exception of the following:
      (1)   Non-native fruit trees that are cultivated or grown for the
specific purpose of producing edible fruit, including, but not limited to,
mangos, avocados or citrus.
      (2)   Species of the genus Ficus, except F. aurea (strangler fig), F.
laevigata (short leaf fig), F. rubiginosa (rusty fig or rusty leaf fig), F.
jacquinifolia.
      (3)   All multi-trunk palms.
      (4)   Trees that are in poor condition or form as determined by the city.
      (5)   All tree species as defined as category one invasive materials in
the most recent document compiled by the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council
(FLEPPC) for the south region.
   SPILL LIGHT: Light which falls outside the property where the luminaire is
sited.
   STACKING LANE: A portion of the vehicular use area on a site that is
dedicated to the temporary storage or standing of vehicles engaged in a drive-
through use of the sire or development.
   STEALTH FACILITY: Any telecommunications facility which is designed to blend
into the surrounding environment. Examples of stealth facilities include
architecturally screened roof mounted antennas, antennas integrated into
architectural elements, and telecommunication towers designed to look like and
are similar in scale to surrounding light poles or power poles.
   STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place of
whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic.
   STREET LINE: The right-of- way line of a street or the base building line,
whichever will provide for a greater width of street.
   STRUCTURE: A building of any kind, either temporary or permanent, which has
a roof over it, together with the curtilage thereof.
   SUBDIVISION: The platting of real property into two or more lots, parcels,
tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units, or any other division of land, and
includes establishment of new streets and alleys, additions, and re-
subdivisions.
   SUPERGRAPHIC OR MURAL: An artistic design or pictorial representation that
contains no lettering or business identification or logo or symbols used as
sign defined herein.
   SUSTAINABILITY: Meeting the needs of the present without compromising the
ability of future generations to meet their own needs.
   SWALES: Low-lying areas providing surface drainage, such as that area lying
between the paved portion of the public right-of-way and sidewalk or lot line.
   TATTOO PARLOR: An establishment whose business activity is principal or main
use to which the premise is devoted and the primary purpose involved the
practice of tattooing.
   TATTOOING: Any method of placing permanent designs, letters, scroll, figures
or symbols upon or under the skin with ink or any other substance, by the aid
of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin or a
process of piercing and ingraining a pigment, dye or ink in the skin, resulting
in either the coloration of the skin, or the production of scars or scarring,
including cosmetic tattooing, permanent makeup, microblading,
micropigmentation, and the like.
   TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER: A guyed, monopole, or self-support/lattice tower,
constructed as a free-standing structure, containing one or more antennas used
in the provision of personal wireless services.
   TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER, MONOPOLE: A telecommunication tower consisting of a
single pole or spire self-supported by a permanent foundation, constructed
without guy wires and ground anchors.
   TELEPHONE, TELECOMMUNICATION SWITCHING FACILITIES: Facilities housing solid
state electronic equipment, unmanned, and less than 300 square feet in size,
requiring only one parking space.
   TOWNHOUSE: One-family, residential dwelling unit, adjoining similar units,
and separated by either a common, eight-inch masonry partition wall, or
independent masonry walls abutting each other.
   TRAFFIC CALMING: The reduction in adverse impacts of motor vehicles by
reducing speeds, providing more space for pedestrians and cyclists, and
improving the local environment.
   TRAFFIC STUDY: Studies including but not limited to vehicle miles traveled
(vmt), peak travel times (a.m. and p.m.), walk and drive time analyses and the
like.
   TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT (TOD): A project or projects, in areas
identified in a local government comprehensive plan, that is or will be served
by existing or planned transit service. These designated areas shall be
compact, moderate to high density developments, of mixed-use character,
interconnected with other land uses, bicycle and pedestrian friendly, and
designed to support frequent transit service operating through, collectively or
separately, rail, fixed guideway, streetcar, or bus systems on dedicated
facilities or available roadway connections as defined in F.S. § 163.3164.
   TREE CANOPY: The total covering or enclosure of foliage held above a tree by
stems or branches. Usually measured by the diameter of the drip line.
   TREE PRUNING: The regular and frequent shearing of outer tree branches,
making cuts of one inch in diameter or less, for the purposes of controlling
the size and shape of the tree canopy.
   TREE REMOVAL: The act of cutting down a tree or palm, which results in total
removal of the stump from the property.
   TREE RING: Area surrounding the tree trunk used for retaining water
mulching, fertilizing. Includes but is not limited to loose mulch, rubber,
pavers, or stone.
   TREE: Any self-supporting, woody perennial plant which has a trunk diameter
of no less than two inches, measured at four and one- half feet above grade,
which normally grows to an overall height not less than 12 feet in southeast
Florida.
   UL: Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., a nationally recognized testing
laboratory that provides safety certification.
   USE: The purpose for which land or a structure thereon is designed,
arranged, or intended to be occupied or utilized, or for which it is occupied
and maintained.
   USE, ACCESSORY: A use that is subordinate and incidental to the principal
use in area, extent, size, or purpose, and serves only the principal use.
   USED: Arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, or
leased.
   UTILITY TRAILER: A trailer designed to transport materials, goods,
equipment, or boats.
   VALET PARKING: A service where a customer's vehicle is parked in designated
parking area and retrieved by attendant.
   VARIANCE: A modification of, or deviation from, the regulation of this Code
which is authorized and approved by the respected board after it finds that the
literal application of the provisions of this Code would cause unnecessary
hardship or practical difficulty in the use or development of a specific lot or
building.
   VESTED RIGHTS: A right belonging to a person as a property interest which
cannot be removed without the consent of the owner.
   VINES: Plants which normally require support to reach mature form.
   VULNERABILITY: The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to
cope with, adverse effects of climate change, including climate vulnerability
and extremes. It is the function of character, magnitude, and rate of climate
variation to which a system is exposed, its sensitivity, and its adaptive
capacity.
   XERISCAPE: Quality landscaping that conserves water and protects the
environment.
   YARD: The area within a lot that lies between the principal structure(s) on
the lot and the nearest lot lines. Yards are further classified as front yards,
street side yards, interior side yards, and rear yards.
   YARD, FRONT: The area extending across the full width of the lot between the
front lot line and the nearest line of the main use or main building.
   YARD, REAR: The area extending across the full width of the lot between the
rear lot line and the nearest line to the main building.
   YARD, SIDE: The area extending from the front yard to the rear yard, between
the side lot line and the nearest line of any building or use on the lot. The
width shall be the shortest distance between the side lot line and the nearest
use or building on the lot.
   ZERO LOT LINE: The location of a building on a lot where one or more sides
rests directly on a lot line.
   ZONING: Public regulation of the use of land.
   ZONING CERTIFICATE OF USE: A document ensuring that new business occupancies
and uses, and changes of existing business occupancies and uses, comply with
the city's LDC, Code of Ordinances, Building Code and life safety requirements,
and other applicable codes and regulations.
   ZONING CHANGE: An amendment to the existing zoning text or map.
   ZONING IN PROGRESS: A temporary hold on development orders and approvals if
there are pending active efforts underway to amend the Code in a way that would
preclude such permits and approvals should the pending amendment be adopted.
   ZONING MAP: The official zoning map or maps that are part of the city's LDC
in
Chapter 155 and delineate the boundaries of individual zones and districts.
§ 155.204 ACRONYMS.
   This section is intended to identify acronyms which may appear in the LDC or
which may appear in the development or permit review process.
   AADT: Average Annual Daily Traffic
   ADA: American's with Disabilities Act
   ADU: Accessory Dwelling Unit
   AMI: Approved Minutes
   BCAD: Broward County Aviation Department
   BCT: Broward County Transit
   CAA: Clean Air Act
   CAO: City Attorney's Office
   CBDD: Central Broward Water Control District
   CCT: Color Correlated Temperature
   CO: Certificate of Occupancy
   CPTED: Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design
   DBH: Diameter Breast Height
   DEO: Department of Economic Opportunity
   DEP: Department of Environmental Protection
   DO: Development Order
   DRC: Development Review Committee
   DRI: Development of Regional Impact
   EA: Environmental Assessment
   EAR: Evaluation and Appraisal Report
   EPA: Environmental Protection Agency
   FAA: Federal Aviation Administration
   F.A.C: Florida Administrative Code
   FAR: Floor Area Ratio
   FBC: Florida Building Code
   F.C.: Foot-candles
   FDOT: Florida Department of Transportation
   FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency
   FGBC: Florida Green Building Code
   FHWA: Federal Highway Administration
   FLU: Future Land Use
   FLUM: Future Land Use Map
   FPL: Florida Power and Light
   F.S: Florida State Statutes
   GIS: Geographic Information Systems
   HOA: Homeowners Association
   HUD: U.S Department of Housing and Urban Development
   IES or IESNA: Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
   I/A: If Applicable
   LCD: Liquid Crystal Display
   LED: Light Emitting Diode
   LPA: Local Planning Agency
   LUPA: Land Use Plan Amendment
   LZA: Letter from Zoning Administrator
   MPO: Metropolitan Planning Organization
   MUTCD: Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
   NAVD: North American Vertical Datum
   NGBS: National Green Building Council
   NOAA: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
   ORD: Ordinance
   PER: Permit
   RES: Resolution
   ROW: Right-of-Way
   SBDD: South Broward Drainage District
   SFRPC: South Florida Regional Planning Council
   SR: State Road
   TOC: Transit Oriented Corridor
   TOD: Transit Oriented Development
   USGBC: United Stated Green Building Council
   VMT: Vehicle Miles Traveled
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
ARTICLE 3: ADMINISTRATION
§ 155.300 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter establishes the review and approval procedures for all
development applications under this Land Development Code (LDC).
   (B)   Review and approval by outside agencies including but not limited to
Broward County, Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) and Florida Power
and Light (FPL) may be required. The approval of any application under the
provisions of this LDC shall not provide exemption from having to gain outside
agency approval.
   (C)   The Planning and Economic Development Department Director shall
determine what application(s) shall apply to the proposal.
   (D)   The types of decisions to which this subchapter applies include:
      (1)   Legislative decisions;
      (2)   Quasi-judicial decisions;
      (3)   Administrative decisions.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.301 DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS.
Table 155.301: Application Review Processes
CLICK_HERE_to_view_Table_as_a_PDF_document
   (A)   Site plan.
      (1)   Purpose. To ensure that layout and general design of proposed
development comply with all applicable standards in this Code.
      (2)   Applicability:
         (a)   Construction of new structures on vacant land including but not
limited to buildings or parking lots.
         (b)   Construction of freestanding building(s) or out parcel building
(s).
         (c)   Significant modifications to an approved plan which change the
function and/or character of an existing site as determined by the Director.
         (d)   Significant redevelopment of an existing site as determined by
the Director.
      (3)   Exemption:
         (a)   Construction of a single-family home (if in accordance with a
valid building permit).
         (b)   Repairs or renovations to residential or nonresidential
structures, but only when the improvements are made to the interior of the
structure or when the facade, roofline, or exterior dimensions of the structure
are not changed.
         (c)   Demolition.
         (d)   Land clearing activity done in compliance with a valid land
clearing permit issued pursuant to this Code and a city engineering permit.
         (e)   The deposit and contouring of fill on land.
      (4)   Procedure:
         (a)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for application review process.
         (b)   Site plans that have buildings or structures exceeding 50 feet
in height shall require review and action by the City Commission.
         (c)   Site plans located within a planned district as defined in §§
155.450 through
155.456 shall require review and action by the City Commission.
   (B)   Site plan amendment.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide means for the consideration of proposed
modifications to previously approved site plans.
      (2)   Applicability:
         (a)   Additions to existing buildings or structures.
         (b)   Modifications which may change the function and/or character of
an existing site.
      (3)   Procedure:
         (a)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for application review process.
         (b)   Site plan amendments that have additions or modifications to
buildings or structures exceeding 50 feet in height shall require review and
action by the City Commission.
   (C)   Administrative review.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide means for the consideration of modifications to
an existing development plan, which does not significantly alter function and/
or character of an existing site.
      (2)   Applicability. Minor modifications to an existing development plan
that follow the provisions and intent of this LDC and which do not depart from
the principal concept of the approved plan, as determined by the Planning and
Economic Development Department.
      (3)   Procedure:
         (a)   The Planning and Economic Development Department shall determine
the process for an administrative review and shall be one of the following:
            1.   Staff review resulting in the issuance of a zoning letter.
            2.   Review and action by the Planning and Zoning Board.
         (b)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for specific application review process, once determined by the
Department.
   (D)   Zoning change (zoning map amendment).
      (1)   Purpose. To provide means for the consideration of amendments to
the official zoning map whenever public necessity, general welfare,
comprehensive plan, or appropriate land use practices justify or require doing
so.
      (2)   Applicability. All land that meets minimum lot size requirements
within the City of Pembroke Pines is eligible for a zoning change so long as
the proposed change is consistent with the underlying land use and plat.
      (3)   Procedure:
         (a)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for application review process.
         (b)   This application is processed as an ordinance which requires
transmittal to City Commission by the Planning and Zoning Board and two
readings at City Commission.
      (4)   Limitations on subsequent applications:
         (a)   If the Planning and Zoning Board or City Commission has acted to
deny a petition for the zoning change of property, the Board will not consider
any further petition for the same zoning change of any part of the same
property for a period of one year from the date of the latest such action by
either the Board or the Commission.
         (b)   If the Commission has changed the zoning of property by
ordinance, the Board will not consider any petition for zoning change of any
part of the same property for a period of six months from the effective date of
the resolution.
         (c)   The above time limits for Board consideration may be waived by
the Commission by the affirmative vote of four Commissioners, if the Commission
deems such action necessary to prevent an injustice or to facilitate
development consistent with the character and vision of the city.
      (5)   Prohibitions on conditional zoning change:
         (a)   No zoning change of property may contain conditions,
limitations, or requirements that are not applicable to all other property in
the zoning district to which the particular property is rezoned.
         (b)   However, voluntary commitments proposed by the applicant may be
considered by the Planning and Zoning Board.
      (6)   Planning and Zoning Board decision required. No change or amendment
relating to the boundaries of the various zoning districts and the regulations
applicable thereto, shall be made by the City Commission unless the proposal or
request for that change has been considered by the Planning and Zoning Board,
and the Commission has received a recommendation thereon from the Board.
   (E)   Zoning change (Land Development Code).
      (1)   Purpose. To provide means consideration of amendments to the text
of the LDC whenever public necessity, general welfare, comprehensive plan, or
appropriate land use practices justify or require doing so.
      (2)   Applicability:
         (a)   All text within the LDC is eligible to be amended, unless such a
change would conflict with county, state, or federal regulations.
         (b)   Proposed amendments to the text of the LDC may come from the
public, city staff, City Commission.
      (3)   Procedure:
         (a)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for application review process.
         (b)   This application is processed as an ordinance which requires
transmittal to City Commission by the Planning and Zoning Board and two
readings at City Commission.
      (4)   Limitation on subsequent applications:
         (a)   If the Planning and Zoning Board or City Commission has acted to
deny a petition for the zoning change of property, the Board will not consider
any further petition for the same zoning change of any part of the same
property for a period of one year from the date of the latest such action by
either the Board or the Commission.
         (b)   If the Commission has changed the zoning of property by an
ordinance, the Board will not consider any petition for zoning change of any
part of the same property for a period of six months from the effective date of
the resolution.
         (c)   The above time limits for Board consideration may be waived by
the Commission by the affirmative vote of four Commissioners, if the Commission
deems such action necessary to prevent an injustice or to facilitate the proper
development of the city.
   (F)   Zoning change (planned district text amendment).
      (1)   Purpose. To provide means consideration of amendments to the text
of a planned district whenever public necessity, general welfare, comprehensive
plan, or appropriate land use practices justify or require doing so.
      (2)   Applicability. All text within planned district guidelines are
eligible to be amended, unless such a change would conflict with county, state,
or federal regulations.
      (3)   Procedure:
         (a)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for application review process.
         (b)   This application is processed as an ordinance which requires
transmittal to City Commission by the Planning and Zoning Board and two
readings at City Commission.
      (4)   Limitation on subsequent applications:
         (a)   If the Planning and Zoning Board or City Commission has acted to
deny a petition for the zoning change of property, the Board will not consider
any further petition for the same zoning change of any part of the same
property for a period of one year from the date of the latest such action by
either the Board or the Commission.
         (b)   If the Commission has changed the zoning of property by
ordinance, the Board will not consider any petition for zoning change of any
part of the same property for a period of six months from the effective date of
the resolution.
         (c)   The above time limits for Board consideration may be waived by
the Commission by the affirmative vote of four Commissioners, if the Commission
deems such action necessary to prevent an injustice or to facilitate the proper
development of the city.
   (G)   Comprehensive plan text or map amendment (land use plan amendment).
      (1)   Purpose. To provide means for the consideration of amendments to
the future land use element of the City of Pembroke Pines.
      (2)   Applicability.
         (a)   The comprehensive plan map amendment process applies to the
following types of amendments:
            1.   County land use plan amendment: The re-designation of property
on the City of Pembroke Pines Land Use Plan which by virtue of its nature also
requires an amendment to the Broward County Land Use Plan through application
to the Broward County Planning Council. A county land use plan amendment shall
become effective only after the City of Pembroke Pines Land Use Plan is
recertified by the Broward County Planning Council.
            2.   Local land use plan amendment: The re-designation of property
on the City of Pembroke Pines Land Use Plan which does not also require an
amendment to the Broward County Land Use Plan. A local land use plan amendment
shall become effective only after the City of Pembroke Pines Land Use Plan is
recertified by the Broward County Planning Council.
         (b)   Comprehensive plan text is eligible to be amended, unless such a
change would conflict with county, state, or federal regulations. Proposed
amendments to the text of the comprehensive plan may come from the public, city
staff, City Commission.
      (3)   Procedure:
         (a)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for application review process.
         (b)   This application is processed as an ordinance which requires
transmittal to City Commission by the Planning and Zoning Board and two
readings at City Commission.
   (H)   Plat.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide a uniform means to approve the division of
land, ensuring that such divisions promote the health, safety and welfare of
city's inhabitants.
      (2)   Applicability. Platting is applicable to all land within the City
of Pembroke Pines that meet the requirements set forth by Broward County.
      (3)   Procedure:
         (a)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for application review process.
         (b)   This application is processed as a resolution which requires
transmittal to City Commission by the Planning and Zoning Board and one reading
at City Commission.
         (c)   Plats shall require transmittal to the county for additional
processing.
         (d)   Plats may require an agreement for municipal dedication.
   (I)   Delegation request.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide means for the consideration of amendments to a
restrictive note or condition on an existing recorded plat.
      (2)   Applicability. All existing plats are eligible to be amended, if
the amendment is consistent with the underlying land use.
      (3)   Procedure:
         (a)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for application review process.
         (b)   This application is processed as a resolution which requires one
reading at City Commission.
   (J)   Flexibility allocation and redevelopment units.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide means for the assignment of both flexibility
and redevelopment units, which are regulated by Broward County but administered
by municipalities.
      (2)   Applicability. Flexibility units shall apply to land which can meet
the criteria and rules set forth by the Broward County Administrative Rules
documents.
      (3)   Procedure:
         (a)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for application review process.
         (b)   This application will be processed in conjunction with another
development application either as an ordinance requiring transmittal to City
Commission by the Planning and Zoning Board and two readings at City Commission
or as a resolution requiring transmittal to City Commission by the Planning and
Zoning Board and one reading at City Commission.
         (c)   Flexibility units can only be assigned through a zoning change,
plat or other official action as determined by the Planning and Economic
Development Department Director.
   (K)   Development of regional impact (DRI) amendment.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide means to update development orders for an
existing DRI.
      (2)   Applicability. Existing DRIs may be amended if they are consistent
with the underlying land use and do not exceed the intended impacts. Changes to
existing DRI's will be reviewed for impacts based on the standards and
procedures in the city's adopted local comprehensive plan and land development
regulations.
      (3)   Procedure:
         (a)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for application review process.
         (b)   This application is processed as an ordinance which requires
transmittal to City Commission by the Planning and Zoning Board and two
readings at City Commission.
   (L)   Interpretation.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide means for the applicant to request the approval
or authorization of a use which is not specifically or implicitly prohibited in
a zoning district.
      (2)   Applicability. Interpretations shall be provided upon an
applicant's request.
      (3)   Procedure. Refer to
Table 155.301 for application review process.
   (M)   Special exception.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide means for the individualized review of certain
uses which, due to their nature, require special consideration of their
location, design, and methods of operation, as well as the impositions of
conditions to mitigate concerns before they can be deemed appropriate in a
zoning district and compatible with their surroundings.
      (2)   Applicability:
         (a)   Uses requiring special exception as outlined in
Table 155.501 shall require review and action by the Planning and Zoning Board.
         (b)   City Commission review and approval of a special exception will
be required for nonresidential applications that propose a floor area ratio
(FAR) exceeding 0.5 to 1.0.
         (c)   City Commission review and approval of a special exception will
be required for all development applications proposing uses as outlined in
Table 155.501 that are part of the I-H (Industrial Heavy) zoning district.
      (3)   Standards for approval:
         (a)   The proposed use is compatible with the existing natural
environment and community character of the properties within the immediate
neighborhood.
         (b)   The proposed use is deemed desirable for public convenience, and
not injurious or otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort
and welfare.
         (c)   The design of the proposed use shall minimize adverse effects,
including noise, light, dust or other potential nuisances, of the proposed use
on adjacent property through the use of building orientation, setbacks,
buffers, landscaping and other design criteria consistent with the city
regulations to the greatest extent possible. Entire site shall be void of any
pre-existing code violations.
         (d)   There are adequate parking areas and off-street truck loading
spaces (if applicable) consistent with the parking requirements of the Code,
and the layout of the parking and vehicular use areas is convenient and
conducive to safe and efficient operation consistent with the city standards to
the greatest extent possible.
         (e)   There will be adequate provisions for traffic movement, both
vehicular and pedestrian internal to the use and adequate measures exist or
shall be taken to provide ingress and egress to the proposed use, for both
vehicles and pedestrian, in a manner that minimizes traffic congestion in the
public streets, and the use may not result in a significantly greater amount of
traffic on local streets than would result from a development permitted by
right, performed through use of a traffic study.
         (f)   The land area must be sufficient, appropriate and adequate for
the use and for any reasonably anticipated expansion thereof.
      (4)   Procedure:
         (a)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for application review process.
         (b)   A special exception shall be processed concurrent with a site
plan or site plan amendment.
   (N)   Zoning verification letter.
      (1)   Purpose. Provide means for the applicant to obtain general zoning
information related to a specific district.
      (2)   Applicability. Zoning verification letters can be requested for any
property within the city limits. Zoning verification letters are for
informational purposes and do not serve as due diligence for a property.
      (3)   Procedure. Refer to
Table 155.301 for application review process.
   (O)   Variance.
      (1)   Purpose. To allow for the provision of relief from certain
development standards of this LDC for one or more of the following reasons:
         (a)   There are special circumstances or conditions applying to the
land or building for which the variance is sought, which are peculiar to the
land or building and do not apply generally to land or buildings in the
neighborhood, and the strict application of the provisions of the zoning
ordinance would result in an unnecessary hardship and deprive the applicant of
the reasonable use of the land or building;
         (b)   Any alleged hardship is not self-created by any person having an
interest in the property nor is the result of a mere disregard for or in
ignorance of the provisions of the zoning ordinances of the city; or
         (c)   Granting the variance is not incompatible with public policy,
will not adversely affect any adjacent property owners, and the circumstances
which cause the special conditions are peculiar to the subject property.
      (2)   Applicability:
         (a)   All properties are eligible to receive a variance from the
regulations under this LDC.
         (b)   Use variances are prohibited under this LDC.
      (3)   Procedure:
         (a)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for applicable application review process.
         (b)   The authority to review variances requested by single-family
homeowners rests with the Board of Adjustment, whereas variances requested for
non-single-family are reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Board.
   (P)   Landscape permit.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide a means to ensure the landscape diversity and
design meets the provisions of this LDC.
      (2)   Applicability. A landscape permit shall be required for the
following: planting as the result of a new development, significant planting or
replanting on an existing site or general landscape maintenance to a property
as determined by the landscape division.
      (3)   Procedure:
         (a)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for applicable application review process.
         (b)   The authority to review, process and grant approval rests with
the staff of the Landscape Division of the Planning and Economic Development
Department.
         (c)   Inspection of the work is required following completion.
   (Q)   Tree removal or relocation permit.
      (1)   Purpose. Ensure that all trees are properly moved or removed and
that all properties provide the proper mitigation and maintain the tree canopy
throughout the city.
      (2)   Applicability. This process applies whenever trees are removed or
relocated on any property as determined by the staff of the Landscape Division
of the Planning and Economic Development Department.
      (3)   Procedure:
         (a)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for applicable application review process.
         (b)   Permits are processed through the Landscape Division of the
Planning and Economic Development Department.
         (c)   Inspection is required 90 days after issuance of the permit.
   (R)   Appeal of departmental LDC interpretation.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide means for the appeal of interpretations made by
the Planning and Economic Development Department.
      (2)   Applicability. If an applicant is not satisfied with a LDC
interpretation rendered by the Planning and Economic Development Department.
All LDC interpretations are appealable.
      (3)   Procedure. Refer to
Table 155.301 and §
155.310 for applicable application review process and criteria.
   (S)   Appeal of Board of Adjustment or Planning and Zoning Board decision.
      (1)   Purpose. Establish procedures to appeal decisions made by the Board
of Adjustment or Planning and Zoning Board.
      (2)   Applicability. All items heard by the Board of Adjustment or the
Planning and Zoning Board that receives a decision is eligible for this appeal
process.
      (3)   Procedure. Refer to
Table 155.301 and §
155.310 for applicable application review process and criteria.
   (T)   Zoning certificate of use.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of a certificate of use is to ensure that any
development of a change in use complies with the provisions of this LDC.
      (2)   Applicability. Any person who operates or engages in any use within
the city limits. A new certificate of use is required for any change in use,
owner, location, business name and any additional use added to the business.
      (3)   Procedure.
         (a)   Refer to
Table 155.301 for applicable application review process.
         (b)   Application shall be submitted to the Planning and Economic
Development Department and reviewed by the Zoning Division.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.302 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
Table 155.302: Summary of Notice Requirements by Application Type
I/A: If applicable | N/A: Not applicable
Requirement      Published Mailed Posted
Application Type Notice    Notice Notice Homeowners Association Notice
Table 155.302: Summary of Notice Requirements by Application Type
I/A: If applicable | N/A: Not applicable
Requirement    Published                                 Mailed                                    Posted
Application    Notice                                    Notice                                    Notice                                    Homeowners Association Notice
Type
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Site Plan      bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]
Site Plan      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Amendment      bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]
Zoning Change  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
(Map)          bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]
Zoning Change
(Land          [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Development    bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/
Code or        IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]
Planned
District)
Comprehensive  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Plan Map       bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/
Amendment      IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]
Comprehensive  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Plan Text      bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ N/A                                       N/A                                       N/A
Amendment      IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Plat           bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ N/A
               IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]
Flexibility
Allocation and I/A                                       I/A                                       I/A                                       I/A
Redevelopment
Units1
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
DRI Amendment  bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ N/A
               IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]
Special        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Exception      bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Interpretation bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]
Variance       [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
(Single-Family bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ N/A
Homeowner      IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]
Residential)
Variance (Non  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Single-Family) bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]
Appeal of      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Departmental   bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/
LDC            IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]
Determination
Appeal of
Planning and   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Zoning or      bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/ bbcb2026fee1a85c2e92e1c2a7da6da550f802b5/
Board of       IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8312.jpg]
Adjustment
Decisions
 
1 Flexibility Allocation and Redevelopment Units shall be noticed in accordance
with the concurrent development application.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Unless noted within the provisions of this LDC noticing will not be
required for an application.
      (2)   For information regarding specific noticing procedures and
formatting, review the Public Notification Guide, which is maintained in the
Planning and Economic Development Department.
   (B)   Published notice.
      (1)   Proper legal notice shall be provided at least 15 days prior to
quasi-judicial proceeding and shall inform any and all affected persons that
they can present evidence, bring forth witnesses, cross examine witnesses if
the City Clerk's office is notified within seven days of scheduled proceeding.
      (2)   Published notice shall include: name of petitioner, the current
date, time and location of scheduled proceeding.
      (3)   Comprehensive plan map amendments notice shall be provided at least
seven days prior to meeting with the Local Planning Agency and City Commission
for first reading. Notice shall be provided at least five days prior to second
reading at City Commission.
   (C)   Mailed notice.
      (1)   Adjacent property owner notice:
         (a)   Proper notice will be mailed to all property owners within 500
feet of the subject site at least 15 days prior to the quasi-judicial
proceeding.
         (b)   All mailed notice shall be sent via first class mail.
      (2)   Board of Adjustment. Mailed notice for Board of Adjustment shall be
completed by the Planning and Economic Development Department.
      (3)   Planning and Zoning Board or the City Commission.
         (a)   Mailed notice for Planning and Zoning Board or City Commission
applications in relation to this LDC shall be completed by the applicant.
         (b)   The Planning and Economic Development Department shall produce
the notice, however, the applicant shall be responsible for producing copies
and mailing the notice to property owners within 500 feet of the site.
         (c)   The applicant shall provide the following to the Planning and
Economic Development Department.
            1.   The list of property owners shall be derived from the most
recent official tax roll of Broward County. The applicant shall provide an
affidavit attesting to the completeness and accuracy of the property owner's
list.
            2.   An affidavit that notice was sent to all property owners
included in the property owner's list.
         (d)   The applicant is responsible for all costs associated with the
mailed notice.
   (D)   Homeowners association notice. Adjacent homeowner associations notice:
      (1)   Proper notice shall be mailed to all homeowner's associations
registered with the City Clerk's Office within 500 feet of the subject site at
least 30 days prior to the quasi-judicial proceeding with the Planning and
Zoning Board or the City Commission.
      (2)   The master homeowners' association shall notify all applicable sub-
associations
      (3)   An affidavit of mailing shall be provided to the Planning and
Economic Development Department within 15 days of quasi-judicial proceeding.
The affidavit shall:
         (a)   Confirm the mailed notice was sent to the proper associations.
         (b)   Advise the association of pending application.
         (c)   Confirm the mailed notice was sent at least 30 days prior to
meeting.
         (d)   Provide a copy of the mailed notice.
   (E)   Posted notice.
      (1)   Board of Adjustment.
         (a)   Proper posted notice shall be placed on the subject site visible
on each adjacent road frontage at least 15 days prior to the quasi-judicial
proceeding.
         (b)   The city shall provide the applicant or petitioner the
appropriate notification sign(s) to post upon receipt of application. An
affidavit of posting and a dated photograph of the sign(s) posted shall be
submitted to the city by the applicant or petitioner.
      (2)   Planning and Zoning Board and City Commission. Proper posted notice
shall be placed on the subject site visible on each adjacent road frontage at
least 30 days prior to the quasi-judicial proceeding.
      (3)   Notice removal.
         (a)   Posted notice sign shall be removed within ten calendar days
after the expiration of the final appeal period or the date of which the appeal
decision is effective.
         (b)   Failure to remove posted notice sign will result in a code
violation.
         (c)   If severe storm warning is declared by NOAA, the applicant must
remove all posted signs from the property. If applicant fails to remove posted
signs, the city may remove posted signs if deemed a danger by the Planning and
Economic Development Department Director. Signs shall be reinstalled two days
after storm warning is canceled.
         (d)   Proof of posted notice removal shall be provided to the project
planner. All costs of the quasi-judicial proceedings, including but not limited
to notification and advertising, for posted notice signs and mailings shall be
paid by the applicant or petitioner.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22)
§ 155.303 REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING AUTHORITIES.
   (A)   Planning and Economic Development Department Staff.
      (1)   Purpose. The staff of the Planning and Economic Development
Department is responsible for administering the provisions found in the LDC.
      (2)   Powers and duties:
         (a)   Review development applications.
         (b)   Conduct pre-application meetings.
         (c)   Maintain the official zoning map and associated materials.
         (d)   Serve as professional staff to the Board of Adjustment, Planning
and Zoning Board , City Commission and other advisory boards as necessary.
         (e)   Provide expertise and technical assistance to the city's review
and decision-making bodies on request.
         (f)   Recommend action on applications that are reviewed by the
Planning and Zoning Board and or City Commission.
         (g)   Establish application submittal requirements and review
procedures.
         (h)   Render decisions on designated administrative reviews.
         (i)   Render decisions on applications including alcoholic beverage
licenses, landscape permits, tree removal permits and zoning certificates of
use.
   (B)   Development Review Committee (DRC).
      (1)   Purpose. The Development Review Committee (DRC) is an advisory
group of city staff members and outside agencies (as necessary) who meet to
review and comment on development applications and discuss other matters
related to the city's review and management of development.
      (2)   Membership. The DRC shall include but is not limited to the
following disciplines: planning, zoning, fire prevention, engineering,
landscaping, police, Water Management District(s), Broward County Mass Transit,
Florida Power and Light, utilities, waste/trash city contract vendor and any
other agencies as determined by the staff project managers.
      (3)   Powers and duties: The committee shall have the following
jurisdiction:
         (a)   Review and render recommendations on development applications.
         (b)   Act as the land development regulation commission pursuant to
F.S. §§ 163.3164 et seq., so as to develop and recommend to the City Commission
Land Development Code amendments.
   (C)   Board of Adjustment.
      (1)   Purpose. The Board of Adjustment shall be established to hear and
decide upon zoning variances, interpretation of the LDC and appeals of
departmental LDC interpretations for individual single-family residential
properties.
      (2)   Powers and duties. Make decisions on variances, interpretation of
the LDC and appeals of departmental LDC interpretations for individual single-
family residential properties.
   (D)   Planning and Zoning Board.
      (1)   Purpose. The Planning and Zoning Board shall serve as the
Architecture Review Board, as well as the Local Planning Agency in accordance
with F.S. § 163.3174 and render decisions or recommendation for applicable
application found under this LDC.
      (2)   Powers and duties:
         (a)   Serve as an advisory board to the City Commission.
         (b)   Make decisions for the following applications:
            1.   Appeal of staff decision;
            2.   Flexibility allocation;
            3.   Interpretation;
            4.   Site plan* (See §
155.301(A));
            5.   Site plan amendment* (See §
155.301(B));
            6.   Special exception* (See §
155.301(M));
            7.   Variance (multi-family, nonresidential).
         (c)   Make recommendations to the City Commission for the following
applications:
            1.   Comprehensive plan amendment;
            2.   DRI amendment;
            3.   Land use plan amendment;
            4.   Plat;
            5.   Site plan* (See §
155.301(A));
            6.   Site plan amendment* (See §
155.301(B));
            7.   Special exception* (See §
155.301(M));
            8.   Zoning change (Land Development Code or planned district);
            9.   Zoning change text.
      (3)   For applications in which the Planning and Zoning Board makes a
decision, the decision shall be either:
         (a)   Approval as submitted;
         (b)   Approval subject to condition(s);
         (c)   Denial.
      (4)   For applications in which the Planning and Zoning Board makes a
recommendation, the recommendation shall be a transmittal to City Commission
for:
         (a)   Approval;
         (b)   Approval subject to condition(s);
         (c)   Denial.
   (E)   City Commission.
      (1)   General. In addition to other authority granted to City Commission
by the Florida Constitution and State Law, the City Commission has specified
powers and duties under the LDC.
      (2)   Powers and duties:
         (a)   Make decisions for the following applications:
            1.   Appeals of Planning and Zoning Board or Board of Adjustment
decision;
            2.   Comprehensive plan amendment;
            3.   Delegation request;
            4.   DRI amendment;
            5.   Plat;
            6.   Site plan* (See §
155.301(A));
            7.   Site plan amendment* (See §
155.301(B));
            8.   Special exception* (See §
155.301(M));
            9.   Zoning change (Land Development Code or planned district);
            10.   Zoning change text.
         (b)   Make decisions on residential density and nonresidential
intensity of development.
         (c)   Perform any other functions as designated by motion, resolution
or ordinance of the City Commission.
      (3)   The City Commission decision shall be either:
         (a)   Approval as submitted;
         (b)   Approval subject to conditions;
         (c)   Denial;
         (d)   Table or defer to a specified time;
         (e)   Transmittal of application back to the recommending body or
board.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.304 QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. To provide an equitable and efficient manner for the city to
hear matters which are considered quasi-judicial in nature. These procedures
shall be utilized by the Board of Adjustment, Planning and Zoning Board, and
the City Commission in regards to hearings on quasi-judicial matters in which
their body is the final authority.
   (B)   Applicability. For the purposes of this section, the following
matters, regardless of whether the final determination is made by the City
Commission or a board, shall be considered to be quasi-judicial:
      (1)   Site specific zoning changes and site plans;
      (2)   Site specific land use amendments;
      (3)   Variances;
      (4)   Plat approvals;
      (5)   Special exceptions which relate to the use of land and businesses;
      (6)   Interpretations;
      (7)   Appeal of departmental LDC interpretation;
      (8)   Appeal of Planning and Zoning or Board of Adjustment decisions.
   (C)   Ex-parte (oral) communications.
      (1)   Ex-parte (oral) communications are not presumed prejudicial
provided any disclosure required in divisions (C)(2), (C)(3) or (C)(4) of this
section is made before or during the public meeting at which a vote is taken on
the matter.
      (2)   The substance of any ex-parte communication with a local public
official that relates to quasi-judicial action pending before the official is
not presumed prejudicial to the action if the subject of the communication and
the identity of the person, group or entity with whom the communication took
place is disclosed and made a part of the record.
      (3)   A local public official may read a written communication from any
person. However, a written communication that relates to quasi-judicial action
pending before a local public official shall not be presumed prejudicial to the
action and such written communication shall be made a part of the record before
final action on the matter.
      (4)   Local public officials may conduct investigations and site visits
and may receive expert opinions regarding quasi-judicial action pending before
them. Such activity shall not be presumed prejudicial to the action if the
existence of the investigation, site visit, or expert opinion is made a part of
the record before final action on the matter.
      (5)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section above, in quasi-
judicial proceedings on local government land use matters, a person may not be
precluded from communicating directly with a member of the decision making body
by application of ex-parte communications prohibitions. Disclosure of such
communications by a member of the decision making body is not required, and
such nondisclosure shall not be presumed prejudicial to the decision of the
decision making body. All decisions of the decision making body must be
supported by substantial, competent evidence in the record pertinent to the
proceedings, irrespective of such communications.
   (D)   Presentation of evidence.
      (1)   All persons testifying before a board or the City Commission must
be sworn in. The petitioner, members of a board or the City Commission and any
affected person who has provided notice that it intends to appear at the
proceeding shall be given the opportunity to present evidence, bring forth
witnesses, and cross-examine any witnesses.
      (2)   All evidence relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the
conduct of their business shall be admissible, whether or not such evidence
would be admissible in a court of law. However, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
      (3)   Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or
explaining other evidence, but it shall not be sufficient by itself to support
a finding.
      (4)   Documentary evidence may be presented in the form of a copy or the
original, if available. Upon request, parties shall be given an opportunity to
compare the copy with the original.
      (5)   A party shall be entitled to conduct cross-examination when
testimony is provided or documents are made a part of the record.
      (6)   The office of the City Attorney shall represent the Board or the
City Commission. Any questions as to the propriety and admissibility of
evidence shall be presented to the City Attorney's office in a timely fashion.
   (E)   Conduct of proceedings.
      (1)   The proceedings shall be conducted in an informal manner. Each
party shall have the right to do the following:
         (a)   To call and examine witnesses;
         (b)   To introduce exhibits;
         (c)   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any relevant matter;
         (d)   To rebut evidence.
      (2)   To the extent possible, the following shall be the order of the
proceedings:
         (a)   Call the proceeding to order and announce the beginning of the
proceeding. A majority of the board or City Commission members must be
continuously present during the proceeding.
         (b)   The matter to be heard and the rules concerning the
admissibility of evidence should be announced.
         (c)   Statements of counsel shall only be considered as argument and
not be considered as testimony. Counsel for parties shall not be subject to
cross-examination. The board or the City Commission shall have the authority to
refuse to hear any testimony which is irrelevant or repetitive.
         (d)   The Chair of the board or the City Commission shall have the
option of determining the order of presentation of the parties in order to
expedite the proceeding. During its presentation the city shall present any
staff, board or other reports on the matter as well as any comments. These
reports shall include, but not be limited to, a description of the request of
the petitioner; a description of background related to the petitioner; an
analysis which includes the consistency with the city comprehensive plan, if
applicable, and how the petition does or does not meet the requirements of the
City Code; a listing of the exhibits to be presented; a summary of the issues;
and, the staff and boards' recommendations. These reports shall include
specific findings in support of justifying a recommendation for approval or
denial of the petition.
         (e)   The petitioner, or a representative, may make a presentation. If
the petitioner chooses to make a presentation, it should include a description
of the nature of the petition if there is additional information that has not
been previously provided to or by the city. In addition, the petitioner shall
introduce any exhibits and witnesses.
         (f)   Parties who are in support of the petition shall make their
presentation. The parties shall introduce any exhibits and witnesses.
         (g)   Parties who are in opposition of the petition shall make their
presentation. The parties shall introduce any exhibits and witnesses.
         (h)   City personnel in attendance shall provide responses to any
party to the proceeding.
         (i)   After each witness testifies or documents are made a part of the
record, a party shall be permitted to question the witness. The questioning
party is not permitted to make any statements, only to ask questions which are
directly related to the testimony presented.
         (j)   Final presentation by petitioner in response to any testimony
from other parties.
         (k)   Final presentation by the city in response to any testimony from
other parties.
         (l)   The board or City Commission shall deliberate on the petition.
No further testimony shall be taken and the members of the board or the City
Commission shall not ask further questions of persons presenting testimony. The
board or the City Commission shall discuss the evidence that was presented at
the proceeding and vote on the petition.
   (F)   Consent process.
      (1)   All applications for development approvals that are quasi-judicial
matters which are required to be approved by the City Commission may be placed
on the quasi-judicial consent agenda. If an application is not removed from the
quasi-judicial consent agenda, the City Commission shall vote on the quasi-
judicial consent agenda based upon the materials in the agenda report(s). Prior
to placement on the quasi-judicial consent agenda, all applicants shall sign a
notarized statement that the applicant concurs with the recommendations of the
Planning and Zoning Board. If no notarized statement has been obtained from the
applicant, then the development approval shall be heard and processed as set
forth above.
      (2)   The applicant, any City Commissioner, or any member of the public
may request that an application for a development approval be removed from the
quasi-judicial consent agenda and, except as otherwise provided in division (F)
(3) of this section, such item shall be continued to the quasi-judicial items
portion of the meeting, or such other date and time, or both, as mutually
agreed upon by the applicant and City Commission.
      (3)   The applicant may request that the City Commission listen to
testimony, receive documentary evidence, and take action on the application at
the meeting at which the application is removed from the quasi-judicial consent
agenda.
      (4)   All applications for development approval which are placed on a
quasi-judicial regular (non-consent) agenda or that have been removed from the
quasi-judicial consent agenda shall be heard pursuant to and in accordance with
the procedures set forth in divisions (D) and (E) of this section.
   (G)   Hearings in front of special magistrate; final determination. The city
hereby establishes special magistrates who may conduct quasi-judicial hearings
at the direction of the City Commission. Special magistrates shall conduct all
hearings and render final determinations, all in conformity with the provisions
of this LDC.
   (H)   Hearings in front of board or City Commission; final determination. In
reaching a determination as whether to grant or deny the petition, the board or
City Commission shall:
      (1)   Consider whether the petitioner's request is consistent with the
city comprehensive plan, if applicable.
      (2)   State with specificity the reasons for the approval or denial of
the petition. The approval or denial may by reference incorporate the staff,
board or other reports.
      (3)   State whether or not the order is to be recorded in the public
records of Broward County, and if applicable, that the cost of recording shall
be paid by the petitioner.
   (I)   Preparation of order. The City Attorney's office shall prepare the
final order of the board or City Commission based upon the determination. The
special magistrate shall prepare the final order for matters before them. The
final order shall include, but not be limited to, the finding of facts, any
conditions, requirements or limitations on the approval of the petition, and
whether or not the order shall be recorded in the Broward County public
records. If an ordinance is required to be adopted upon approval of an action
by the City Commission, a final order will not be prepared unless the petition
is denied.
   (J)   Continuances and deferrals. If, in the opinion of the board or City
Commission, any testimony or documentary evidence or information presented at
the proceeding justifies providing additional time to allow additional research
or review in order to properly determine the issue presented, the board or City
Commission shall continue the case to a designated time to allow for the
additional research or review. After the decision is made to continue, the date
to which the proceeding shall be continued shall be announced at the
proceeding.
   (K)   Transcript of proceedings. The official transcript of a proceeding
shall be preserved by tape recording or other device by the City Clerk's
office. Nothing precludes any party from providing a court reporter for the
proceeding.
   (L)   Maintenance of evidence. The Office of the City Clerk shall retain all
of the evidence and documents presented at the proceeding, except for large
scale exhibits which shall be retained by the City Manager or a designee, all
which become part of the public record of the proceeding.
   (M)   Appeals. The final determination of the City Commission is subject to
judicial review in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.305 ZONING IN PROGRESS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide an administrative
and legislative procedure whereby the city can place a temporary hold on
development permits and approvals if there are pending active efforts underway
to amend this Code in a way that would preclude such permits and approvals
should the pending amendment be adopted.
   (B)   Applicability. Zoning in progress shall be in place from the time that
the City Manager or designee determines that:
      (1)   The city is actively developing and processing a proposal to amend
this Code in a way that would preclude permits and approvals of certain uses
and development, and
      (2)   Authorization or approval of such uses and development before the
proposed amendment is decided would be detrimental to the public interest. The
city shall not grant any development permit or approval, or accept any
application for a development permit or approval, that authorizes or proposes
development that would not be allowed under the proposed amendment to this LDC.
   (C)   Procedure.
      (1)   The City Manager or designee shall issue an administrative order
that specifies the area(s) affected by the proposed amendment and that
prohibits the issuance of any development permits or granting of development
approvals that would be precluded by the proposed amendment;
      (2)   On issuing the administrative order, the City Manager or designee
shall schedule consideration of a resolution confirming the administrative
order for the next available City Commission meeting.
   (D)   City Commission review and action.
      (1)   The City Commission shall review the City Manager's or designee's
zoning in progress determination and decide whether to confirm or reject it.
      (2)   If the City Commission decides to confirm the City Manager's or
designee's zoning in progress determination, they shall adopt a resolution
affirming the administrative order.
      (3)   If a resolution is adopted by the City Commission, the zoning in
progress shall remain active for up to six months or until the adoption of the
amendment to the LDC. The time period may be extended if determined necessary
by the City Commission.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.306 APPLICATION SUBMITTAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Pre-application meeting.
      (1)   The pre-application meeting will determine the submittal
requirements, review procedures and standards applicable to an anticipated
application for a development permit reviewed under this Code.
      (2)   A pre-application meeting is required for all applications prior to
submission unless determined otherwise by the Planning and Economic Development
Department Director.
      (3)   At a minimum, the applicant must bring a conceptual plan to the
pre-application meeting showing the location, general layout and main elements
of the proposed development.
      (4)   At the pre-application meeting the applicant must provide the
Planning and Economic Development Department a letter stating the scope of work
for the project. The Director shall determine what application(s) and process
shall apply to the project.
      (5)   When two or more applications for a development are submitted
concurrently, the requirement for a pre-application conference may be met with
single conference.
      (6)   The pre-application conference is intended as a means of
facilitating the review process. Discussions held in accordance with this
section are not binding on the city. Processing times for review of
applications for a development permit do not begin until a formal, complete
application is submitted and determined to be complete.
   (B)   Authority to submit applications. Unless expressly stated otherwise in
this Code, applications for a development permit reviewed under this Code shall
be submitted by:
      (1)   The owner, contract purchaser, or any other person having a
recognized property interest in the land on which development is proposed; or
      (2)   A person authorized to submit the application on behalf of the
owner, contract purchaser, or other person having a recognized property
interest in the land, as evidenced by a letter or document signed by such
owner, contract purchaser, or other person.
      (3)   If there are multiple owners, contract purchasers, or other persons
authorized to submit the application, all such persons shall sign the
application or a letter or document consenting to the application.
   (C)   Application contents.
      (1)   The Planning and Economic Development Department Director
establishes the requirements for the content and form of applications for each
type of application reviewed under this Code.
      (2)   The Planning and Economic Development Department Director may amend
and update these requirements as determined necessary to ensure effective and
efficient city review under this Code.
      (3)   The applicant bears the burden of ensuring that an application
contains sufficient information to demonstrate compliance of the proposed
application for a development permit with applicable standards.
   (D)   Application submittal.
      (1)   Applications reviewed under this Code shall be submitted to the
Planning and Economic Development Department, along with other applicable
documents. For site plan submittals, a site plan checklist will be provided and
maintained by the Planning and Economic Development Department
      (2)   In addition to the technical documents required, other plans and
studies may be required at the request of staff based on the scope of work
which includes but is not limited to the following:
         (a)   Affordable housing;
         (b)   Circulation, parking, stacking or traffic;
         (c)   Civil or engineering;
         (d)   Feasibility or market analysis;
         (e)   Landscaping;
         (f)   Lighting or photometric;
         (g)   Sustainability.
      (3)   All applications must be submitted through the Planning and
Economic Development Department.
   (E)   Fees.
      (1)   The City Commission establishes application fees and may amend and
update those fees as determined necessary.
      (2)   The fees schedules for any development plan are incorporated herein
by reference. A fee schedule is available in the City Clerk's and Planning and
Economic Development Department offices upon request.
      (3)   A surcharge applies to all development and applications that
require Planning and Zoning Board consideration. The surcharge can be found in
the fee schedule, which is available in the City Clerk's and Planning and
Economic Development Department offices upon request.
      (4)   On October 1 of each year, the fees referred to above may be
increased, in accordance with the Consumer Price Index for Urban Consumers in
the United States, published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the 12
months ending April of each year, unless otherwise instructed by the City
Commission. All other proposed changes to the fees referred to above shall be
set by resolution of the City Commission by separate resolution.
      (5)   Advertising fees. The applicant bears the cost of the advertisement
for any displayed advertisements or mailings required by state statutes or city
ordinances, except as may otherwise be expressly provided herein.
      (6)   Applicants are responsible for all applicable recording costs where
applicable.
   (F)   Determination of application completeness.
      (1)   On receiving a development application reviewed under this Code,
the Planning and Economic Development Department Director will review the
application package to determine whether the application is complete or
incomplete within the timeframes as set forth in F.S. § 166.033, as may be
amended from time to time, unless formally waived by the applicant. A complete
application is one that:
         (a)   Contains all information and materials established by the
Planning and Economic Development Department Director as required for submittal
of the application;
         (b)   Is in the form established by the Planning and Economic
Development Department Director as required for submittal of the application;
         (c)   Includes information in sufficient detail to evaluate the
application to determine whether it complies with the appropriate review
standards of this Code; and
         (d)   Is accompanied by the fee established for the application, which
is intended to offset the administrative costs thereof.
      (2)   Review for application completeness is solely to determine whether
preliminary information required for submission with the application is
sufficient to allow further processing. It does not constitute a decision as to
whether an application complies with the LDC.
      (3)   Incomplete applications:
         (a)   If an application is determined to be incomplete, the Planning
and Economic Development Department Director will notify the applicant of the
deficiencies within the timeframes as set forth in F.S. § 166.033, as may be
amended from time to time, unless formally waived by the applicant.
         (b)   The applicant may correct the deficiencies and resubmit the
application for completeness determination.
         (c)   If the applicant fails to resubmit an application within the
timeframes as set forth in F.S. § 166.033, as same may be amended from time to
time, unless waived by the applicant after being first notified of
deficiencies, the application shall be considered withdrawn.
         (d)   The Planning and Economic Development Department Director shall
not process an application for further review until it is determined to be
complete.
      (4)   Application revisions:
         (a)   An applicant may revise the application after receiving initial
staff review comments on the application. Revisions must be limited to changes
that directly respond to specific requests or suggestions made by the staff or
the review or decision-making body, if they constitute only minor additions,
deletions, or corrections and do not include significant substantive changes to
the plan for development proposed in the application.
         (b)   Any other revisions to the application may be submitted at any
time during the review procedure, but the revised application will be submitted
and reviewed as if a new application and may be subject to additional
application fees to defray the additional costs of processing the revised
application.
         (c)   All revised applications must be submitted to the Planning and
Economic Development Department Director.
      (5)   Complete applications:
         (a)   If an application is determined to be complete, the Planning and
Economic Development Department Director will accept the application for review
in accordance with the procedures and standards of this Code.
         (b)   The time frame and cycle for review of the application is based
on the date the application is determined to be complete.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 1998, passed 10-19-22)
§ 155.307 STAFF REVIEW AND ACTION.
   (A)   Application review.
      (1)   When an application is determined to be complete, the application
along with the associated documents shall be distributed to the applicable
reviewing bodies.
      (2)   If deficiencies are found, the applicant shall be notified and
provided an opportunity to address them.
      (3)   The timeframe for review will be determined based on the
application type.
      (4)   Additional documents may be requested per §
155.306(D).
   (B)   Applications subject to board or City Commission decision; staff
report. If an application is to be reviewed and decided upon by a board or City
Commission the Planning and Economic Development Department staff shall prepare
a staff report which summarizes the application.
   (C)   Applications subject to staff decision. If an application is subject
to staff decision, the application shall be reviewed and decided upon following
the procedures and standards established within this LDC.
   (D)   Scheduling of public hearing. The Planning and Economic Development
Department Director shall determine when an item is scheduled for public
hearing. The Director shall do so providing enough time for the preparation of
the staff report, distribution of applicable documents to board or City
Commission members and for public notification in accordance with the standard
established within the LDC.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.308 POST DECISION ACTIONS AND LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Notice of decision. The Planning and Economic Development Department
shall provide the applicant with the applicable document as they become
available. Refer to
Table 155.301 for the document provided.
   (B)   Effect of approval.
      (1)   Approval of any development application in accordance with this
Code authorizes only the particular use, plan, or other specific activity
approved, and not any other development requiring separate application.
      (2)   If one development permit or approval is a prerequisite to another
permit or approval (e.g., variance approval prior to a site plan approval),
development may not take place until all required permits and approvals are
obtained. Approval of one application does not necessarily guarantee approval
of any subsequent application.
   (C)   Expiration of approval.
      (1)   Unless otherwise noted an approved application excluding those that
result in an ordinance or resolution shall expire following one year of
inactivity as determined by the Planning and Economic Development Department
Director.
      (2)   Approval extension.
         (a)   The Planning and Zoning Board may grant an extension of an
approved application where the holder thereof can establish to the satisfaction
of the Board that the delay is absolutely beyond their control.
         (b)   The applicant must reapply for approval prior to the expiration
of the approved application.
         (c)   Resubmitted applications shall be subject to the same process
and fee requirements of the previously approved applications.
         (d)   All resubmittals for extensions must comply with all
requirements and provisions of this LDC at the time of resubmittal.
         (e)   An extension may be provided in accordance with F.S § 252.363
(Emergency Management Tolling and extension of permits and other
authorizations) as amended from time to time.
   (D)   Amendments to an approved application. Any modifications of approved
plans or conditions of approval shall require a new application that is
submitted and reviewed in accordance with the full procedure and fee
requirements applicable to the particular type of modification.
   (E)   Effect of denial.
      (1)   If an application requiring a public hearing is denied, the
applicant may appeal the decision following the applicable process set forth in
§
155.311.
      (2)   Denied applications that require a public hearing require a new
application including noticing (if required) submittal of plans, fees and any
other documents as determined by the project manager in order to be heard
again.
   (F)   Building permits.
      (1)   Approval of an application under the provision of this Code does
not provide exemption from any applicable building permits and related fees.
      (2)   Development applications must be approved prior to issuance of a
building permit.
      (3)   No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration, or
use of any building, structure, or part thereof, or for the use of any land or
water, which is not in conformity with all the provisions of this LDC.
   (G)   Outside agencies. Approval of an application under the provision of
this Code does not provide exemption from any applicable applications, review
or fees that may be required from outside agencies including but not limited to
Broward County or Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT).
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.309 APPLICATION WITHDRAWAL PROCESS.
   After an application has been accepted for review, the applicant may
withdraw the application at any time by submitting a written letter of
withdrawal to the Director of Planning and Economic Development.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.310 APPLICATION REFUNDS.
   No refunds will be provided for incomplete or withdrawn applications unless
specifically granted by the City Manager or designee.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
2021 S-51
§ 155.311 APPLICATION APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   Right to appeal. Any party aggrieved by a decision, interpretation, or
order made by the Planning and Economic Development Department Director or
other administrative official, Board of Adjustment, Planning and Zoning Board,
or the City Commission in administering or enforcing the provisions of the Land
Development Code may appeal the decision, interpretation, or order.
   (B)   Appeal of Planning and Economic Development Department staff
interpretation.
      (1)   Code interpretations made by the Planning and Economic Development
Department staff are subject to appeal to the Planning and Zoning Board or
Board of Adjustment as outlined in this subchapter by the petitioner or an
affected person based on lack of competent and substantial evidence to support
staffs decision.
      (2)   In addition to the application and associate fees the person filing
the appeal shall submit a written statement to the Director of the Planning and
Economic Development Department stating why they believe that the staff's
decision was not based on competent and substantial evidence.
      (3)   The applicant filing the appeal shall bear the cost of all
advertising and notice requirements associated with the appeal.
      (4)   The appeal shall be presented to the Planning and Zoning Board as
soon as practicable, subject to the notice requirements and procedures set
forth herein, for a final determination as to whether or not there was
competent and substantial evidence to support staffs interpretation.
      (5)   The appeal shall be presented to the City Commission as soon as
practicable, subject to the notice requirements and procedures set forth
herein, for a final determination as to whether or not there was competent and
substantial evidence to support the board's ruling. The City Commission may
remand the quasi-judicial proceeding back to the board for further
consideration by the board in a quasi-judicial hearing, subject to the notice
requirements and procedures for the board set forth herein.
   (C)   Appeal of Board decisions.
      (1)   Decisions of the Board of Adjustment or the Planning and Zoning
Board, collectively known as "Board", in quasi-judicial proceedings are subject
to appeal to the City Commission by either the city, petitioner, or an affected
person as defined in this Code based on lack of competent and substantial
evidence to support the board's ruling.
      (2)   Any person seeking to appeal must file a written request to appeal
with the Director of Planning and Economic Development, or designee, no later
than noon on the seventh calendar day following the meeting at which the Board
has rendered a final decision.
      (3)   The applicant filing the appeal shall submit a written statement to
the Director of Planning and Economic Development no later than ten days before
City Commission meeting at which the appeal shall be heard. This written
statement shall state with specificity why the appellant believes that the
Board's decision was not based on competent and substantial evidence. This
written statement shall be included in the agenda for the City Commission
meeting at which time the appeal shall be heard
      (4)   The person filing the appeal shall bear the cost of all advertising
and notice requirements associated with the appeal.
      (5)   The appeal shall be presented to the City Commission as soon as
practicable, subject to the notice requirements and procedures set forth
herein, for a final determination as to whether or not there was competent and
substantial evidence to support the board's ruling.
   (D)   Appeal of City Commission decisions. The final determination of the
City Commission with regards to the applications specified in this LDC is
subject to judicial review in a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   Hearings. Hearings before the Planning and Zoning Board and City
Commission are not trials de novo but rather appellate in nature. Appeals shall
be limited to the written record and new additional evidence shall not be
presented.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22)
§ 155.312 APPLICATION DEFERRAL PROCESS.
   (A)   If an application is subject to a public hearing and required notice
of the hearing has already been provided, the applicant may request that the
hearing be deferred by submitting a written request for deferral to the
Director of the Planning and Economic Development Department before the date on
which the public hearing is scheduled.
   (B)   The Director of the Planning and Economic Development Department shall
submit the request to the body scheduled to hold the hearing, which may grant
the request for good cause, or if finding no good cause for deferral, may
proceed to hold the hearing, then consider and act on the application.
   (C)   If the body grants the request for deferral, it shall be either set to
a time certain or a time uncertain.
   (D)   If the deferral is granted, the applicant shall bear all cost
associated with deferring the application, which may include noticing.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.313 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Purpose. This section establishes procedures and standard to ensure
compliance with the provision of this LDC and obtain corrections for violation
of the LDC.
      (2)   Compliance required. Compliance with all the procedures, standard,
and other provisions of this LDC are required by all persons owning,
developing, managing, using or occupying land or structures in the city.
      (3)   Development or approval only authorizes development approved. A
development order, development approval or permit issued under the provisions
of this LDC shall only authorize the specific use, arrangement, location,
design, density, or intensity, and development set forth in such approval.
   (B)   Violations.
      (1)   Failure to comply with the LDC or term or condition of approval.
Any failure to comply with the standards, requirements, prohibition, or
limitations imposed by this LDC, or the terms or conditions of any development
order or authorization granted in accordance with this LDC shall constitute as
a violation of the LDC.
      (2)   Specific violations. It shall be a violation of this LDC to
undertake any activity contrary to the provisions of this LDC, including but
not limited to the following:
         (a)   Developing land or constructing any structure without first
obtaining all required building permits, appropriate approvals and complying
with all terms and conditions.
         (b)   Occupying land or any structure without first obtaining all
appropriate approvals and complying with all terms and conditions.
         (c)   Excavating, grading, cutting, clearing, or undertaking any land
disturbing activity without first obtaining all appropriate development permits
and approvals, and complying with their terms and conditions.
         (d)   Removing existing trees from a site or parcel of land without
first obtaining appropriate permits and approvals and complying with their
terms and conditions.
         (e)   Installing, creating, erecting, altering, or maintaining any
sign without first obtaining the appropriate building permits and approvals,
and complying with their terms and conditions.
         (f)   Failing to remove any sign installed, created, erected, or
maintained in violation of this Code, or for which the relevant permit or
approval has expired.
         (g)   Creating, expanding, replacing, or changing any nonconformity
except in compliance with this Code.
         (h)   Reducing or diminishing the requirements for development,
design, or dimensional standards below the minimum required by this Code.
         (i)   Increasing the intensity or density of development, except in
accordance with the standards of this Code.
         (j)   Utilizing or operating a business without obtaining and
maintaining a valid business tax receipt.
         (k)   Through any act or omission, fail to comply with any other
provisions, procedures, or standards as required by this Code.
   (C)   Enforcement responsibilities. The Planning and Economic Development
Department, Code Compliance Division and other applicable departments shall be
responsible for enforcing the provisions of this LDC. The City Manager or their
designee may delegate authority to another city official to aid in the
enforcement of the provision of this LDC.
   (D)   Code enforcement violation and hearing procedures. Code enforcement
violation and hearing procedures shall be consistent with procedures set forth
within
Chapter 32 of the City Code of Ordinances and F.S. Chapter 162, as may be
amended from time to time.
   (E)   Notice to abate.
      (1)   When the City Manager or their designee finds that any premises or
property within the city may be maintained contrary to one or more of the
provisions of this section, shall notify the owner, lessee, occupant,
mortgagee, or beneficiary by written notice, served personally or posted on the
premises, stating the conditions which constitute the public nuisance and shall
order the abatement of the nuisance by a time period consistent with the nature
of the violation. Failure to bring about compliance within the time stated
shall result in a summons before the Code Enforcement Board, the special
magistrate, or the county court. The summons shall be served according to state
statutes.
      (2)   Abatement by the city. If the person fails to abate the nuisance
within the time set forth, the city may proceed to abate the nuisance.
      (3)   Record of expenses. The city shall keep an itemized account of the
expenses involved in abating the nuisance. The city shall post conspicuously on
the property and shall also mail to the owner of the property a statement
showing the expense of the abatement, together with a notice of the time and
place when the statement will be submitted to the Commission for approval and
confirmation, and at which time the Commission shall consider objections or
protests to the cost of the work.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22)
ARTICLE 4: ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 155.400 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with district standards. No land within the city shall be
developed except in accordance with the zoning district regulations of this
subchapter and all other regulations of this Code.
   (B)   Consistency with the comprehensive plan. This LDC is intended to be
consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the city's adopted
comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.401 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The areas assigned to these districts and the boundaries of the
districts shown on the maps are made a part of this LDC as if fully set forth
herein are hereby established, the maps being designated as the "Zoning
District Map."
   (B)   The maps and the proper notations, references, and other information
shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this LDC as if the matters and
information set forth by the map were fully described herein.
   (C)   Each district shall be subject to the regulations set forth in this
Land Development Code.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.402 DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS.
   (A)   District boundaries.
      (1)   Unless otherwise shown, the district boundaries are street lines,
alley lines, or the subdividing or boundary lines of recorded plats, or the
extensions thereof. Where the districts designated on maps accompanying and
made a part of this LDC are approximately bounded by street lines, alley lines,
or the subdividing or boundary lines of recorded plats, those lines or the
extensions thereof shall be considered to be district boundaries.
      (2)   Where, due to the scale or illegibility of the district map or due
to the absence of a street, alley, or recorded subdividing of plat lines, there
is any uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to intended location of any
district boundary, the Planning and Economic Development Department Director
shall have the power and duty of interpreting the intent of the district maps
so as to determine and designate the proper location for the district boundary
in accordance with the spirit and purpose of this LDC.
      (3)   Where a zoning district boundary divides a lot or parcel, the
location of such boundary, unless indicated by legal description with distance
and bearing or other dimension, shall be determined by the scale of the zoning
district map by the Planning and Economic Development Department Director.
      (4)   Where a zoning designation conflict may occur, the Planning and
Economic Development Director shall determine the official zoning district
classification.
      (5)   The Planning and Economic Development Department Director shall
enter changes on the official zoning map as soon as is practical after a zoning
change is approved by the City Commission. Where the ordinance enacting a
zoning change contains wording explaining or clarifying the location of zoning
district boundaries, the Planning and Economic Development Department Director
may enter on the official zoning map notations reflecting the ordinance
wording.
      (6)   Land that is not indicated on the official zoning pap as being in
any zoning district shall be considered to be included in the most restrictive
adjacent zoning district that complies with the future land use map
designation, even when such district is separated from the land in question by
a right-of-way.
      (7)   Zoning of annexed lands. All lands annexed to the corporate limits
of the city shall retain their existing county zoning classifications. For this
purpose, all published material establishing the rules, regulations, and
limitations governing and restricting the use of property under such zoning
classifications shall be adopted in this LDC by reference. Such zoning
classifications shall be presumed to be valid classifications of the lands
annexed and shall not be subject to change, except upon initiation of a zoning
change pursuant to the LDC, by either the city or the owners of the property
annexed.
   (B)   District classification.
      (1)   Types of zoning districts. Land within the city will hereby be
classified into the following categories: Agricultural, community facilities,
recreation, residential, commercial, industrial, and planned.
      (2)   Specific zoning districts.
         (a)   Agricultural, community facilities, and recreation:
            1.   Agriculture (A);
            2.   Agriculture Excavation (A-E);
            3.   Resource Recovery (R-R);
            4.   Utility (U);
            5.   Community Facility (CF);
            6.   Recreation (REC).
         (b)   Residential:
            1.   Residential Estate (R-E);
            2.   Residential Single-Family (R-1A through R-1C);
            3.   Residential Single-Family Zero Lot Line (R-1Z);
            4.   Residential Mobile Home (R-MH);
            5.   Residential Two-Family (R-2);
            6.   Residential Townhouse (R-TH);
            7.   Residential Multi-Family (R-MF).
         (c)   Commercial:
            1.   Neighborhood Business (B-1);
            2.   Community Business (B-2);
            3.   General Business (B-3);
            4.   Commercial (C-1);
            5.   Professional Office (PO).
         (d)   Industrial:
            1.   Industrial Light (I-L);
            2.   Industrial Medium (I-M);
            3.   Industrial Heavy (I-H).
         (e)   Planned:
            1.   Planned Unit Development (PUD);
            2.   Planned Small Lot Development (PD-SL);
            3.   Mixed Use Development (MXD);
            4.   Planned Commercial Development (PCD);
            5.   Planned Industrial Development (PID);
            6.   Hospital District (HD).
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.403 ZONING DISTRICTS COMPARATIVE TABLE.
   (A)   On April 26, 2021, the city revised and consolidated the zoning
districts per Ord. No. 2021-02. This table shall serve as the official
comparison between the previous and the proposed zoning districts.
   (B)   Comparative Table.
Table 155.403: Zoning Districts Comparative Table
Prior to date March 22, 2021 Effective March 22, 2021
Table 155.403: Zoning Districts Comparative Table
Prior to date March 22, 2021          Effective March 22, 2021
(A-1) Limited Agricultural            (A) Agricultural
(A-2) General Agricultural
(A-5) Agricultural Excavation         (A-E) Agricultural Excavation
(A-6) Agricultural Disposal           (R-R) Resource Recovery
(A-3) Agricultural Utility            (U) Utility
(A-4) Agricultural Amusement          (REC) Recreation
(S-1) Recreational
(CF) Community Facility               (CF) Community Facility
(RR) Rural Ranches Lifestyle          Removed
(E-1) Estate                          (R-E) Residential Estate
(R-1A) One-Family Dwelling            (R-1A) Residential Single-Family
(R-1B) One-Family Dwelling            (R-1B) Residential Single-Family
(R-1C) One-Family Dwelling            (R-1C) Residential Single-Family
(R-1P) One-Family Dwelling Parking    Removed
(RS-7) Single-Family                  (R-1Z) Residential Single-Family Zero Lot
                                      Line
(R-1T) Mobile Home Dwelling           (R-MH) Residential Mobile Home
(R-2U) Two-Family Dwelling            (R-2) Residential Two-Family Dwelling
(TH-12) Townhouse                     (R-TH) Residential Townhouse
(R-3) Low Density Multiple
(R-4) Apartment                       (R-MF) Residential Multi-Family
(R-4A) Planned Apartment
(R-6) Hotel
(B-1) Neighborhood Business           (B-1) Neighborhood Business
(B-2) Community Business              (B-2) Community Business
(B-2A) Planned Business Center        Removed
(B-3) General Business                (B-3) General Business
(C-1) Commercial                      (C-1) Commercial
(PO-1) Professional Office            (PO) Professional Office
(PO-2) Professional Office
(M-1) Light Industrial                (I-L) Industrial-Light
(M-2) Medium Industrial
(M-3) General Industrial              (I-M) Industrial-Medium
(M-4) Limited Heavy Industrial        (I-H) Industrial-Heavy
(M-5) Heavy Industrial
(PUD) Planned Unit Development        (PUD) Planned Unit Development
(PD-SL) Planned Development Small Lot (PD-SL) Planned Development Small Lot
(MXD) Mixed Use Development           (MXD) Mixed Use Development
(PCD) Planned Commercial Development  (PCD) Planned Commercial Development
(PID) Planned Industrial Development  (PID) Planned Industrial Development
(HD) Hospital                         (HD) Hospital
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
AGRICULTURE, COMMUNITY FACILITIES AND RECREATION
§ 155.410 AGRICULTURE (A).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended primarily to provide for lands
which accommodate agricultural production and agricultural support uses.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.410: Agriculture (A)
Standard Nonresidential Residential
Table 155.410: Agriculture (A)
Standard             Nonresidential              Residential
Minimum Lot Size     35,000 square feet and      35,000 square feet and street
                     street frontage of 125 feet frontage of 125 feet [1]
                     20% for lots less than 1    20% for lots less than 1 acre
Maximum Lot Coverage acre | 25% for lots greater | 25% for lots greater than 1
                     than 1 acre                 acre
Maximum Height       60 feet                     60 feet
Front Setback        25 feet                     25 feet
Side Setback         25 feet                     25 feet [2]
Rear Setback         25 feet                     25 feet
Street Side Setback  Equivalent to 25% of lot    Equivalent to 25% of lot
                     width not to exceed 25 feet width not to exceed 25 feet
Minimum Floor Area   N/A                         Single-family dwelling: 900
                                                 square feet
Note(s):
[1]   A lot having a minimum area of 10,000 square feet and a minimum width of
100 feet and platted as a single lot or acquired by the present owner prior to
the effective date of this LDC, may be utilized for a single-family dwelling.
[2]   A side setback for a single-family dwelling shall not be required to
exceed 25 feet. Greater setbacks may be required for various uses (See
additional design criteria).
 
   (D)   Additional criteria.
      (1)   Setback modifications. The setback requirements specified in
division (C) of this section shall be subject to the following:
         (a)   Setback requirements shall not apply to portions of land or land
used for permissible uses, and which do not contain buildings, and which do not
contain structures over 20 feet in height.
         (b)   Where a portion of a tract of land is utilized for a building or
buildings as the principal use, the lot of land occupied by those buildings
shall be provided with all required setbacks, the measurement of which shall be
from the building or buildings.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.411 AGRICULTURE EXCAVATION (A-E).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended primarily to apply to undeveloped
areas of the city, wherein there are deposits of natural resources which can be
safely extracted without serious damage.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.411: Agriculture Excavation (A-E)
Standard Nonresidential
Table 155.411: Agriculture Excavation (A-E)
Standard             Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Size     5 acres
Maximum Lot Coverage N/A
Maximum Height       100 feet
Front Setback        100 feet
Side Setback         100 feet
Rear Setback         100 feet
Note(s):
No mixing or batching plant, bin, tank, silo, or structure incidental to such
plant, shall be located nearer than 300 feet to any property in separate and
different ownership.
Every lot shall conform to all of the provisions of §
155.6112.
No excavation shall be allowed within 50 feet of the future right-of-way line
for any street or highway, nor within 100 feet of any private property line
for lots less than one acre and 30 feet of any property line for lots one acre
or greater.
 
   (D)   Additional standards. Any permitted single-family use built under this
zoning shall follow the residential development standards under Agriculture (A)
§
155.410.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.412 RESOURCE RECOVERY (R-R).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended primarily to apply to areas
appropriate for the disposal of waste materials wherein that disposal will not
adversely affect desirable future development.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.412: Resource Recovery (R-R)
Standard Nonresidential
Table 155.412: Resource Recovery (R-R)
Standard             Nonresidential
                     Disposal of refuse only - Minimum 5 acres.
Minimum Lot Size     Disposal of refuse including garbage or animal refuse -
                     Minimum 20 acres.
                     An incinerator - Minimum 40 acres.
Maximum Lot Coverage 10% for all main and accessory buildings
Maximum Height       150 feet
Front Setback        75 feet in depth [1]
Side Setback         50 feet in depth [1]
Rear Setback         50 feet in depth [1]
Note(s):
[1]   Lots used for disposal of refuse, including garbage or animal refuse,
shall have setbacks to all lot lines not less than 100 feet in depth. No part
of any incinerator or its appurtenant attached building or structures shall be
located within 500 feet of any lot line.
 
   (D)   Additional standards. Any permitted single-family use built under this
zoning shall follow the residential development standards under Agriculture (A)
§
155.410.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.413 UTILITY (U).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to accommodate utility uses which
are necessary to provide an adequate level of service to meet the current and
future needs of the city.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.413: Utility (U)
Standard Nonresidential
Table 155.413: Utility (U)
Standard         Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Size 5 acres in area [1]
Maximum Lot      20%
Coverage
Maximum Height   500 feet
Front Setback    50 feet in depth or width. [2] [3] [4]
Side Setback     50 feet in depth or width. [2] [3] [4]
Rear Setback     50 feet in depth or width. [2] [3] [4]
Street Side      50 feet in depth or width. [2] [3] [4]
Setback
Note(s):
[1]   1 A lift station for a sewer line may be located on a lot at least 75
feet wide and 7,500 square feet in area.
[2]   Any structure used as part of a sewage treatment plant, water treatment
plant or water pumping plant, including tank, bins, settling basins,
reservoirs, and other similar facilities, shall be located at least 100 feet
from any lot line.
[3]   Any structure or building exceeding 20 feet in height shall not be
located nearer to any property in separate or different ownership than a
distance equal to one-half the height of the structure or building.
[4]   On a lot used only for a sewage lift station and having no building
over ten feet in height and no structure over 25 feet in height, the required
setbacks shall be reduced to 25 feet in depth or width.
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.414 COMMUNITY FACILITY (CF).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended primarily to provide for
educational institutions, government facilities, civic facilities and other
related uses.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.414: Community Facility (CF)
Standard All Uses
Table 155.414: Community Facility (CF)
Standard         All Uses
Minimum Lot Size N/A
Maximum Height   100 feet
Front Setback    25 feet [1]
Side Setback     15 feet [1]
Rear Setback     20 feet [1]
Note(s):
[1]   The setbacks shall apply to all one story structures and shall each be
increased by five feet for every story thereafter, not to exceed setback of 50
feet. Bufferyards within other provisions of the Code shall also apply.
 
   (D)   Additional criteria. Community facility zoning shall not be permitted
in any private residential community.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22)
§ 155.415 RECREATION (REC).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended primarily for sports and
recreational activities in which the participants are actively engaged, but
which may also provide entertainment for spectators.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.415: Recreation (REC)
Standard Nonresidential
Table 155.415: Recreation (REC)
Standard         Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Size 150 feet wide | 1 acre
Maximum Lot      20%
Coverage
Maximum Height   100 feet
Front Setback    50 feet
Side Setback     50 feet [1]
Rear Setback     50 feet
Note(s):
[1]   Side setback shall increase by one foot for every foot in height of
the building or structure exceeding 25 feet
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 155.420 RESIDENTIAL ESTATE (R-E).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to primarily apply to large lot,
single-family developments. This district also allows supporting public and
recreational facilities.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.420: Residential Estate (R-E)
Standard Residential Nonresidential
Table 155.420: Residential Estate (R-E)
Standard             Residential             Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Size     Width: 125 feet | Area: Width: 125 feet | Area: 35,000
                     35,000 square feet [1]  square feet [1]
Maximum Lot Coverage 20%                     20%
Maximum Height       Two stories or 35 feet  60 feet
Front Setback        50 feet                 50 feet
Side Setback         25 feet                 25 feet [2]
Rear Setback         25 feet                 25 feet
Street Side Setback  25 feet                 25 feet
Minimum Floor Area   1,500 square feet       N/A
Note(s):
[1]   Lots for utility uses are exempt from minimum lot size requirements
but are required to meet minimum setbacks.
[2]   Side setbacks shall increase by one foot for each foot in height of
the building or structure exceeding 40 feet.
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.421 RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY (R-1A, R-1B, R-1C).
   (A)   Purpose. These districts are intended primarily for detached, single-
family residential dwelling neighborhoods. These districts also allow
supporting public and recreational facilities.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Tables.
Table 155.421.1: Residential Single-Family (R-1A)
Standard Residential Nonresidential
Table 155.421.1: Residential Single-Family (R-1A)
Standard             Residential                Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Size     Width: 100 feet | Area:    Width: 100 feet | Area: 10,000
                     10,000 square feet [1]     square feet [1]
Maximum Lot Coverage 40%                        40%
Maximum Height       Two stories or 35 feet     Two stories or 35 feet
Front Setback        25 feet                    30 feet
Side Setback         10 feet [2]                20 feet [3]
Rear Setback         15 feet                    25 feet
Street Side Setback  Key Lots: 25 feet | Corner Key Lots: 25 feet | Corner
                     Lots: 15 feet              Lots: 15 feet
Minimum Floor Area   1,500 square feet          N/A
Note(s):
[1]   A smaller lot of record may be utilized for a one-family dwelling if
platted prior to Date 1969.
[2]   An existing legal lot of 60 feet wide or less, side setback shall be at
least five feet
[3]   Side setback shall increase by one foot for every two feet in height of
the building or structure exceeding 20 feet
 
Table 155.421.2: Residential Single-Family (R-1B)
Standard Residential Nonresidential
Table 155.421.2: Residential Single-Family (R-1B)
Standard             Residential                Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Size     Width: 75 feet | Area:     Width: 75 feet | Area: 7,500
                     7,500 square feet [1]      square feet [1]
Maximum Lot Coverage 40%                        40%
Maximum Height       Two stories or 35 feet     Two stories or 35 feet
Front Setback        25 feet                    30 feet
Side Setback         7.5 feet [2]               20 feet [3]
Rear Setback         15 feet                    25 feet
Street Side Setback  Key Lots: 25 feet | Corner Key Lots: 25 feet | Corner
                     Lots: 15 feet              Lots: 15 feet
Minimum Floor Area   1,000 square feet          N/A
Note(s):
[1]   A smaller lot of record may be utilized for a one-family dwelling if
platted prior to March 1969.
[2]   An existing legal lot of 60 feet wide or less, side setback shall be at
least five feet
[3]   Side setback shall increase by one foot for every two feet in height of
the building or structure exceeding 20 feet
Table 155.421.3: Residential Single-Family (R-1C)
Standard Residential Nonresidential
Table 155.421.3: Residential Single-Family (R-1C)
Standard             Residential                Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Size     Width: 70 feet | Area:     Width: 70 feet | Area: 7,000
                     7,000 square feet [1]      square feet [1]
Maximum Lot Coverage 40%                        40%
Maximum Height       Two stories or 35 feet     Two stories or 35 feet
Front Setback        25 feet                    30 feet
Side Setback         7.5 feet [2]               20 feet [3]
Rear Setback         15 feet                    25 feet
Street Side Setback  Key Lots: 25 feet | Corner Key Lots: 25 feet | Corner
                     Lots: 15 feet              Lots: 15 feet
Minimum Floor Area   900 square feet            N/A
Note(s):
[1]   A smaller lot of record may be utilized for a one-family dwelling if
platted prior to March 1969.
[2]   An existing legal lot of 60 feet wide or less, side setback shall be at
least five feet
[3]   Side setback shall increase by one foot for every two feet in height of
the building or structure exceeding 20 feet
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.422 RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY ZERO LOT LINE (R-1Z).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended primarily for smaller lot single-
family residential neighborhoods which encourage more compact use of land as
compared with the typical single-family development.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.422: Residential Single-Family Zero Lot Line (R-1Z)
Standard Residential
Table 155.422: Residential Single-Family Zero Lot Line (R-1Z)
Standard                 Residential
Minimum Development Size 5 Acres
Minimum Lot Size         Width: 30 feet | Area: 4,500 square feet
Maximum Lot Coverage     45%
Maximum Height           Two stories or 35 feet
Front Setback            20 feet
                         0 feet for the side where the home is placed against
Side Setback             the lot line;
                         15 feet on the nonzero side
Rear Setback             15 feet
Street Side Setback      15 feet
Minimum Floor Area       1,300 square feet
 
   (D)   Additional criteria. See §
155.652 for additional criteria for Residential Single-Family Zero Lot Line (R-
1Z) development.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22)
§ 155.423 RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME (R-MH).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended primarily for single-family
residential mobile home developments and neighborhoods. This district is
intended to apply to areas to be used for the parking or placement of mobile
homes for permanent residences.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.423: Residential Mobile Home (R-MH)
Standard Residential
Table 155.423: Residential Mobile Home (R-MH)
Standard             Residential
Minimum Lot Size     Width: 40 feet | Depth: 80 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage N/A
Maximum Height       15 feet
Front Setback        6 feet
Side Setback         4 feet [1]
Rear Setback         8 feet
Street Side Setback  4 feet
Minimum Floor Area   N/A
Note(s):
[1]   Open carports, driveways and stoops may be located 2 feet from the
interior lot line.
 
   (D)   Additional criteria. Limitations and special requirements.
      (1)   The mobility of the vehicle used as a mobile home or house trailer
shall be maintained. Each unit of a mobile home originally moved onto the site
as a separate house trailer, shall be kept currently licensed each year as
provided under F.S. § 320.081.
      (2)   Plumbing fixtures and electrical connections associated with
cooking facilities shall not be permitted in any building or structure other
than the mobile home itself.
      (3)   Each lot shall abut on a public street at least 50 feet in width.
      (4)   Any R-MH District shall be at least five acres in gross area. R-MH
zoning shall be applied only to property properly platted under a subdivision
plat of record.
      (5)   Fences. A fence may be installed within the front yard setback in
accordance with the following regulations:
         (a)   Height. The fence shall not exceed 36 inches in height.
         (b)   Such fence must be constructed of decorative aluminum or wood
and shall be no more than 50% opaque.
         (c)   The fence shall not obstruct sight distance triangles, fire
hydrants, water valves, water meters, sewer clean-outs and or otherwise
precludes any utility maintenance to be performed by the city.
      (6)   Driveways. Mobile home communities established pursuant to this
section shall include a minimum of two car stacking driveways with the
following dimensions:
         (a)   Minimum of nine feet wide and 35 feet long; or
         (b)   Minimum of 16 feet wide and 20 feet long.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22)
§ 155.424 RESIDENTIAL TWO-FAMILY (R-2).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended primarily for attached, two-family
residential dwelling neighborhoods with minimum lots per two-family dwelling
units. Detached single-family dwelling units are permitted.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.424: Residential Two-Family (R-2)
Standard Residential Nonresidential
Table 155.424: Residential Two-Family (R-2)
Standard             Residential                   Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Size     Width: 70 feet | Area: 7,000  Width: 70 feet | Area: 7,000
                     square feet [1]               square feet [1]
Maximum Lot Coverage 40%                           40%
Maximum Height       Two stories or 30 feet        Two stories or 30 feet
Front Setback        25 feet                       30 feet
Side Setback         7.5 feet [2]                  20 feet [3]
Rear Setback         15 feet                       25 feet
Street Side Setback  15 feet                       15 feet
                     Single-Family Detached
Minimum Floor Area   Dwelling: 750 square feet     N/A
                     Two-Family Attached Dwelling:
                     750 square feet per unit
Note(s):
[1]   If each half of a two-family dwelling is on separate adjoining lots then
each lot shall not be less than 35 feet in width and 3,500 square feet in area.
[2]   However, if two-family dwelling is erected on two platted lots, no
setback is needed along common wall and lot line.
[3]   Side setback shall increase by one foot for every two feet in height of
structure or building exceeding 20 feet.
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.425 RESIDENTIAL TOWNHOUSE (R-TH).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended primarily for multi-family,
townhouse residential dwelling neighborhoods.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.425: Residential Townhouse (R-TH)
Standard Residential Townhouse
Table 155.425: Residential Townhouse (R-TH)
Standard Residential Townhouse
Minimum  1.5 acres
Lot Size
Maximum  12 units per gross acre
Density
Maximum  35 feet
Height
Front    15 feet
Setbacks
Side     25 feet
Setbacks
Rear     20 feet
Setbacks
Street
Side     N/A
Setbacks
Townhouse Grouping
(A)
Front to
front    Minimum separation between townhouse buildings:
and rear (A)   50 feet of which a minimum of 15 feet of open space, not to be used for
to rear; parking;
(B) Side (B)   20 feet;
to rear; (C)   20 feet plus 10 feet if driveway between groupings
(C) Side
to side

Grouping 20 feet between each group of townhouses; plus 10 feet if driveway between
Spacing  groupings
Grouping A grouping of townhouses shall not exceed 160 feet in length
Length
Minimum
Unit     800 square feet
Size
Minimum
unit     Minimum width: 16 feet for an individual townhouse
width
 
   (D)   Additional criteria. See §
155.651 for additional criteria for Residential Townhouse (R-TH) development.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.426 RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY (R-MF).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to primarily accommodate a mixture
of housing types including single-family, multi-family, as well as townhouse
developments.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table:
Table 155.426.1: Residential Multi-Family (R-MF)
Standard Residential Nonresidential
Table 155.426.1: Residential Multi-Family (R-MF)
Standard            Residential           Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Size    12 gross acres [1]    Width: 100 feet | Area: 10,000
                                          square feet
Maximum Height      8 stories or 100 feet 8 stories or 100 feet whichever
                    whichever is less     is less
Front Setback       60 feet               30 feet
Side Setback        20 feet               25 feet [2]
Rear Setback        20 feet               20 feet [3]
Street Side Setback N/A                   15 feet
Minimum Unit Size   750 square feet       N/A
Note(s):
[1]   12-acres or less as a portion of a PUD
[2]   Side setback shall increase by one foot for every two feet in
height of building or structure exceeding 20 feet.
[3]   Rear setback shall increase by two feet for every ten feet in
height of building or structure exceeding 44 feet.
 
   (D)   Development standards.
Table 155.426.2: Multi-Family Development Standards
Standard Residential
Table 155.426.2: Multi-Family Development Standards
Standard                  Residential
Maximum Density           Consistent with FLUM
Maximum Building Coverage 30%
Minimum Open Space        45% [1]
Minimum Between Buildings 15 feet
Vehicle Use Area          30% maximum non-pervious
Note(s):
[1]   See additional Criteria in §§
155.600 et seq.
 
   (E)   Additional standards.
      (1)   All single-family (R-1A, R-1B and R-1C) units shall comply with the
standards set forth in §
155.421.
      (2)   All zero lot line (R-1Z) units shall comply with the standards set
forth in §
155.422.
      (3)   All duplex (R-2) units shall comply with the standards set forth in
§
155.424.
      (4)   All townhouse units (R-TH) shall comply with the standards set
forth in §
155.425.
   (F)   See §
155.650 for additional criteria for Residential Multi-Family (R-MF)
development.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
§ 155.430 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS (B-1).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to primarily meet the local
neighborhood shopping and personal service needs a limited, surrounding
residential area.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.430: Neighborhood Business (B-1)
Standard Nonresidential
Table 155.430: Neighborhood Business (B-1)
Standard             Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Area     None
Minimum Lot Coverage None
Maximum Height       Two stories or 30 feet
Front Setback        25 feet [1]
Side Setback         10 feet [1]
Rear Setback         15 feet [1]
Minimum Floor Area   1,500 square feet
Note(s):
[1]   The first 10 feet must be fully sodded and landscaped.
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.431 COMMUNITY BUSINESS (B-2).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to primarily meet the shopping and
service needs of surrounding residential neighborhoods and communities.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.431: Community Business (B-2)
Standard Nonresidential
Table 155.431: Community Business (B-2)
Standard                      Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Area              15,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Dimensions        150 feet of frontage on the primary traffic
                              artery and 100 feet in depth
Maximum Height                100 feet [1]
Front or Street Side Setback  30 feet in depth [2,3]
[5]
Side Setback [5]              10 feet in width which shall be totally
                              landscaped [4]
Rear Setback [5]              15 feet in depth [7]
                              Each structure having a permitted or combination
Minimum Floor Area            of permitted uses shall have a minimum of 1,500
                              square feet [6]
Note(s):
[1]   No building within 100 feet of any single-family dwelling shall exceed
two stories or 35 feet.
[2]   For buildings exceeding 35 feet in height, front or street side setbacks
must be increased one foot for every two feet in height in excess of 35 feet.
[3]   The first 15 feet of all front and street side setbacks adjacent to the
property line shall be fully landscaped with sod, ground shrubbery, and trees,
except where crossed by permitted access driveways or walkways. The balance of
the required setbacks may be used for parking.
[4]   For buildings exceeding 35 feet in height, side setbacks must be
increased one foot for every five feet in height in excess of 35 feet
[5]   All lots abutting a residential district or use shall have setbacks in
accordance with §§
155.630 -
155.633
[6]   However, existing outparcels delineated on a plat recorded prior to 2-6-
85 for a shopping facility shall be exempt from providing a building of the
above minimum square footage.
[7]   The first 10 feet must be fully sodded and landscaped.
 
   (D)   Additional criteria. See §§
155.600 et seq. for additional criteria for Community Business (B-2)
development.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.432 GENERAL BUSINESS (B-3).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to primarily apply to shopping
centers that serve a regional scale and offer a diverse range of goods and
services. This district should have access to arterial roadways to better serve
the community.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.432: General Business (B-3)
Standard Nonresidential
Table 155.432: General Business (B-3)
Standard                      Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Area              15,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Dimensions        150 feet of frontage on the primary traffic
                              artery and 100 feet in depth
Maximum Height                100 feet [1]
Front or Street Side Setback  30 feet in depth [2,3]
[5]
Side Setback [5]              10 feet in width which shall be totally
                              landscaped [4]
Rear Setback [5]              15 feet in depth [7]
                              325 square feet per dwelling unit; each
                              structure having a permitted or combination of
                              permitted uses shall have a minimum of 1,500
Minimum Floor Area            square feet [6]
                              150 square feet for a rental sleeping room in a
                              hotel, lodging house, tourist home, or similar
                              use.
Note(s):
[1]   No building within 100 feet of any single-family dwelling shall exceed
two stories or 35 feet.
[2]   For buildings exceeding 35 feet in height, front or street side setbacks
must be increased one foot for every two feet in height in excess of 35 feet.
[3]   The first 15 feet of all front and street side setbacks adjacent to the
property line shall be fully landscaped with sod, ground shrubbery, and trees,
except where crossed by permitted access driveways or walkways. The balance of
the required setbacks may be used for parking.
[4]   For buildings exceeding 35 feet in height, side setbacks must be
increased one foot for every five feet in height in excess of 35 feet
[5]   All lots abutting a residential district or use shall have setbacks in
accordance with §§
155.630 -
155.633
[6]   However, existing outparcels delineated on a plat recorded prior to 2-6-
85 for a shopping facility shall be exempt from providing a building of the
above minimum square footage.
[7]   The first 10 feet must be fully sodded and landscaped.
 
   (D)   Additional criteria. See §§
155.600 et seq. for additional criteria for General Business (B-3) development.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.433 COMMERCIAL (C-1).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to accommodate a diverse range of
retail, repair services, wholesale, storage, and sales of large or heavy
machinery and equipment.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.433: Commercial (C-1)
Standard Nonresidential
Table 155.433: Commercial (C-1)
Standard                      Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Area              1 acre: 43,560 square feet
Minimum Lot Dimensions        N/A
Maximum Height                100 feet
Front or Street Side Setback  30 feet in depth [1]
[3]
Side Setback [3]              10 feet in width which shall be totally
                              landscaped [2]
Rear Setback [3]              15 feet in depth [4]
Minimum Floor Area            N/A
Note(s):
[1]   The first 15 feet of all front and street side setbacks adjacent to the
property line shall be fully landscaped with sod, ground shrubbery, and tees,
except where crossed by permitted access driveways or walkways. The balance
of the required yards may be used for parking.
[2]   For buildings exceeding 35 feet in height, side setbacks must be
increased one foot for every five feet in height in excess of 35 feet
[3]   All lots abutting a residential district or use shall have setbacks in
accordance with §§
155.630 -
155.633
[4]   The first 10 feet must be fully sodded and landscaped.
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.434 PROFESSIONAL OFFICE (PO).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to primarily provide suitable site
for administrative, professional, and financial offices while maintaining and
limiting impacts on surrounding residential neighborhoods.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.434: Professional Office (PO)
Standard Nonresidential
Table 155.434: Professional Office (PO)
Standard               Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Area       6,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Dimensions 60 feet in width by 100 feet in depth
Maximum Height         50 feet [1]
Front or Street Side   30 feet [2]
Setback
Side Setback           20 feet
Rear Setback           25 feet
Minimum Floor Area     N/A
Note(s):
[1]   Where a building exceeds 25 feet in height, all setbacks shall be
increased two feet over the initial setback distance for every one foot in
height
[2]   Except where the lot is adjacent to a traffic way with 100 feet or
more right-of-way, the setback shall be 50 feet
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
§ 155.440 INDUSTRIAL-LIGHT (I-L).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is primarily intended to accommodate a wide
range of low intensity manufacturing, assembly, processing, distribution,
warehousing, research and development, or other low intensity industrial uses.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.440: Industrial-Light (I-L)
Standard Nonresidential
Table 155.440: Industrial-Light (I-L)
Standard                      Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Area              N/A
Minimum Lot Dimensions        N/A
Maximum Height                100 feet
Front or Street Side Setback  §§
[1,2,3]                       155.630 -
                              155.633
                              §§
Side Setback [1,2,3]          155.630 -
                              155.633
                              §§
Rear Setback [1,2,3]          155.630 -
                              155.633
Minimum Floor Area            1,500 square feet
Note(s):
[1]   No building, structure, or part thereof shall be located within 75
feet of the right-of-way and no direct access shall be permitted from
Pines Boulevard to abutting properties. No parking shall be located
within 50 feet of the right-of-way line from the main arterial's roads.
[2]   Except on a street which separates an I-L District from a
residential district, in which case the setback shall be 25 feet, and
that area shall be maintained as a planting strip. No direct access shall
be permitted from the dividing street to the abutting properties in an I-
L District.
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.441 INDUSTRIAL-MEDIUM (I-M).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is primarily intended for medium intensity
manufacturing uses which are compatible with nonresidential areas and have
limited negative impacts upon contiguous nonresidential areas and uses. This
district is not typically well suited to be adjacent to residential
communities.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.441: Industrial-Medium (I-M)
Standard Nonresidential
Table 155.441: Industrial-Medium (I-M)
Standard                     Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Area             10,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Size             100 feet in width
Maximum Height               150 feet
                             §§
Front or Street Side Setback 155.630 -
                             155.633
                             §§
Side Setback                 155.630 -
                             155.633
                             §§
Rear Setback                 155.630 -
                             155.633
Minimum Floor Area           N/A
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.442 INDUSTRIAL-HEAVY (I-H).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is primarily intended to apply to areas
surrounded by less intense industrial districts, which because of location,
access, transportation, and relation to other industrial areas, can be
appropriately utilized for heavier types of industry.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See
Table 155.501.
   (C)   Dimensional Standards Table.
Table 155.442.1: Industrial-Heavy (I-H)
Standard Nonresidential
Table 155.442.1: Industrial-Heavy (I-H)
Standard                           Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Area                   40,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Size                   200 feet in width
Maximum Height                     200 feet
                                   §§
Front or Street Side Setback [1,2] 155.630 -
                                   155.633
                                   §§
Side Setback [1,2]                 155.630 -
                                   155.633
                                   §§
Rear Setback [1,2]                 155.630 -
                                   155.633
Minimum Floor Area                 N/A
Note(s):
[1]   No portion of any land utilized for, or building occupied by, a use first
permitted in an I-H District shall be located within 300 feet of any
residentially zoned property or any property zoned (A, U, A-E, R-R). However,
this separation requirement shall not apply to accessory uses which are
permissible in I-M or more restricted districts as principal uses.
[2]   Any land, building, or structure utilized for a use first permitted in an
I-H District shall be located at least 50 feet from all lot lines. However,
this 50 foot setback area may be utilized for accessory uses, building, and
structures permitted in an I-M or more restricted district.   
 
   (D)   Additional criteria. The following table shall be for uses which
require special exception in Industrial-Heavy (I-H) districts as shown in
Table 155.501.
Table 155.442.2: Industrial-Heavy (I-H) Special Exception Standards
Standard Nonresidential
Table 155.442.2: Industrial-Heavy (I-H) Special Exception Standards
Standard                           Nonresidential
Minimum Lot Area                   5 acres
Minimum Lot Size                   500 feet in width
Maximum Height                     200 feet
                                   §§
Front or Street Side Setback [1,2] 155.630 -
                                   155.633
                                   §§
Side Setback [1,2]                 155.630 -
                                   155.633
                                   §§
Rear Setback [1,2]                 155.630 -
                                   155.633
Minimum Floor Area                 N/A
Note(s):
[1]   No portion of any land utilized for, or building occupied by, a use first
permitted in an I-H District shall be located within 300 feet of any
residentially zoned property or any property zoned in an agriculture zoned
district However, this separation requirement shall not apply to accessory uses
which are permissible in I-M or more restricted districts as principal uses.
[2]   Any land, building, or structure utilized for a use first permitted in an
I-H District shall be located at least 50 feet from all lot lines. However,
this 50 foot setback area may be utilized for accessory uses, building, and
structures permitted in an I-M or more restricted district.
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
PLANNED DISTRICTS
§ 155.450 DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES FOR PLANNED DISTRICTS.
   (A)   All planned districts as defined in this subchapter are subject to
site plan approval procedures set forth in §
155.301(A) unless otherwise noted herein.
   (B)   All planned districts undergoing a site plan amendment shall comply
with the procedures set forth in §
155.301(B).
   (C)   Zoning change to a planned district shall comply with the procedures
set forth in §
155.301(F) and shall include a site plan and narrative to demonstrate
compliance with the requirements for the requested zoning district as outlined
in this subchapter.
   (D)   All planned districts undergoing an amendment to previously approved
planned districts guidelines shall comply with the procedures set forth in §
155.301(F).
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.451 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD).
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   This district is intended to provide flexible land use and design
regulations through the use of performance criteria; so that small-to-large
scale areas, or portions thereof, may be developed with a variety of
residential types and nonresidential uses, and may contain both individual
building sites and common property.
      (2)   A planned unit is to be designed and organized so as to be capable
of satisfactory use and operation as a separate entity without necessarily
needing the participation of other building sites or other common property in
order to function as a neighborhood. This section specifically encourages
innovations so that the growing demands of residential and nonresidential uses
may be met by a greater variety in type, design, and siting of buildings and by
the conservation and more efficient use of land.
      (3)   This section recognizes that the standard zoning functions (use and
bulk) and the subdivision function (platting and design) are appropriate for
the regulation of land use in areas of neighborhoods that are already
substantially developed. This section further recognizes that a rigid set of
space requirements along with bulk and use specifications would frustrate the
application of this concept. Therefore, where PUD techniques are deemed
appropriate the land may be rezoned to a PUD District. In so doing,
conventional use and dimensional specifications are ignored in this section and
are herein replaced by an approval process in which an approved plan becomes
the basis for continuing land use controls. This provides the means by which
City Commission may approve land development plans which meet or exceed the
level of development quality required by regular city zoning standards.
      (4)   It is intended that this district offer development design
flexibility to developers, in order to encourage imaginative, functional, high
quality development planning. The use of this district shall be limited to
those development projects which will result in desirable community
environmental qualities and development which is compatible with surrounding
lands and activities.
   (B)   Design guidelines. Guidelines for the planned unit development shall
be determined at the time of application submittal to the Planning and Economic
Development Department. Guidelines include but are not limited to: Setbacks,
buffers, required yards, lot size, distance between structures, or otherwise
established herein.
   (C)   Active planned unit developments.
      (1)   Where a parentheses () comes after a planned unit development, it
shall denote the name of an alias of the approved PUD.
      (2)   Where an asterisk * comes after a planned unit development, it
shall mean that the PUD has been approved under a site plan.
         (a)   Big Sky (Keystone Lake);
         (b)   Big Sky North (Laguna Isles);
         (c)   Chapel Trail;
         (d)   Charleston in the Pines*;
         (e)   Meadow Pines (Cobblestone);
         (f)   Grand Palms;
         (g)   Nasher (Sarah Park);
         (h)   Pembroke Falls;
         (i)   Pembroke Isles (Lakes of Western Pines);
         (j)   Pembroke Shores;
         (k)   Pierpointe*;
         (l)   Raintree;
         (m)   SilverLakes;
         (n)   The Landings;
         (o)   TownGate;
         (p)   Country Pines (Walnut Creek).
   (D)   Standards.
      (1)   Minimum area required. Under normal circumstances, the minimum area
required to qualify for a PUD District shall be 120 contiguous acres of land.
The Planning and Zoning Board may consider projects with less acreage where the
applicant can demonstrate that a smaller parcel will meet the objectives and
requirements of a PUD District, but in no case shall projects less than 50
acres be qualified as a PUD District.
      (2)   Ownership of land to be used for the project. The parcel of land
for a project may be owned, leased, or controlled either by a single person,
corporation, or by a group of individuals. An application must be filed by the
owner or by the authorized agent of all property included in a project. In the
case of multiple ownership, the approved plan shall be binding on all owners,
heirs, successors, and assigns.
      (3)   Permitted uses. All uses within an area designated as a PUD
District are determined by the provisions of this section and the approved plan
of the project concerned.
         (a)   Residential uses. Residences may be of any variety of types.
(Single-family, multi-family, rental, condominium, townhouses, quadplexes, and
the like). In developing a balanced community, the uses of a variety of housing
types and designs shall be deemed most in keeping with this section.
         (b)   Accessory, commercial, service, and other nonresidential uses:
            1.   Because of the primarily residential nature of PUD, only those
commercial and industrial uses which are compatible with residential uses may
be permitted.
            2.   Customary accessory or associated uses may also be permitted,
as appropriate, to the PUD.
            3.   The permitted uses shall conform to the approved PUD plan.
      (4)   Minimum area and land dedication requirements.
         (a)   Planned unit developments shall contain areas at least equal to
35% of the gross area in open space. In addition thereto, planned unit
developments shall comply with the standards and regulations set forth in §
154.36.
         (b)   In the event the land shall not be required for municipal
purposes, the City Commission may require the developer to make a cash
contribution in lieu of the land dedication. The cash contribution shall be the
higher of the appraisals of two qualified, mutually acceptable appraisers.
         (c)   Where the planned unit development is being constructed on a
planned, phased basis, areas to be dedicated to the city shall be shown on the
plan for that phase and shall be deeded to the city at the time of the approval
of that phase. Likewise, cash contributions in lieu of land dedication shall be
payable upon the approval of each phase.
      (5)   Setbacks or yards. There shall be a setback or yard of not less
than 25 feet in depth, abutting all public road rights-of-way within or
abutting a Planned Unit Development District.
      (6)   Access.
         (a)   Each dwelling unit or other permitted use shall have access to a
public street either directly or indirectly via a private approach road,
pedestrian way, court, or other area dedicated to public or private use or by
common easement guaranteeing access. Permitted uses are not required to front
on a road.
         (b)   The city shall be allowed access on privately owned roads,
easements, and open space to insure the police- and fire-protection of the
area, to meet emergency needs, to conduct city services, and to generally
insure the health and safety of the residents of the planned unit development.
      (7)   Compatibility zone with adjacent zoning district. The planned unit
development shall be generally compatible with surrounding uses and
communities.
      (8)   Length of structures. The length of structures within any given PUD
District shall be subject to the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning
Board and the approval of the City Commission.
      (9)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall at least meet all
requirements as required by the city. If changes in these requirements are
requested by the applicant, a parking study shall be required to deem the
changes necessary.
      (10)   Underground utilities.
         (a)   With the planned unit development, all utilities, including
telephone, television cable, and electrical systems, shall be installed
underground. Primary facilities providing service to the site may be exempted
from this requirement.
         (b)   Large transformers shall be placed on the ground and contained
within pad mounts, enclosures, or vaults.
         (c)   The developer shall provide adequate landscaping with shrubs and
plants to screen all utility facilities permitted above ground.
      (11)   Open space regulations. Planned unit developments shall exhibit
and maintain a total open space requirement at least equal to 35% of the gross
area of the PUD. The following areas qualify wholly or partially as open space:
         (a)   No more than 50% of lakes and golf courses shall be counted
toward the total open space requirement.
         (b)   All canals and lakes in excess of 80 feet in width may be
counted toward open space requirements subject to division (D)(11)(a) of this
section.
         (c)   If natural habitats of unique and significant value are
determined to exist, the Planning and Zoning Board may recommend the area so
defined to be left in an undisturbed state, and adequately protected or
incorporated into the design of the PUD as a passive recreation area with a
minimum of improvements permitted. In either case, 100% of the area contained
therein may be counted as open space.
         (d)   The area contained in a continuous, open space pedestrian
system; consisting of permanently maintained walks and trails, not less than 12
feet wide; leading to a natural amenity, recreation facility, or commercial
use; offering internal pedestrian walkways that are divorced from roads and
streets; may be counted as open space.
         (e)   The area contained in mini-parks; which may or may not be part
of the open space system, but contain at least one acre and have a minimum
dimension of 100 feet together with, but not limited to, one of the following:
benches, playground apparatus, barbeque pits, and fire rings; may be counted as
open space.
         (f)   The area occupied by a multiple-use recreation building and its
attendant outdoor recreation facilities may be counted as open space.
         (g)   Any privately maintained or owned exterior open space adjacent
to and for the exclusive use by the residents of an individual dwelling unit;
enclosed or partially enclosed by walls, buildings, or structures, including
balconies, terraces, porches, decks, patios and atriums may be counted toward
the total open space requirement, providing the total area contained therein
does not exceed 5% of the gross area of the PUD, nor decreases the amount of
ground level open space below 30% of the gross area of the PUD. All previous
land areas between the property or lot lines and the building or buildings
thereon shall count as open space, except as herein otherwise provided.
         (h)   The area contained in public and private streets rights-of-way
is not considered as open space and receives no credit toward the open space
requirement.
         (i)   All open space and all private streets and ways shall conform to
its intended use and remain as expressed in the master development plan through
the inclusion in all deeds of appropriate covenants.
            1.   The deed restrictions shall run with the land and be for the
benefit of present as well as future property owners.
            2.   All covenants and deed restrictions shall be included in the
association documents, which shall specifically provide that the city shall
have the power to enforce all the covenants and deed restrictions which affect
the health, safety, and welfare of residents.
            3.   All covenants and deed restrictions shall grant to the city a
lien upon all real property benefitted by the enforcement, in the event it is
necessary for the city to enforce the covenants or restrictions.
         (j)   All open space as well as public and recreation facilities shall
be specifically included in the development plan schedule, and be constructed
and fully improved by the developer at an equivalent or greater rate than the
construction of residential structures.
            1.   If the rate of construction of dwelling units is greater than
the rate which open space and recreational facilities have been constructed and
provided, no permits shall be issued until the proper ratio has been provided.
      (12)   Procedure for zoning change land to PUD District classification.
The applicant shall submit to the city an application for zoning change, on a
form provided by the city,
         (a)   In order to allow the Planning and Zoning Board and the
developer to reach an understanding on basic design requirements prior to
detailed design, the developer shall apply for concept approval, and submit
along with the applications:
            1.   A copy of the DRI Report and Development Order, if applicable
to the PUD.
            2.   An area map showing the adjacent property owners and existing
uses within 200 feet of the parcel.
            3.   A legal description of the metes and bounds of the parcel.
            4.   A sketch plan approximately to scale, though it need not be to
the precision of a finished engineering drawing; and it shall clearly show the
following:
               A.   The existing topographical features of the site.
               B.   The location of the various uses and their areas in acres.
               C.   The general outlines of the interior roadway system and all
existing rights-of-way and easements, whether public or private.
               D.   Delineation of the various residential areas indicating for
each such area its general extent, size, and composition in terms of total
number of dwelling units and approximate percentage allocation by dwelling unit
type.
               E.   A calculation of the residential density in dwelling units
per gross acre including interior roadways.
               F.   The interior open space system.
               G.   Principal ties to the community at large with respect to
water supply, sewage disposal, and storm drainage.
               H.   General description of the availability of other community
facilities, such as schools, fire protection services, and cultural facilities,
if any, police, and solid waste disposal and how these facilities are affected
by this proposal.
               I.   Evidence of how the developer's proposed land uses meet the
existing and projected community requirements. Evidence as to requirements may
be in the form of specific studies or reports initiated by the developer or in
the form of references to existing studies or reports relevant to the project
in question.
               J.   Evidence that the proposal is compatible with the goals of
the official master plan, if such plan exists.
               K.   General statement as to how open space is to be owned and
maintained.
               L.   All pedestrian walkway systems shall be shown. Sidewalks
will be required along private streets, except where there is a pedestrian
walkway within the common areas.
               M.   Evidence as to traffic movement on both exterior and
interior roadways.
               N.   If the development is to be staged, a general indication of
how the staging is to proceed. Whether or not the development is to be stages,
the sketch plan shall show the intended total project.
      (13)   Failure to commence or continue project. If no construction has
begun or no use established in the planned unit development within one year
from the time of zoning change, or if construction and development activity
shall not thereafter be of a reasonably continuous nature, the site development
plan lapses under the provisions of this section.
      (14)   Compliance with subdivision regulations. The city reserves the
right to require the landowner to comply with any and all requirements of the
subdivision regulations of the city as they now exist or as they may hereafter
be amended.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.452 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SMALL LOT (PD-SL).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to promote and facilitate the
development and redevelopment of by-passed, underutilized, or abandoned
properties. This district provides for the development of these properties in a
manner that will contribute to the creation of high quality employment
opportunities, provide for diversity of housing stock, and improve the overall
economic viability of the area in the city. It is the intent of this district
to:
      (1)   Encourage flexibility in the development, redevelopment, investment
and reinvestment of by-passed, underutilized and/or abandoned properties;
      (2)   Encourage the use of innovative approaches to development that
utilize sustainable development practices, and incorporate environmental
performance standards;
      (3)   Encourage a mixture of functionally related uses in close proximity
of each other to promote pedestrian activity and reduce vehicle miles traveled;
      (4)   Encourage the construction of new buildings of a compatible
architectural scale to its surroundings;
      (5)   Facilitate the development, redevelopment and use of properties in
the city in close proximity to mass transit;
      (6)   Discourage "Big Box Retail" and drive-thru facilities within this
district unless these developments are specifically designed to meet the
purpose and intent of this subchapter.
   (B)   Active planned development small lot developments. A list of active
PD-SL developments and guidelines shall be maintained in the Planning and
Economic Development Department.
   (C)   Standards.
      (1)   Statement of need. The statement of need shall describe the
existing conditions of the general area, proposed development and how such
proposed development is a benefit to the city, meets the goals and objectives
of this LDC, and that the proposed development is compatible with, and not
detrimental to, adjacent properties or the surrounding neighborhood(s).
      (2)   Design guidelines. Design guidelines shall be required establishing
development standards for the proposed development, including illustrations of
proposed architectural, urban design, streetscape, and landscape concepts,
thematic design elements such as architectural materials, building colors and
landscape plans, and any proposed variation from the design standards or
guidelines contained in this LDC. The PD-SL design guidelines may describe
broadly based design or architectural themes and concepts, sufficient to convey
an idea and general pattern of development.
         (a)   Floor area ratio calculations and ground coverage shall be
provided to determine scale, density and impact of the project.
         (b)   The maximum project size shall be ten acres. The project may
contain less than five acres if off-street pedestrian and vehicular access is
provided to adjacent uses and the applicant can demonstrate the inter-
relationships and benefits of a PD-SL District of such size.
         (c)   Within the PD-SL District, pedestrian movement and safety shall
be given priority. Internal roadways shall be "pedestrian friendly" including
the use of pavers, wide sidewalks, narrow vehicular lanes and parallel parking.
         (d)   Parking garages, loading docks, and service areas shall be
directly accessible from major roadways and appropriately screened to promote a
pedestrian scale and safety.
         (e)   Setbacks within the project shall be determined at the time of
project review to encourage an urban pedestrian scale.
         (f)   Outdoor uses and public places shall be designed to connect
various buildings and promote pedestrian activity. Active use of the public
spaces is desired to encourage increasing average length of stay within the
project area.
         (g)   Signage shall be at a scale and aesthetic design appropriate to
the size and type of project.
         (h)   Streetscape design shall compliment and be consistent with the
project's architectural theme as well as the surrounding developed properties.
         (i)   A maintenance plan for all common areas including but not
limited to, parking, sidewalks, public plazas, building facades and programming
shall be required as part of the approval of the project.
   (D)   Additional criteria; evaluation criteria. The Planning and Zoning
Board and the City Commission shall consider at a minimum, the following goals
and objectives when evaluating the proposed PD-SL District. The proposed PD-SL
guidelines shall:
      (1)   Conform to the city's comprehensive plan policies and land use map
designations.
      (2)   Conform to the purpose and intent of the PD-SL District.
      (3)   Address the concerns outlined in the statement of need in support
of the PD-SL District.
      (4)   Provide a land use, or combination of land uses that are arranged
and designed in such a manner as to be well integrated with other land uses,
the immediate surrounding area, the planned thoroughfare system, and other
public facilities such as water and sewer systems, parks, schools, transit
routes and utilities.
      (5)   Adequately, reasonably and conveniently integrate into existing and
planned streets, transit systems, and public services, utilities and public
facilities.
      (6)   Promote development that is appropriate to and well integrated with
its environmental setting, including existing vegetation, soils, geology,
topography and drainage patterns.
      (7)   Adequately justify any deviations from standard development
requirements based upon the overall quality of the plan provided, the need to
address specific concerns outlined in the statement of need, and the need to
address other conditions that may affect the viability of reasonably developing
the property in a manner consistent with stated objectives of the city's
comprehensive plan.
      (8)   Provide innovative design in comparison with development reviewed
under other base zoning district regulations.
      (9)   Be compatible with, and not detrimental to, adjacent properties or
the surrounding neighborhood(s).
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.453 MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT (MXD).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to provide flexible design
regulations and uses for each project to encourage innovative development and
redevelopment. Mixed use projects must have a consistent architectural theme,
promote a pedestrian friendly environment and reduce traffic generation.
   (B)   Active mixed use developments. A list of active mixed use developments
and guidelines shall be maintained in the Planning and Economic Development
Department.
   (C)   Standards.
      (1)   A mixed use development is to be designed and organized to
encourage a combination of at least two uses that compliment each other and
assist in reducing traffic generation. No single use shall dominate a mixed use
project. Single use buildings, especially "Big Box Retail" are discouraged
unless the mixture of buildings is designed to encourage interaction among the
proposed uses.
      (2)   Floor area ratio calculations and ground coverage shall be provided
to determine scale, density and impact of the project.
      (3)   The minimum project size shall be 25 acres. The project may contain
less than 25 acres if off-street pedestrian and vehicular access is provided to
adjacent uses and the applicant can demonstrate the inter-relationships and
benefits of a Mixed Use Development District of such size.
      (4)   Within the mixed use project, pedestrian movement and safety shall
be given priority. Internal roadways shall be "pedestrian friendly" including
the use of pavers, wide sidewalks, narrow vehicular lanes and parallel parking.
Major parking areas shall be located to encourage walking and discourage
internal vehicle trips among the various buildings and uses.
      (5)   Parking garages, loading docks, and service areas shall be directly
accessible from major roadways and appropriately screened to promote a
pedestrian scale and safety.
      (6)   Architectural requirements.
         (a)   A consistent architectural theme including, but not limited to,
scale, colors, textures and materials shall be required.
         (b)   Setbacks within the project shall be determined at the time of
project review to encourage an urban pedestrian scale.
         (c)   Setbacks to adjacent properties shall be the larger of the
existing underlying zoning district or the adjacent district, whichever is
larger. The design of the project shall be required to be consistent with
adjacent uses and structures.
         (d)   Outdoor uses and public places shall be designed to connect
various buildings and promote pedestrian activity. Active use of the public
spaces is desired to encourage increasing average length of stay within the
project area.
         (e)   First floor facades shall be "active" to encourage pedestrian
traffic throughout the project area.
         (f)   Signage shall be at a scale and aesthetic design appropriate to
the size and type of project.
         (g)   Streetscape design shall compliment and be consistent with the
project's architectural theme.
      (7)   A maintenance plan for all common areas including but not limited
to, parking, sidewalks, public plazas, building facades and programming shall
be required as part of the approval of the project. (Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-
17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022,
passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.454 PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT (PCD).
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   This district is intended to provide flexible design regulations
and uses for each project to encourage innovative development and redevelopment
without imposing arbitrary requirements. Commercial projects must have a
consistent architectural theme and promote a pedestrian friendly environment.
      (2)   A planned commercial development is to be designed and organized to
encourage a combination of multiple commercial uses or tenants that compliment
each other. No single tenant shall dominate a planned commercial project. "Big
Box Retail" buildings are discouraged unless the mixture of buildings is
designed to encourage interaction among the proposed uses.
   (B)   Active planned commercial developments. A list of active PCD
developments and guidelines shall be maintained in the Planning and Economic
Development Department.
   (C)   Standards.
      (1)   Floor area ratio calculations and ground coverage shall be provided
to determine scale, density and impact of the project.
      (2)   The minimum project size shall be ten acres. The project may
contain less than ten acres if off-street pedestrian and vehicular access is
provided to adjacent uses and the applicant can demonstrate the inter-
relationships and benefits of a Planned Commercial Development District of such
size.
      (3)   Within the planned commercial project, pedestrian movement and
safety shall be given priority. Internal roadways shall be "pedestrian
friendly" including the use of pavers, wide sidewalks, narrow vehicular lanes
and parallel or angled parking. Major parking areas shall be located to
encourage walking and discourage internal vehicle trips among the various
buildings and uses.
      (4)   Parking, loading docks, and service areas shall be directly
accessible from major roadways and appropriately screened to promote a
pedestrian scale and safety.
      (5)   Architectural requirements.
         (a)   A consistent architectural theme including, but not limited to,
scale, colors, textures and materials shall be required.
         (b)   Setbacks within the project shall be determined at the time of
project review to encourage an urban pedestrian scale.
         (c)   Setbacks to adjacent properties shall be the larger of the
existing underlying zoning district or the adjacent district, whichever is
larger.
         (d)   Outdoor uses and public places shall be designed to connect
various buildings and promote pedestrian activity. Active use of the public
spaces is desired to encourage increasing average length of stay within the
project area.
         (e)   First floor facades shall be "active" to encourage pedestrian
traffic throughout the project area.
         (f)   Signage shall be at a scale and aesthetic design appropriate to
the size and type of project.
         (g)   Streetscape design shall compliment and be consistent with the
project's architectural theme.
      (6)   A maintenance plan for all common areas including but not limited
to, parking, sidewalks, public plazas, building facades and programming shall
be required as part of the approval of the project.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.455 PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT (PID).
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   This district is intended to provide flexible design regulations
and uses for each project to encourage innovative and industrial development
and redevelopment without imposing arbitrary requirements.
      (2)   A PID is to be designed and organized to encourage a combination of
multiple industrial uses, compatible uses or tenants that compliment each
other.
      (3)   The uses within this district shall be consistent with, but may be
more restrictive than, the industrial land use plan category permitted uses.
This zoning district may be applied to land designated industrial on the city's
land use plan map.
   (B)   Active planned industrial developments. A list of active PID
developments and guidelines shall be maintained in the Planning and Economic
Development Department.
   (C)   Standards.
      (1)   A PID is to be designed and organized to encourage a combination of
multiple industrial uses, compatible uses or tenants that compliment each
other.
      (2)   The uses within this district shall be consistent with, but may be
more restrictive than, the industrial land use plan category permitted uses.
This zoning district may be applied to land designated industrial on the city's
land use plan map.
      (3)   Design guidelines shall be required establishing development
standards for the proposed development, including illustrations of proposed
architectural, urban design, streetscape, and landscape concepts, thematic
design elements such as architectural materials, building colors and landscape
plans, and any proposed variation from the design standards or guidelines
contained in this section.
         (a)   Floor area ratio calculations and ground coverage shall be
provided to determine scale, density and impact of the project.
         (b)   A description of the allowable uses.
         (c)   An accessibility plan showing means of ingress and egress to
adjacent thoroughfares.
         (d)   Setbacks and buffer yards for the project shall be determined at
the time of project review to ensure compatibility with and protection of
adjacent uses.
         (e)   A uniform sign plan for the development shall be included in the
design guidelines. Signage shall be at a scale and design appropriate to the
size and type of project.
         (f)   A consistent architectural theme including, but not limited to,
scale, colors, textures and materials shall be required. Streetscape design
shall compliment and be consistent with the project's architectural theme.
         (g)   A plan or design for the screening of outdoor uses.
         (h)   A maintenance plan for all common areas including but not
limited to, parking, sidewalks, public plazas, building facades and programming
shall be required as part of the approval of the project.
      (4)   No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected or
used, in whole or in part, in any manner that is obnoxious, objectionable, a
nuisance or a hazard to adjoining properties, as it relates to sound,
vibrations, odors, glare, radioactive materials, smoke and particular matters.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.456 HOSPITAL DISTRICT (HD).
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to promote and facilitate the
development and redevelopment of hospitals within the city. This district
provides for the continued growth and development of a hospital use and,
associated accessory uses and additions necessitated by advances in medical
technology and patient treatment as well as expansion to accommodate the
healthcare needs of the region's population. It is the intent of this district
to:
      (1)   Encourage the use of innovative approaches to development that
utilize sustainable development practices, and incorporate environmental
performance standards;
      (2)   Encourage a mixture of functionally related uses in close proximity
of each other to promote pedestrian activity and reduce vehicle miles traveled;
      (3)   Encourage the construction of new buildings of a compatible
architectural scale to its surroundings;
      (4)   Facilitate the development, redevelopment and use of properties in
the city in close proximity to mass transit;
      (5)   Encourage the goals and objectives within the city's Green Plan.
      (6)   Provide for development consistent with the underlying land use.
   (B)   Active hospital district developments. A list of active HD
developments and guidelines shall be maintained in the Planning and Economic
Development Department.
   (C)   Uses.
      (1)   Permitted uses shall include:
         (a)   Hospital;
         (b)   Medical lab;
         (c)   Medical office;
         (d)   Nursing home/hospice;
         (e)   Assisted living facility;
         (f)   Such other hospital related uses as may be set forth in the HD
guidelines governing use of the subject property.
      (2)   Accessory uses:
         (a)   Pharmacy;
         (b)   Ambulatory/outpatient surgery;
         (c)   Professional offices;
         (d)   Restaurant/cafes/cafeteria;
         (e)   Auditorium/assembly hall/ conference center;
         (f)   Retail commercial;
         (g)   Plant operations;
         (h)   Helipad/heliport;
         (i)   Parking garage;
         (j)   Rehabilitation/fitness center;
         (k)   Educational;
         (l)   Child care/adult day care;
         (m)   Temporary parking areas and temporary parking structures;
         (n)   Telecommunication tower/antennas;
         (o)   Temporary outdoor storage;
         (p)   Hotel/motel;
         (q)   Uses incidental and customarily associated with hospital uses.
   (D)   Standards.
      (1)   Design guidelines shall be required establishing development
standards for the proposed development, including illustrations of proposed
architectural, design, streetscape and landscape concepts, thematic design
elements such as architectural materials, building colors and landscape plans,
and any proposed variation from the design standards or guidelines contained in
this section. The HD design guidelines may describe broadly based design or
architectural themes and concepts, sufficient to convey an idea and general
pattern of development.
         (a)   Floor area ratio calculations and ground coverage shall be
provided to determine scope, density and impact of the project.
         (b)   The minimum project size shall be five acres.
         (c)   Parking garages, loading docks, and service areas shall be
directly accessible from major roadways and appropriately screened to promote a
pedestrian scale and safety.
         (d)   Internal roadways shall be "pedestrian friendly" and shall be
easily accessible to the disabled and injured; including, but not limited to,
the use of pavers, wide sidewalks. Major parking areas shall be located to
encourage walking and discourage internal vehicle trips among the various
buildings and uses.
         (e)   Traffic circulation shall be designed to avoid through-traffic
in residential areas.
         (f)   The use of public transportation shall be promoted; bus and/or
shuttle bus stops on campus shall be provided.
         (g)   Protect and minimize any undesirable effects upon contiguous and
nearby residential property.
         (h)   Provide sufficient off-street parking and loading facilities, so
that the use of streets in the vicinity for this purpose will not be
unavoidable.
         (i)   Provide sufficient setbacks and yard spaces adjacent to public
streets and to residentially zoned property, with adequate landscaping in those
yard and setback areas, in order to protect the appearance and character of the
neighborhood.
         (j)   Provide sufficient walls, fences, enclosures, or hedges to
prevent or minimize effects of noise, glare, odors, smoke, and soot, upon
surrounding residential property.
         (k)   Reserved parking shall be considered upon review and approval of
the Planning and Zoning Board.
      (2)   Site plan requirements.
         (a)   Setbacks within the project shall be determined at the time of
project review.
         (b)   Inventory of existing facilities and services.
         (c)   Projected expansion plans for new construction and/or
substantial rehabilitation of existing facilities indicating the type, size and
location of each facility.
         (d)   A master sign plan shall conform to the requirements set forth
in §§
155.600 et seq. Signage shall be at a scale and aesthetic design appropriate to
the size and type of project.
         (e)   A maintenance plan for all common areas including but not
limited to, parking, sidewalks, public areas, building facades, landscaped
areas and programming shall be required as part of the approval of the project.
         (f)   An aesthetically pleasing architectural theme, including but not
limited to scale, colors, textures, materials and the use of landscaping.
         (g)   Outdoor uses and public places shall be designed to connect
various buildings and promote pedestrian activity.
         (h)   Landscape design shall compliment and be consistent with the
project's architectural theme.
      (3)   Parking structures. Parking structures are also subject to the
following additional requirements:
         (a)   Parking structure height should be less than the principal
structure.
         (b)   Parking structure shall be designed to have a decorative
appearance consistent with the overall architectural composition of the
development, by providing unified design elements with the main buildings
through the use of similar materials and color, vertical and horizontal
elements, and architectural style. Such architectural composition shall
incorporate any number of the following: detail and embellishments; louvres or
screening; color and material banding; use of decorative metal grates;
cornices; planters; or vines.
         (c)   Architectural features shall be incorporated into the facade to
mitigate the mass and bulk of the building.
         (d)   Decorative architectural elements on the ground floor level
shall be designed to accommodate the pedestrian scale.
         (e)   Parking levels above the ground floor shall maintain the same
vertical and horizontal articulation or rhythm and incremental appearance
established on the ground floor.
         (f)   Ramps shall be visually screened from streets and oriented
towards the interior of the lot where possible within the development. Ramp
profiles shall be hidden on the exterior elevations.
         (g)   Roof top parking shall be visually screened with articulated
parapet walls and/or other architectural treatments or landscaping.
         (h)   Exterior lighting fixtures shall provide cut-off shielding in
order to eliminate glare and spillage onto adjacent properties and roadways.
         (i)   The openings of the garage shall be designed in a manner that
obscures parked vehicles when possible.
         (j)   Parking structures abutting any residential property shall
utilize noise abating materials.
         (k)   Compact parking spaces may be provided at a maximum of 20% of
the total required parking spaces. All compact parking spaces shall be clearly
marked with the word "compact" either on the wheel stop or curb, or on the
pavement at the opening of the space. Compact parking spaces shall be
reasonably dispersed throughout the parking area.
      (4)   Temporary surface parking lots, provided that the primary purpose
of temporary surface parking lots is to serve employees of the hospital
facilities and accessory uses through approval by the Planning and Zoning
Board.
      (5)   Evaluation criteria. The Planning and Zoning Board and the City
Commission shall consider, at a minimum, the following goals and objectives
when evaluating the proposed Hospital District. The proposed HD guidelines
shall:
         (a)   Conform to the purpose and intent of the Hospital District.
         (b)   Provide a land use, or combination of land uses that are
arranged and designed in such a manner as to be well integrated with other land
uses, the immediate surrounding area, the planned thoroughfare system, and
other public facilities such as water and sewer systems, parks, schools,
transit routes and utilities.
         (c)   Adequately, reasonably and conveniently integrate into existing
and planned streets, transit systems, and public services, utilities and public
facilities.
         (d)   Provide sustainable design elements in comparison with
traditional development reviewed under other base zoning district regulations.
         (e)   Be compatible with, and not detrimental to, adjacent properties
or the surrounding neighborhood(s).
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
ARTICLE 5: USE REGULATIONS
§ 155.500 OVERVIEW OF USE REGULATIONS.
   General purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to authorize the
establishment and continuation of land uses that are allowed as a primary use
of a parcel of land and consistent with the comprehensive plan. The subchapter
identifies the zoning districts in which the various primary uses are allowed,
identifies if any special processes might be required for the use, and
establishes any use standards that might be applicable to the various primary
uses. Before utilizing this subchapter to confirm if a use is allowed within a
specific zoning district, it must first be determined if the zoning district
designation of the subject site is consistent with the site's future land use
designation as depicted on the future land use map of the city's comprehensive
plan.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.501 PERMITTED USE TABLE.
   (A)   Permitted use table.
      (1)   Organization.
         (a)   Use classification. Use classifications are very broad and
general categories such as residential, commercial or industrial.
         (b)   Use categories. Use categories represent major subgroups of the
use classifications that have common functional, product, or physical
characteristics such as educational facilities, food and beverage service,
animal related or manufacturing and production.
         (c)   Use types. Use types identify specific primary land uses whose
characteristics are considered to fall within the various use categories such
as high school or daycare in the educational facilities use category.
      (2)   Designation of primary uses in permitted use table. The permitted
use table utilizes the following designations and abbreviations:
         (a)   Permitted "P" - Indicates the use type is allowed in the zoning
district.
         (b)   Permitted/specific use regulations for more information "P/S" -
Indicates the use type is allowed but specific use regulations must be followed
for the use to be allowed.
         (c)   Accessory "A" - Indicates the use type is allowed in the zoning
district accessory or incidental to a permitted use.
         (d)   Accessory/specific use regulations for more information "A/S" -
Indicates the use type is allowed as an accessory use but specific use
regulations must be followed for the use to be allowed as an accessory use.
         (e)   Special exception "SE" - Indicates the use type is only allowed
in the zoning district through the special exception process of §
155.301(M).
         (f)   Not permitted "blank" - Indicates the use type is not allowed in
the zoning district.
      (3)   Uses not listed in the Permitted Use Table. Uses not specifically
listed shall be subject to the following regulations:
         (a)   The Planning and Economic Development Department shall consider
the compatibility of the proposed use when determining the designated use
category or use type. Upon review, the Director may determine if the use is
either permitted or not permitted as well as any specific use regulations. When
making such determination, the Director shall consider the character and
compatibility of the proposed use as well as the potential impacts including
but not limited to how the use will affect the overall health, safety and
welfare of surrounding community.
         (b)   The applicant may seek an interpretation of the Planning and
Economic Development Department Director's determination to the City's Planning
and Zoning Board outlined in §
155.301(L).
 
Table 155.501: City of Pembroke Pines - Permitted Uses Table - All Zoning Districts
P = Permitted; P/S = Permitted / Specific Use Regulations; A = Accessory Use; A/S = Accessory /
Specific Use Regulations SE = Special Exception; Blank = Not Permitted;
              Agriculture,                                    Business       Industrial Specific
              Community, and     Residential Districts        Districts      Districts  Use
Use      Use  Recreation
Category Type A  A- R- U  CF REC R- R- R- R- R- RMH R- R- RMF B- B- B- C- PO l- l- l-H
                E  R         E  1A 1B 1C 1Z    2  TH    1  2  3  1    L  M   
                                                                   
Table 155.501: City of Pembroke Pines - Permitted Uses Table - All Zoning Districts
P = Permitted; P/S = Permitted / Specific Use Regulations; A = Accessory Use; A/S = Accessory / Specific Use
Regulations SE = Special Exception; Blank = Not Permitted;
                            Agriculture,                                    Business       Industrial Specific
                            Community, and     Residential Districts        Districts      Districts  Use
Use         Use Type        Recreation
Category                    A  A- R- U  CF REC R- R- R- R- R- RMH R- R- RMF B- B- B- C- PO l- l- l-H
                              E  R         E  1A 1B 1C 1Z    2  TH    1  2  3  1    L  M   
                                                                                 
   Residential
            Single-Family   P  P  P         P  P  P  P  P  P   P    P                      
            Detached
            Mobile Homes                           P                             
            Two-Family                                P    P                      
Residences  Attached
            Townhouse                                   P  P                      
            Multi-Family                                  P                      
            Accessory       A/            A/ A/ A/ A/          A/                    155.621
            Dwelling Units  S                  S  S  S  S               S                             (A)(7)
            Special         P/ P/ P/   P/    P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/S P/ P/ P/S                   155.530
            Residential 1   S  S  S     S      S  S  S  S  S      S  S                                (A)(1)
            Special         P/ P/ P/   P/                     P/S                   155.530
Group       Residential 2   S  S  S     S                                                             (A)(2)
Living      Special         P/ P/ P/   P/                     P/S                   155.530
            Residential 3   S  S  S     S                                                             (A)(3)
            Rooming and                                   P                      
            Boarding
            Family Daycare  P/ P/ P/        P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/S P/ P/ P/S                   118.15
Other       Homes           S  S  S            S  S  S  S  S      S  S
            Home Based      P/ P/ P/        P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/S P/ P/ P/S                   120.02
            Businesses      S  S  S            S  S  S  S  S      S  S
   Community Facilities | Government | Institutional
            Non-Profit
            Facility
Community   Educational/                 P  P  P  P    P   P                          
or Cultural Recreational
Facilities  Center
            Philanthropic   P  P  P  P    P                                          
            Institution
            Public Library/ P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  p   p  P  p     P  P  P    P  P  P     
Community   Museum/Gallery
or Cultural Public
Facilities  Recreation      P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P     P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Facilities and
            Parks
            Adult or
            Continuing              P                           P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Education
            Schools
            Child Care      P/ P/ P/        P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/S P/ P/ P/S                   118.15 -
Educational (Home Daycare)  S  S  S            S  S  S  S  S      S  S                                118.20
Facilities  College or      P  P  P    P                           P  P  P    P  P  P     
            University
            Elementary/
            Middle/ High    SE SE SE   SE SE  SE SE SE SE SE SE  SE SE SE  SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE   155.526
            School
            Specialized             P                           P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Education
            Library         P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
            Government      P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
            Buildings
            Park and
            Recreational
Govern-ment Facilities
            (Public) Both   P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
            indoor and
            outdoor
            facilities
            Public Services P  P  P  P  P  P                       P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
            Buildings
   Community Facilities | Government | Institutional
            Religious
Religious   Institution,    P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P/ P/ P/ P  P   P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P    155. 524
Assembly    House of                              S  S  S
            Worship
   Commercial
            Adult                                              P/ P/ P/   P/ P/ P/S  155.503
            Entertainment                                                      S  S  S     S  S
Age         Pawn Shop                                          P/ P/ P/   P/ P/ P/S  155.521
Restricted                                                                     S  S  S     S  S
            Tattoo Parlor                                      P/ P/ P/   P/ P/ P/S  155.532
                                                                               S  S  S     S  S
            Automotive and                                                        P/ P/    P/ P/
            Vehicle                                              S  S    S  S  P/S  155.505
            Dealership
            Automotive
            Parts and                                        P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Accessories
Auto-       Auto Repair,                                         P  P    P  P  P     
motive,     Minor
Boats,      Auto Repair,                                         A  P    P  P  P     
Equipment   Major
and Vehicle Boat Sales                                           P  P    P  P  P     
Sales and   Boat Building,
Service     Storage,                                               P/   P/ P/ P/S  155.506
            Service and                                                              S     S  S
            Repair
            Car Gallery                                          SE SE   SE SE SE   155.505
            Car Wash,                                                             A/ A/    A/ A/
            Accessory                                            S  S    S  S  A/ S 155.508
            Automatic
            Car Wash,                                                             P/ P/    P/ P/
            Attended                                             S  S    S  S  P/S  155.508
            Automated
            Car Wash,                                            A/ A/   A/ A/ A/ S 155.508
            Manual                                                                S  S     S  S
Auto-       Car Wash, Self                                       P/ P/   P/ P/ P/ S 155.508
motive,     Service                                                               S  S     S  S
Boats,      Construction                                         SE P    P  P  P     
Equipment   Equipment Sales
and Vehicle Motorcycle                                           P  P    P  P  P     
Sales and   Sales
Service     Service                                              P/ P/   P/ P/ P/ S 155.527
            Stations                                                              S  S     S  S
            Small Engine
            Service and                                        P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Repair
            Vehicle Rentals                                      SE SE   SE SE SE   155.531
            Animal Cemetery                                            P/ P/ P/ S 155.514
                                                                                           S  S
            Animal
            Hospital,       P  P  P                               P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Veterinary
Animal      Clinic
Related     Kennel, Animal  P                                       P    P  P  P     
            Boarding
            Pet Grooming,
            Sales, and                                         P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Supply
            Pet Hotels, Dog                                      P/ P    P  P  P    155.522
            Daycare                                                               S
            Business and
            Professional                                       P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
            Offices
Office and  Call Center                                        P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
Profess-    Employment                                         P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
ional       Office
Services    Parcel,
            Packaging or                                       P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Postal Facility
            Printing and                                       P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Copying
            Adult Daycare                                      P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
Daycare     Child Care                                       P/ P/ P/ P/   P/ P/ P/S  155.509
            Center                                                          S  S  S  S     S  S
            Banks, Credit                                      P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
            Unions
            Check Cashing                                      P  P  P    P  P  P     
Financial   Financial                                          P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
Services    Institutions
            Investment
            Firms/                                           P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
            Stockbrokers
Food and    Bakery                                           P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
Beverage    Banquet Hall                                       P  P  P    P  P  P     
Service     Bar, Tavern                                        P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Food Production                                    P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Microbreweries,
            Microwineries,                                       SE SE   SE SE SE   155.517
            Brewpubs
            Mobile Food                                        A/ A/ A/   A/ A/ A/ S 155.518
            Vendors                                                            S  S  S     S  S
            Nightclub                                          P  P  P    P  P  P     
Food and    Outdoor Dining                                   A/ A/ A/ A/   A/ A/ A/ S 155.519
Beverage                                                                    S  S  S  S     S  S
Service     Restaurant                                       P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Restaurant,                                      P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Take Out
            Restaurant,                                        P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Drive-Thru
            Restaurant,                                        P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Food Hall
            Detoxification,
            Treatment and           P                             P  P    P  P  P     
            Recovery
            Centers
Health Care Hospital        P  P  P    P  P                           SE SE            
Related;    Medical Office,                                  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
Medical     General
Office      Medical Office,                                  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
            Specialized
            Medical and                                        P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
            Dental Labs
            Medical                                                  P  P  P  P     
            Research
            Physical
            Therapy and                                        P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
            Rehab Centers
Health Care Surgical
Related;    Centers,                                           P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
Medical     Outpatient
Office      Urgent Care                                        P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Wellness Center                                    P  P  P  P  P  P  P     
            Freestanding
            Emergency       P        P                             P  P  P  P  P  P     
            Facility
            Hotel, Full                                   SE    P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/S  155.513
            Service                                                            S  S  S  S  S  S
Lodging,    Hotel, Limited                                SE    P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/S  155.513
Visitor     Services                                                           S  S  S  S  S  S
Accomm-     Hotel, Extended                               SE    P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/S  155.513
odations    Stay                                                               S  S  S  S  S  S
            Motel                                         SE    P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/S  155.513
                                                                               S  S  S  S  S  S
            Body Art                                           P/ P/ P/   P/ P/ P/S  155.507
            Studios                                                            S  S  S     S  S
            Barber, Beauty                                   P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
Personal    Parlor, Salon
Services    Day Spa                                            P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Dry Cleaners                                       P/ P/ P/   P/ P/ P/S  155.511
                                                                               S  S  S     S  S
            Dry Cleaners                                     P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Pick- Up Only
            Funeral Home,                                      P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Mortuary
            Locksmith                                            P  P    P  P  P     
            Massage                                            P  P  P    P  P  P     
Personal    Services
Services    Nail Salon                                       P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Self-Service                                                    P/ P/ P/ P/    P/ P/
            Laundry,                                         S  S  S  S    S  S  P/S  155.527
            Laundromat
            Tailor,                                          P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Alterations
            Amusement                 P                         P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Center, Arcades
            Aquarium                  P                         P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Assembly Hall                                      P  P  P    P  P  P     
            (Non-Religious)
            Billiards or              P                         P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Pool Hall
Recreation  Bowling Alley             P                         P  P  P    P  P  P     
and Enter-  Go-Cart Track,            P/S                                       155.523
tainment    No Racing
            Golf Course     P  P  P      P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P                      
            Golf Course,    P  P  P      P                           P  P    P  P  P     
            Miniature
            Golf Driving              P                           P  P    P  P  P     
            Range
            Gun Range,                P                           SE P    P  P  P     
            Indoor
            Gun Range,                P                                 P/ P/ P/S  155.514
            Outdoor                                                                        S  S
            Gym or Fitness                                     P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Center
            Gym,                                               P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Specialized
            Mechanical                P/S                                       155.523
            Riding Devices
            Movie Theatre,                                     P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Inline
            Movie Theatre,                                     P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Free Standing
            Museum or Art
Recreation  Gallery         P  P  P      P                         P  P  P    P  P  P     
and Enter-  (Private)
tainment    Parks,
            Recreational    P  P  P      P                         P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Facilities
            (Private)
            Racetrack -
            Auto,                     P/S                               P/ P/ P/S  155.514,
            Motorcycle, or                                                                 S  S       155.523
            Horse
            Skating Rink                                         P  P    P  P  P     
            Sports Stadium,
            Amphitheatre,             P/S                         P  P    P  P  P    155.523
            or Arena
            Theatre or                                         P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Music Hall
            Alcohol Sales                                      P/ P/ P/   P/ P/ P/S  155.504
Retail                                                                         S  S  S     S  S
            Antiques                                         P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Apparel and                                      P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Clothing
            Bait and Tackle                                    P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Books, Cards,
            Stationary,                                      P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Gift
            Convenience                                      P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Store
            Department                                         P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Store
            Drug Store or                                    P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Pharmacy
            Electronics
Retail      Sales, Supply                                    P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            and Service
            Farmers Market                                   P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Farm Supply and                                      SE P    P  P  P     
            Equipment
            Florist                                          P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Furniture for                                    P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Home and Office
            Garden Supply                                    P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Grocery and                                      P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Food Supply
            Hardware                                         P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Hobby Supply,                                    P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Craft
            Home Appliance
            Sales and                                        P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Service
            Home
            Improvement                                          P  P    P  P  P     
            Centers
            Jewelry, Shoe
            and Accessory                                    P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Repair
            Lumber Yard                                            P    P  P  P     
            Machinery Sales                                            P  P  P     
            Meat, Poultry,
            Fish, Seafood                                    P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Sales
Retail      Optical,                                         P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Eyeglasses
            Outdoor Display                                  A/ A/ A/ A/   A/ A/ A/ S 155.520
            and Sales                                                       S  S  S  S     S  S
            Plumbing and
            Electrical                                         P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Fixtures
            Regional                                             P/ P/   P/ P/ P/ S 155.645-
            Shopping Malls                                                        S  S     S  S       155.649
            Restaurant and                                         P    P  P  P     
            Hotel Supplies
            Sporting Goods                                   P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Swimming Pool
            Supplies and                                       P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Equipment
            Thrift Store or
Retail      Secondhand or                                      P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Consignment
            Auction                                              P  P    P  P  P     
            Art and
            Photography                                        P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Studios
            Business,
            Commercial                                         P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Schools
            Dance Studio                                       P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Instructional                                    P  P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Services
            Martial Arts                                       P  P  P    P  P  P     
Other       Studio
            Performing Arts                                    P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Schools
            Private Club,
            Lodge,          P  P  P  P                             P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Nonprofit
            Seasonal                                           P/ P/ P/   P/ P/ P/S  155.334
            Outdoor Storage                                                    S  S  S     S  S
            Self-Storage                                           P    P  P  P     
            Swim School                                        P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Trade and
            Vocational                                         P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Schools
   Industrial
            Abattoir or                                                    SE    
            Slaughterhouse
            Circus                                                                         P/ P/
            Quarters,                                                  S  S  P/S  155.514
            Animal Refuge
            Livery Stable,                                             P  P  P     
            Riding Academy
            Livestock
Animal      Auction and                                                    SE    
Related     Sales
            Livestock                                            SE P    P  P  P     
            Supply
            Rendering Plant                                                SE    
            Tanning,
            Curing, or
            Storage of Raw                                                 SE    
            Hides, except
            as incidental
            to taxidermy
            Audio,
            Photography,
            and Film                                             P  P             
            Production
            Studio
            Broadcast,
Communi-    Radio and                                          P  P  P    P  P  P     
cations     Television
            Studio
            Telecommuni-
            cation Tower -                                             SE SE SE   155.533
            Guyed
            Telecommuni-
            cation Tower -                                         SE   SE SE SE   155.533
            Lattice
            Telecommuni-    P/ P/ P/ P/ P/                                  P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/
            cation Tower -  S  S  S  S  S  P/S                  SE  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  P/ S 155.533
Communi-    Monopole
cations     Telecommuni-    P/ P/ P/ P/ P/                        P/ P/ P/  P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ P/
            cation Tower -  S  S  S  S  S  P/S              S  S  S   S  S  S  S  S  S  S  P/ S 155.533
            Stealth
            Brewery/                                                   P/ P/ P/ S 155.514
            Distillery                                                                     S  S
            Food Catering                                              P  P  P     
            Food and Bakery                                            P  P  P     
            Products
            Meat and Fish
Food and    Products, no                                               P  P  P     
Beverage    slaughtering
Production  Nonalcoholic
and         Beverage                                                   P  P  P     
Processing  Production and
            Bottling
            Starch,
            Glucose,                                                   P  P  P     
            Dextrin
            Vegetable Oil                                                P  P     
            Production
            Asphalt Paving                                                 P     
            Plant
Industrial  Building
Services    Material Sales/                                        P    P  P  P     
            Lumber Yard
            Carpet and Rug                                         P    P  P  P     
            Cleaning
            Cleaning and                                           P    P  P  P     
            Dyeing
            Contracting
            Service Yards -                                            P  P  P     
            Building/AC/
            Plumbing
            Dry Cleaning                                               P  P  P     
            Plant
            Extermination/
            Pest Control                                               P  P  P     
            Business
            Fuel Oil,
            Petroleum and
            Bottled Gas                                                P  P  P     
Industrial  Distribution
Services    and Storage
            Linen or
            Uniform                                                P    P  P  P     
            Services
            Lithography,                                           P    P  P  P     
            Engraving
            Machine Shop                                               P  P  P     
            Metalworking,
            Welding,                                                   P  P  P     
            Various Pipe
            Fitting
            Miscellaneous                                          P    P  P  P     
            Repair Shops
            Oil Reclamation                                                P     
            Painting and                                               P  P  P     
            Varnishing
            Printing,
            Bookbinding or                                         P    P  P  P     
            Copying
Industrial  Facility
Services    Stone Cutting                                              P  P  P     
            Septic Tank                                                  P  P     
            Service
            Tire Recapping                                         P    P  P  P     
            and Vulcanizing
            Abrasive                                                       P     
            Products
            Acids, except
            hydrochloric,
            nitric, picric,                                            P  P  P     
            sulphurous, or
            sulphuric acid
            Acids,
            including
            hydrochloric,                                                  SE    
Manufact-   nitric, picric,
uring and   sulphurous, or
Production  sulphuric acid
            Alkaline                                                       SE    
            Products
            Ammonia,
            Chlorine, or                                                   SE    
            Bleaching
            Powder
            Animal or Fish                                                 SE    
            Oil
            Asphalt                                                        SE    
            Manufacturing
            Assembly of
            Electrical                                                 P  P  P     
            Equipment and
            Appliances
            Assembly and
            Treatment of
            Products
            including but                                              P  P  P     
            not limited to
            previously
            prepared
            materials
            Auto
            Accessories,                                               P  P  P     
            except tires
Manufact-   Auto
uring and   Accessories,                                                   SE    
Production  including tires
            Automatic Screw                                            P  P  P     
            Machines
            Automobile                                                   P  P     
            Assembly Plant
            Boat Building                                              P  P  P     
            and Repair
            Box, cardboard,                                            P  P  P     
            and the like
            Building
            Materials
            Manufacturing
            brick, tile,                                               P  P  P     
            concrete,
            glass, lumber,
            rock, stone,
            sash and doors
            Carbon                                                     P  P  P     
            Carpentry                                              P    P  P  P     
            Celluloid                                                  P  P  P     
            Materials
            Cement, Lime,
            Gypsum, or                                                     SE    
            Plaster of
            Paris
            Chemical                                                       SE    
            Cleaning                                                     P  P     
            Products
            Concrete
Manufact-   Products,         P  P                                         P  P     
uring and   Batching and
Production  Mixing Plant
            Cosmetics,
            Perfumes,                                                  P  P  P     
            Toiletries,
            Soap
            Cotton                                                       P  P     
            Die Casting                                                P  P  P     
            Disinfectant                                               P  P  P     
            and Insecticide
            Drugs and                                                  P  P  P     
            Pharmaceuticals
            Dry Ice                                                      P  P     
            Fertilizer                                                     SE    
            Compounding
            Fertilizer
            Compounding                                                  P  P     
            from nonodorous
            materials
            Foundry                                                        P     
            Furniture,
            Cabinet and                                                  P  P     
            Upholstery
            Glue or Gelatin                                                SE    
            Manufacturing
            Gunpowder,
            Fireworks, or                                                  SE    
Manufact-   Explosives
uring and   Ice                                                        P  P  P     
Production  Mattress                                                   P  P  P     
            Metal and Can
            Production;
            Buffing,                                                     P  P     
            Plating,
            Polishing
            Milling                                                      P  P     
            Oil Compounding                                              P  P     
            Paper                                                          SE    
            Petroleum                                                      SE    
            Plastic                                                    P  P  P     
            Poison                                                         P     
            Potash                                                         P     
            Pottery and
            Ceramic                                                    P  P  P     
            Products
            Pyroxylin                                                      P     
            Rubber                                                         SE    
            Salt Works                                                   P  P     
            Sign Printing                                      P  P  P    P  P  P     
            Sign Shop/                                             P/   P/ P/ P/S  155.529
            Manufacturing                                                            S     S  S
            Slag Crushing                                                  P     
            Steel                                                          SE    
            Stock Yards or                                                 SE    
            Feeding Pens
            Sugar Refining                                                 SE    
Manufact-   Tobacco                                                    P  P       
uring and   Toys,
Production  Novelties, and                                             P  P  P     
            the like
            Textile
            including                                                  P  P  P     
            canvas, cloth,
            carpet, rope
            Wood, Veneer,
            and the like,                                                P  P     
            except sawmill
            Wood, Veneer,
            and the like,                                                  P     
            including
            sawmill
            Wool Pulling/                                                  P     
            Scouring
            Data Centers -
            Processing,     P  P  P                                 P  P  P  P  P  P     
            Hosting, and
Research    Related
and         Educational,
Develop-    Scientific or
ment        Industrial        P  P                                       P  P  P     
            Research and
            Development
            Laboratory
            Bulk Outdoor
            Storage of                                                 P  P  P     
            Materials (as a
            primary use)
            Poisonous Gases                                                SE    
            Tank Storage of                                                                P/ P/
Storage and Oil and                                                    S  S  P/ S 155.514
Ware-       Gasoline
housing     Vehicle Towing                                         P    P  P  P     
            and Storage
            Open-Air
            Storage of                                             P    P  P  P     
            Vehicles
            Warehouse and                                          P    P  P  P     
            Distribution
            Agriculture
            Products/Grain                                         P    P  P  P     
            Storage and
Wholesale   Processing
and         Cold Storage,                                          P    P  P  P     
Distribut-  Ice
ion         Crating,
            Packing and                                            P    P  P  P     
            Shipping
            Services
            Parcel Delivery                                      SE P    P  P  P     
            Service
            Fruit Packing                                          P    P  P  P     
Wholesale   and Shipping
and         Fulfillment                                          SE P    P  P  P     
Distribut-  Center
ion         Wholesale,                                             P    P  P  P     
            Distribution
            Wholesale                                              P    P  P  P     
            Seafood
            Building and
            Construction                                                   P     
            Debris
Waste and   Junkyards                                                      P/ S 155.515
Salvage     Materials and
(Waste      Resource              P/
Manage-     Recovery,           S                                           P    155.525
ment)       Recycling and
            Composting
            Solid Waste
            Transfer            P                                           P     
            Station
   Other
            Airport         P  P  P                                       P  P  P     
            Auction,                                                     P  P     
            Vehicle
            Blast Furnace                                                  SE    
Misc.       Blooming Mill                                                  SE    
            Bone                                                           SE    
            Distillation
            Carnival,       P  P  P      P                                 P/ P/ SE   155.514
            Circus                                                                         S  S
            Cemetery,       P  P  P  P  P  P                                 P  P  P     
            Mausoleum
            Coke Oven                                                      SE    
            Correctional or                                                                P/ P/
            Penal           P  P  P  P  P                                   S  S  P/ S 155.514
            Institution
            Crematory       P  P  P  P    P                                 P  P  P     
            Crushing,
            Screening and
            Processing of     P                                                  
            Mined or
            Excavated
            Materials
            Distillation of
            Coal, Tar,
Other       Petroleum of                                                   SE    
            Mined or
            Excavated
            Materials
            Dredging Base                                                P  P     
            Drop Forge                                                     SE    
            Freight
            Terminal/       P  P  P      P                                 P/ P/ P/ S 155.514
            Depot/Truck                                                                    S  S
            Terminal
            Incineration,
            Reduction, or
            Storage of
            Garbage, Offal,                                                SE    
            Dead Animal
            Refuse, and
            Rancid Fats
            Industrial
            Cleaning of                                                    P     
            Materials
            Radium                                                         SE    
            Extraction
            Rolling Mill                                                   SE    
Other       Sand, Gravel,
            Rock, Quarry or
            Other Natural     P                                                  
            Material
            Extraction
            Smelting or                                                    SE    
            Refining Ores
            Electric        P  P  P  P    P                             P    P  P  P     
            Utility Yard
            Electrical
            Substations,
            Transformer and P  P  P  P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P         P    P  P  P     
            Switching
Utilities   Station
            Gas Regulator         P                                 P    P  P  P     
            Station
            Water and
            Wastewater Lift
            and Pumping     P  P  P  P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P         P    P  P  P     
            Stations and
            Facilities
   Agriculture
Accessory   Bee Keeping     P  P  P      P                                          
Agriculture Botanical       P  P  P      P                                          
            Garden
            Crop Raising    P  P  P      P                                          
            Domesticated    P/ P/ P/       P/  P/
            Livestock and   S  S  S      S   S                                      155.510
            Poultry
            Floriculture    P  P  P      P                                          
            Forestry        P  P  P      P                                          
            Greenhouse      P  P  P      P                                          
            Grove           P  P  P      P                                          
            Horticultural   P  P  P      P                                          
            Farming
            Hydroponic      P  P  P      P                                          
Accessory   Garden
Agriculture Nursery         P  P  P      P                                          
            Produce Farm    P  P  P      P                                          
            Raising of Fish P  P  P      P                                          
            Slat House      P  P  P      P                                          
            Sod Farm        P  P  P      P                                          
            Truck Garden    P  P  P      P                                          
            Wayside Stands
            for display or
            sale of farm    P  P  P      P                                          
            products
            produced on the
            premises
   Prohibited Uses
            Medical
Various     Marijuana                                                          155.516
            Dispensing
            Facility
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS
§ 155.502 PROVISIONS NOT RETROACTIVE.
   The provisions for this subchapter shall not be construed to be retroactive,
and any existing designated use which conformed to the regulations in effect
when that designated use was established shall not be rendered illegal or in
violation through the adoption of this LDC or amendments to this LDC, so long
as a local business tax receipt previously issued for that use remains in full
force and effect and is renewed in a timely manner.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.503 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT.
   (A)   Adult entertainment establishments shall be subject to the following
standards and regulations:
      (1)   Location near religious institutions, schools, residential
districts and establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed.
         (a)   In the development, enforcement, and amendment of this LDC, it
is recognized that there are uses and accessory uses which, because of their
very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable characteristics,
particularly when several of them are concentrated in any given location,
thereby having a deleterious effect upon adjacent business and residential
areas. Specific regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these
adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting and downgrading of the
surrounding neighborhood.
         (b)   Adult entertainment uses shall be located nearer than 1,000 feet
to the same or any other designated use, an establishment at which alcoholic
beverages are sold or consumed, or to any religious institutions, or public,
private, or parochial kindergarten, nursery, elementary, middle, or high
school, or day care center. Measurement of 1,000 feet shall be made in
accordance with division (A)(1)(d) of this section.
         (c)   It shall be unlawful hereafter to establish any designated use
within the corporate limits of the city if the proposed location is within 500
feet of a residentially zoned district. This prohibition shall be waived upon
presentment to the Planning and Zoning Board of a written petition requesting
the waiver, signed by 51% of all those persons owning real property, residing
or operating or managing a business within 500 feet of the proposed location of
the designated use.
            1.   The circulator of the petition requesting a waiver shall
subscribe and swear to an affidavit attached to the petition that the
circulator personally witnessed that the signatures were affixed to the
petition by the persons whose names appear in the petition. The petition shall
bear at the top of each page thereof a typewritten title in substantially the
following form. "The undersigned hereby request a waiver from the Planning and
Zoning Board of Pembroke Pines, Florida, that shall permit the establishment
and location of a (an) (state specifically which designated use is sought to be
established) within 500 feet of my real property, residence, or business."
            2.   The Planning and Zoning Board shall investigate the petition
and signatures on the petition to verify that the petitioners do in fact own
real property, or reside or do business in a residentially zoned district
within 500 feet of the proposed designated use. Measurement of the 500 feet
shall be made in accordance with division (A)(1)(d) of this section.
         (d)   For the purposes of this section, a designated use or proposed
designated use shall be deemed to be within 1,000 feet or 500 feet of another
designated use or an establishment at which alcoholic beverages are sold or
consumed, religious institutions, school, real property, residence, business,
or residentially zoned district, respectively, as defined or described herein,
if any part of the building in which, or lot of land upon which, a designated
use is located, is within 1,000 feet or 500 feet, as measured by an actual or
imaginary straight line upon the ground or in the air, of any part of the
building in which, or lot of land upon which, another designated use or an
establishment at which alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed, a religious
institution, school, real property, residence, business, or residentially zoned
district respectively, is located.
         (e)   Where a designated use is located in conformity with the
provisions of this subchapter, the subsequent locating of an establishment
which sells or permits the consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises, a
religious institution or school within 1,000 feet, or a residentially zoned
district within 500 feet of the existing designated use shall not be construed
to cause the designated use to be in violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.504 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Scope of regulations. The following regulations shall apply to the
location, design, construction, operation, and maintenance of all places or
establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed, and shall be in
addition to other requirements or limitations of this LDC.
   (B)   Locations near day care, religious institutions, and schools.
      (1)   Establishments for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be located
not nearer to any day care, religious institution, public, private, or
parochial, elementary, middle, or high school, than 200 feet airline
measurement; measurements being between the nearest entrance to the alcoholic
beverage establishment and the nearest entrance to the day care, religious
institution, public, private, or parochial, elementary, middle, or high school.
However, the aforesaid separation requirement shall not apply to:
         (a)   An establishment incidental to and within a portion of a
building used for a restaurant or a restaurant bar.
         (b)   An establishment incidental to and within a portion of a
building used as a hotel bar.
         (c)   An establishment incidental to and within a bona fide nonprofit
private club where only members and their guests are served.
      (2)   Where an establishment for the sale of alcoholic beverages is
located in conformity with the provisions of this LDC, the subsequent locating
of a day care, religious institution or school in the proximity of that
existing establishment shall not be construed to cause that establishment to be
in violation of this LDC.
   (C)   Beer and wine package stores. There shall be no separation requirement
or limitation applicable to the location of places for the sales of beer or
wine for consumption off the premises.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, sale and licensing regulations, see
Ch. 110
§ 155.505 AUTOMOTIVE AND VEHICLE DEALERSHIPS.
   (A)   Automotive and vehicle dealerships shall be subject to the following
standards and regulations:
      (1)   New or used automobile lease and/or sales providing the use is
located on a minimum lot size of ten acres.
      (2)   All automobile dealerships must include an enclosed showroom.
      (3)   No temporary signs, banners, or pennants will be allowed except as
expressly approved on
the site plan.
      (4)   No signs on or within automobiles shall be visible from any public
street.
      (5)   Customer and employee parking areas shall be shown on the site
plan. No vehicles for sale may be located within these areas.
      (6)   Accessory automatic car wash.
      (7)   Accessory manual car wash/detail.
      (8)   All repair facilities and collision centers must be fully enclosed.
      (9)   No elevated vehicle display(s) for sales of vehicles.
      (10)   Elevated storage of vehicles shall be located to minimize
visibility from street frontages and adjacent properties.
   (B)   Car galleries shall be subject to the following standards and
regulations:
      (1)   Direct to consumer sale or lease of new automobiles.
      (2)   Car galleries must be located within a shopping center with a
minimum size of ten acres.
      (3)   Car galleries must be located within a fully enclosed building.
      (4)   Car galleries must provide a minimum floor area of 2,000 square
feet and shall not exceed a maximum of 5,000 square feet.
      (5)   No more than three vehicles may be displayed within the fully
enclosed building.
      (6)   No more than two vehicles may be located exterior to the fully
enclosed building for test driving purposes only. No inventory may be kept on
site.
      (7)   No automobile delivery or preparation shall be conducted on site.
      (8)   Car galleries shall not be affiliated with on-site automobile
repair services.
      (9)   No temporary signs, banners, pennants, signs on or within
automobiles are permitted.
      (10)   A site plan, or site plan amendment, describing with particularity
the storage areas for the exterior vehicles and test drive route, must be
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Board for review and decision in
accordance with Article 3 of this LDC. Parking for exterior vehicles shall
count towards the required parking for the center. The Planning and Zoning
Board must determine that the location of the exterior vehicles and the test
drive route does not interfere or impede the use of the parking lot for the
customers, employees or owners of the other businesses in the center or impede
traffic on adjacent roadways. (Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.506 BOAT BUILDING, STORAGE, SERVICE AND REPAIR.
   Boat building storage, service and repair shall be subject to the following
standards and regulations:
   (A)   Building, storage, service and repair of boats provided the use is
located at least 100 feet from any residentially zoned property, except where
that property is zoned Agricultural (A).
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.507 BODY ART STUDIOS.
   Body art studios which provide tattooing services as defined in F.S. §
381.00771, as amended from time to time, will be subject to the following
limitations:
   (A)   Uses permitted. Body art studios are permitted as an accessory use to
a personal care service or medical and health care facility subject to the
following conditions:
      (1)   Body art studios shall be required to have a separate room for the
purpose of tattooing. Each room shall be limited to one customer chair and
shall be apart from the waiting room and the public. The room(s) shall not be
visible to the general public.
      (2)   Body art studios are limited to operating between 8:00 a.m. and 10:
00 p.m.
      (3)   All services shall be by appointment only.
      (4)   No exterior signage specifically for tattooing or related
activities.
   (B)   Licenses, permits and inspections.
      (1)   No person shall operate a body art studio or engage in the practice
or business of body art unless the person has first secured the required
permits and licenses from the city, Florida Department of Health, Broward
County and other applicable governmental or non-governmental entities.
      (2)   The city may conduct on-site inspections of any body art studio for
the purpose of determining whether or not said establishment and the person(s)
performing the practice of body art therein are in compliance with all
applicable health provisions, codes and ordinances.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.508 CAR WASHES.
   Car washes shall be subject to the following standards and regulations:
   (A)   Car washes. All car washes shall be reviewed by the Planning & Zoning
Board through the city's development review procedures.
   (B)   Self-service car wash. A structure where equipment and/or facilities
are provided for the self-service application of cleaner, rinse water, waxes or
polishes and other vehicle treatments to automobiles and other motor vehicles.
      (1)   Equipment. No equipment shall be permitted except as necessary to
permit self-service car-washing, drying, vacuuming directly and solely by the
customer. All equipment shall be within an enclosed portion of the building
except that vacuuming facilities may be outside the building where the subject
property is located at least 500 feet from any residentially zoned or used
property.
      (2)   Parking.
         (a)   A minimum of three off-street storage (stacking) spaces shall be
provided at both the entrance and exit of each wash bay.
         (b)   A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided per
vacuum cleaning unit, not including exiting stacking spaces.
      (3)   General design standards. No tunnel entrance or exit of a car wash
operation shall face an adjacent residentially used or zoned property, not
including those across an intervening right-of-way or street.
   (C)   Accessory automatic car wash. An accessory structure containing
facilities for washing automobiles, using production line, automated or semi-
automated application of cleaner, brushes, rinse water, steam-cleaning and heat
for drying, whether or not employing a chain or other type of conveyor.
      (1)   Equipment. All washing facilities shall be within an enclosed
building except that vacuuming facilities may be outside the building where the
subject property is located at least 500 feet from any residentially zoned or
used property. All washing facilities shall also be equipped with a water
recycling system.
      (2)   Parking.
         (a)   A minimum of one off-street storage space shall be provided per
vacuum cleaner.
         (b)   A minimum of eight stacking spaces shall be provided on the
entrance side of the facility.
         (c)   A minimum of three stacking spaces shall be provided on the exit
side of the facility.
      (3)   General design standards.
         (a)   No tunnel entrance or exit of a car wash operation shall face an
adjacent residentially used or zoned property, not including those across an
intervening right-of-way or street.
         (b)   The car wash facility must demonstrate architectural
compatibility with the principal structure.
   (D)   Attended automatic car wash. A structure containing facilities for
washing automobiles, using production line, automated or semi-automated
application of cleaner, brushes, rinse water, steam-cleaning and heat for
drying, whether or not employing a chain or other type of conveyor.
      (1)   Equipment.
         (a)   All washing facilities shall be within an enclosed building
except that vacuuming facilities may be outside the building where the subject
property is located at least 500 feet from any residentially zoned or used
property.
         (b)   No outside loudspeakers or radios are permitted. Radio station
promotions and/or other activities utilizing loudspeakers or broadcasting
equipment are prohibited.
         (c)   No electrical or air driven hand tools, including but not
limited to polishers and buffers, shall be utilized outside of the required
building enclosure, unless the subject property is located at least 500 feet
from any residentially zoned or used property.
         (d)   All washing facilities shall be equipped with a water recycling
system.
      (2)   Parking.
         (a)   One parking space per employee shall be provided.
         (b)   Five parking spaces shall be provided at the exit side of the
facility for final hand drying and interior cleanup and as a customer pickup
area.
         (c)   A minimum of 18 stacking spaces shall be provided on the
entrance side of the facility.
      (3)   General design standards. No tunnel entrance or exit of a car wash
operation shall face an adjacent residentially used or zoned property, not
including those across an intervening right-of-way or street.
   (E)   Manual car wash/detailing. Permitted only as an accessory use to
service stations, automobile dealerships, regional malls, and golf courses.
      (1)   General design standards.
         (a)   Manual car wash/detailing shall be conducted under a permanently
installed canopy aesthetically compatible with the primary structure and shall
meet all applicable building code regulations.
         (b)   The operation of such manual car wash shall not create any
standing water and shall not drain directly into drainage system. Manual car
wash/detailing facilities located within a regional mall shall use a waterless
cleaning process and products used shall be 100% biodegradable.
         (c)   Engine cleaning and undercarriage cleaning shall be prohibited
within regional malls.
         (d)   Required parking and site circulation for existing use(s) shall
be maintained.
         (e)   Sign(s) for car washes are restricted to car wash canopies only
and are counted as part of the total allowed building signage of 36 square
feet.
      (2)   Parking. Two parking spaces are required per work station for
storage, stacking, pick-up, or drop-off.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.509 CHILD CARE CENTERS.
   (A)   Child care centers, as defined in this LDC, shall be designed in a
manner that provides the young child with a sense of place and identity which
they can readily transfer when they enter the public school realm. Efforts to
depict the classic school hour's image should be exercised. Entries should be
clear, inviting, sheltered and warm transition spaces that alert the child to
their surroundings resulting in pride in attendance.
   (B)   Each freestanding child-care center shall have a minimum lot size of
15,000 square feet.
   (C)   Each child care center shall have a minimum of 45 square feet interior
floor space per two children excluding support facilities (bathrooms, kitchen,
corridors, office, storage and the like).
   (D)   Each child care center shall have a minimum of 3,500 square feet or 45
square feet per two children, whichever is greater, of open space enclosed,
shaded, pervious area with outdoor drinking fountain. All playground equipment
shall be identified on the site plan and shall not be permitted in the required
set back areas. Required yards are not to be counted as required open space.
   (E)   Each child care center shall have a minimum of one shade tree per
1,000 square feet of pervious open space area.
   (F)   Each child care center shall have a pickup and drop zone with space to
accommodate four vehicles with a minimum of 30 feet frontage.
   (G)   Each child care center shall operate only from the hours of 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m. outside activities only and inside care may be 24-hours.
   (H)   Each child care center shall provide a minimum of the following yards
and buffers:
      (1)   Rear yards: 25 feet minimum;
      (2)   Side yards: 15 feet minimum;
      (3)   Front yard: 50 feet minimum;
      (4)   Hedged perimeter: eight feet adjacent to residential property
lines.
   (I)   Vehicle impact protection devices required. Child care centers shall
be required to install and maintain vehicle impact protective devices for
exposed areas to protect the child care center, associated play areas, patrons
from vehicle intrusions from out-of-control vehicles. Home based child care
centers, drop-in child care, family day care home, and indoor recreational
facility, or a large family day care home, as respectively defined within F.S.
§ 402.302, shall be exempt from the requirements of this division.
      (1)   Applicability. Child care centers shall install vehicle impact
protection devices prior to any of the following:
         (a)   Opening a non-home based child care center after enactment of
this section;
         (b)   Expansion, modification, or relocation of an existing non-home
based child care center;
         (c)   Expansion, installation, modification, relocation, repair,
creation, establishment, development or redevelopment of any qualifying child
care center play areas;
         (d)   Expansion, installation, modification, relocation, repair,
creation, establishment, development or redevelopment of any exposed area; or
         (e)   The creation, installation, establishment, development, or
redevelopment of head in parking adjacent to a non-home based child care center
uses or associated play areas.
      (2)   Elements of vehicle impact protection devices.
         (a)   Vehicle impact protection devices shall be a minimum of 36
inches in height and, be designed to achieve an impact resistance level of
5,000 pounds traveling at 30 miles per hour. Vehicular impact protection
devices shall be required to be installed within the exposed area. Vehicle
impact protection devices shall be installed parallel or roughly parallel to
the edge of the roadway or drive aisle. Plain concrete barriers, such as "K
Rails" or "Jersey" barriers, shall be prohibited, except as temporarily allowed
for replacement and repairs.
         (b)   Vehicle impact protection devices shall be installed to a height
of no less than three feet and not greater than four feet above finished grade.
         (c)   When vehicle impact protection devices are spaced apart, the
spacing shall be not less than 48 inches and not more than 56 inches between
the outer edge of the barrier and the nearest outer edge of the adjacent
barrier and shall comply with the American Disabilities Act, and all applicable
state, local, and federal codes and regulations.
         (d)   The color and design of the vehicle impact protection devices
shall be consistent throughout the site. Use of protective and/or decorative
sleeves shall be permitted.
         (e)   Vehicle impact protection devices shall be properly maintained,
including no visible rust or corrosion, and be kept in uniform alignment.
         (f)   Child care business owners are encouraged to screen vehicle
impact protection devices with landscape where feasible to reduce visual impact
on a site.
      (3)   ADA compliant parking spaces. Where a parking space is required to
be ADA compliant and is located in an area of a parking lot specified in this
section so as to require vehicle impact protection devices adjacent to the
parking space, bollards or posts may be substituted for wheel stops and the ADA
signage may be mounted on a pole that is mounted or affixed to the post or
bollard.
      (4)   Conflicts with other laws. In the event the terms of this division
or its application to a particular parking lot would cause a parking lot to not
comply with a provision of federal or state law or another provision of the
city's Municipal Code, city staff shall apply this division in a manner to
carry out the provisions of both federal and state law and the other provisions
of this Code and the provisions of this division. When there is an
irreconcilable conflict between the provisions of this division and the
provisions of federal or state law or other provisions of this Code, the
provisions of federal and state law and the other provisions of this Code shall
prevail over this division and only to the extent necessary to avoid a
violation of those other laws or Code provisions.
      (5)   Review. Vehicle impact protection zones shall be considered
concurrently with the review of the underlying site plan or development
application through the Planning and Zoning Board.
      (6)   Minor adjustments to vehicular impact protection zones. The City
Manager or designee may approve minor modifications to vehicle impact
protection standards contained in this section to accommodate for conflicts
with existing site conditions, pedestrian accessibility paths and ground
mounted light poles, fire protection, mechanical equipment, etc., provided the
modifications achieve similar protections as intended by this division.
      (7)   Replacement or repair. Within 90 days after a vehicle impact
protection device or feature that serves to protect an exposed area of a
nonresidential building center is destroyed, damaged, or removed, the device or
feature shall be replaced with one that satisfies the requirements and
standards of this section.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.510 DOMESTICATED LIVESTOCK AND POULTRY.
   (A)   Domesticated livestock and poultry shall be subject to the following
standards and regulations:
      (1)   The number of domesticated livestock permitted shall be restricted
to four grazing animals per each 35,000 square feet.
      (2)   Structures for livestock raising, boarding, or housing, such as
barns, feed lofts, and stables, shall not be located within 100 feet of any lot
line. A stable with a capacity of not over four horses may be located at least
50 feet from a side or rear lot line.
         (a)   Keeping of horses and cows, not exceeding four in total number
for a plot of minimum permitted size: where the plot exceeds 35,000 square feet
in area, one additional horse may be kept for each acre of plot area in excess
of 35,000 square feet. The permitted animals shall be kept in an area which is
located at least 50 feet from any street line. Any roofed structure for shelter
of these animals shall be located at least 50 feet from any plot line.
      (3)   Structures for raising of poultry, such as pens, coops, shelters,
feeders, and the like, shall not be located within 100 feet of any lot line.
         (a)   Where such structures, existing at the effective date of this
LDC, are located less than 100 feet from any lot line, additions to existing
structures and new structures may be erected at the same distance, or at a
greater distance from that lot line, as the existing structures.
         (b)   Keeping of poultry or fowl, not exceeding 25 in total number,
provided the poultry or fowl are kept in an enclosure which is located at least
50 feet from any plot line.
         (c)   This exemption for additions to existing structures and for new
structures, shall apply only to building permits issued prior to January 1,
1962, and shall not apply to any structure, the construction of which is not
begun prior to that date.
      (4)   Structures for raising hogs, such as pens, sties, shelters,
feeders, and the like, shall not be located within 200 feet of any lot line.
      (5)   Hogs shall not be placed, kept, or permitted within 100 feet of any
lot line; within 500 feet of a dwelling under different and separate ownership;
nor within 500 feet of any residentially zoned property.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.511 DRY CLEANERS.
   Dry cleaning establishment shall be subject to the following standards and
regulations:
   (A)   Service shall be rendered directly to customers who bring in and pick
up the articles to be dry cleaned.
   (B)   The establishment shall not provide pick-up or delivery service,
except to or from residential customers.
   (C)   The entire cleaning and drying process shall be carried on within
completely enclosed solvent reclaiming units.
   (D)   All solvents used in the cleaning process and the vapors therefrom
shall not be explosive or flammable.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.512 ELECTRONIC NICOTINE DEVICE RETAIL SALES.
   Regulation of the marketing, sale, or delivery of nicotine products and
nicotine dispensing devices, including electronic cigarettes and similar device
or product, is preempted to the state pursuant to F.S. § 569.315. (Ord. 2021-
02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021;
Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.513 HOTELS.
   (A)   Hotels located in the R-MF District shall be subject to the following
provisions:
      (1)   Lot size. Every lot shall be not less than 100 feet in width and
10,000 square feet in area.
      (2)   Height. No building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected or
altered to a height exceeding 15 stories or 150 feet. However, where any
portion of a building or structure is utilized for a medical or dental office
or clinic, that use shall not extend to a greater height than three stories or
35 feet.
      (3)   Coverage. The combined area occupied by all main and accessory
buildings and structures shall not exceed the percentage given in the following
table for various heights of buildings:
Table 155.513: Hotel Lot Coverage
Percentage by Height
Height Percent Coverage
Table 155.513: Hotel Lot Coverage
Percentage by Height
Height                  Percent Coverage
One Story               55%
Two Stories             55%
Three Stories           50%
Four Stories            50%
Five Stories            45%
Six Stories             45%
Seven - Fifteen Stories 40%
 
   (B)   Hotels located within B-2, B-3, C-1, I-L, I-M and I-H zoning districts
shall have a minimum room size of 150 square feet.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.514 INDUSTRIAL USE SEPARATION FROM RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
   The following industrial uses shall have a 300 foot separation from a
residential use unless otherwise specified within the provisions of this LDC.
   (A)   Animal cemetery;
   (B)   Brewery/distillery;
   (C)   Carnival, circus;
   (D)   Circus quarters, animal refuge;
   (E)   Correctional or penal institution;
   (F)   Racetrack - automobile, motorcycle or horse;
   (G)   Gun range - outdoor;
   (H)   Tank storage of oil and gasoline;
   (I)   Freight terminal/depot/truck terminal..
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.515 JUNKYARDS.
   Junkyards shall be subject to the following standards and regulations:
   (A)   The area of land to be so used shall be no more than 100,000 square
feet.
      (1)   No automobile or vehicle not in running condition, nor machinery or
other junk or scrap, shall be located either for storage or dismantling within
300 feet of any residential district, within 50 feet of the front street line,
nor within 30 feet of any side street line or other property line of the lot to
be so used.
      (2)   The entire area occupied by a junkyard shall be surrounded by a
substantial, continuous masonry, wooden or metal fence or wall eight feet in
height, without openings except for entrance and exit. Openings shall be
equipped with unpierced gates.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.516 MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSING FACILITIES.
   Medical marijuana dispensing facilities shall be subject to the following
standards and regulations:
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to prohibit medical
marijuana treatment centers created under Art. X, § 29 of the Florida
Constitution from establishing medical marijuana dispensing facilities within
the municipal limits of the city.
   (B)   Findings. Based on authority granted to municipalities in F.S. §
381.986(11), the City Commission finds that a ban on the establishment of
medical marijuana treatment center dispensaries within the city is in the best
interest of the city.
   (C)   Prohibition. Medical marijuana dispensing facilities are prohibited
within the boundaries of the city.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.517 MICROBREWERIES, MICROWINERIES, AND BREWPUBS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to ensure the effective operation
and regulation of microbreweries, microwineries and brewpubs. Where any other
provisions of the City of Pembroke Pines Code of Ordinances directly conflicts
with this LDC, this LDC shall control.
      (2)   All operations of microbreweries, microwineries and brewpubs shall
comply with applicable federal, state, local laws, rules and regulations.
   (B)   Microbreweries, microwineries and brewpubs must meet the requirements
set forth in alcoholic beverage establishments and outdoor dining in §§
155.504 and
155.519.
   (C)   Brewpub as principal use. Brewpub shall be a principal use which shall
comply with the following:
      (1)   Brewpub production of beer and malt beverages shall not exceed
5,000 barrels per year.
      (2)   Brewpubs may not sell its product to other retailers or
wholesalers.
      (3)   Brewpubs shall include a restaurant that provides full meal service
for consumption by patrons.
   (D)   Microbrewery and microwinery as principal use subject to special
exception (§
155.301(M)) and alcoholic beverage establishment regulations (§
155.504).
      (1)   Microbrewery and microwinery shall be a principal use which shall
include, but is not limited to: small scale production and distribution of
beer, ale, or other malt beverages, or wine and on-site consumption and sales
of beer, ale, or other malt beverages, or wine.
      (2)   Permitted operations include those establishments engaging in the
small scale production of beer, ale, other malt beverages, or wine.
      (3)   This use shall be permitted only in conjunction with in-house food
service and shall adhere to the following:
         (a)   No more than 75% of the overall square footage associated with
the establishment shall be used for production/distribution including, but not
limited to, the brewhouse, boiling and water treatment areas, bottling and
kegging lines, malt milling and storage, fermentation tanks, conditioning
tanks, serving tanks, and/or the storage of materials and/or product.
         (b)   The commercial use shall be oriented towards the street or
public space, excluding alleys.
   (E)   General standards.
      (1)   Hours of operation.
         (a)   Permissible hours of operation shall be determined by the
Planning and Zoning Board based on impact upon adjacent, adjoining, and nearby
properties and uses. The hours for distribution trucks to visit the
microbrewery/microwinery to receive product(s) for distribution shall be
between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and 11:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m. on Sundays. Local roads shall not be utilized by distributors.
         (b)   However nothing in this division shall operate to change the
hours of sale designated in §
110.02 of the Pembroke Pines Code of Ordinances.
      (2)   Outdoor storage of spent grains. The use of outdoor storage is
strictly prohibited except for the temporary storage, limited to 24 consecutive
hours, of spent grains.
      (3)   Odors. Microbreweries/microwineries/ brewpubs must ensure that the
production process and associated odors are not detrimental to the public
health, safety, comfort and welfare.
      (4)   Production reporting. Microbreweries/ microwineries/brewpubs must
accurately report on their local business tax receipts the (1) amount(s) of
product brewed, vinted, made or produced for the most recent fiscal year; and
(2) the amount(s) of product the microbrewery/microwinery anticipates brewing,
vinting, making or producing for the upcoming fiscal year.
      (5)   Parking for microbreweries, microwineries, and brewpubs shall
follow the parking standards for a restaurant.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.518 MOBILE FOOD VENDORS.
   (A)   Operational regulations.
      (1)   Regulation of mobile food dispensing vehicles, and temporary
commercial kitchens, involving licenses, registrations, permits, and fees is
preempted to the state while the city is permitted to regulate the operation of
mobile food dispensing vehicles pursuant to F.S. § 509.102.
      (2)   Mobile food dispensing vehicles shall comply with all applicable
laws relating to the dispensing of food products.
   (B)   Products permitted to be sold. No products other than foods may be
sold, offered for sale, or dispensed in any fashion from a mobile food
dispensing vehicle unit within the city. Alcoholic beverages may not be sold
from a mobile food vendor unit. This section is not intended to sanction the
sale of products from vehicles in any fashion. Except as permitted herein, no
sales of products, goods, or merchandise from vehicles is permitted within the
city.
   (C)   Restrictions. Mobile food dispensing vehicles are allowed on private
property that is designated and used for commercial, industrial, recreational,
or non-residential purposes, subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Mobile food dispensing vehicles are allowed as accessory or
complimentary to the principal use in the parcel.
      (2)   No display areas, merchandise, or stored items in association with
the vendor or those associated with the principal use on the property, which
are displaced due to the vending activity, shall encroach onto any public
street/right-of-way or easement, or onto any adjacent private property without
express permission from that property owner.
      (3)   The mobile food dispensing vehicle shall set up and locate the
vehicle, wares, and/or any associated displays in accordance with the principal
structure setbacks of the underlying property's land use designation.
      (4)   The mobile dispensing vehicle sales area shall not exceed more than
three parking spaces or 600 square feet in area, whichever is greater. The
mobile food dispensing vehicle shall designate a portion of the sales area as a
waiting area for patrons. Such designated area shall not conflict with traffic.
In addition, one space/100 square feet of mobile vendor unit area shall be
required for customer parking. However, at no time may the required number of
parking spaces for the principal use of the property be rendered nonconforming
due to vendor use.
      (5)   Mobile food dispensing vehicles shall not remain on the property
overnight or when they are not in use by the mobile food vendor.
      (6)   All mobile food dispensing vehicles shall operate in compliance
with the city's noise ordinance,
Chapter 96 of the City of Pembroke Pines Code of Ordinances.
      (7)   Mobile food dispensing vehicles shall be prohibited from
discharging fat, oil, grease, or wastewater into the sanitary sewer system.
Waste shall be properly stored and disposed of at a properly designated
location.
      (8)   All menus and signage shall be fully affixed to the mobile food
vendor unit. Detached signs shall not be permitted.
      (9)   Mobile food dispensing vehicles shall be permitted to conduct their
operations between 7:00 a.m. – 9:00 p.m., provided that the approved restroom
facilities are available to the patrons.
      (10)   Mobile food dispensing vehicles must obtain the written
authorization to operate on private property from the owner of the property or
from another authorized party to provide consent to operate.
      (11)   Mobile food dispensing vehicles are prohibited on public property
without first obtaining written authorization from the city or as otherwise
permitted pursuant to a special event permit.
   (D)   Standards. The following standards shall apply to all mobile food
vendors and their respective mobile food vending units:
      (1)   The mobile food vendor unit shall not interfere with required
parking, loading and unloading spaces, or the vehicular access to those spaces
for the principal use.
      (2)   The mobile food vendor unit shall not block, damage, or interfere
with required landscaping, buffers, or stormwater drainage systems on the
subject property.
      (3)   The mobile food vendor unit shall not interfere with or block fire
lanes on the subject property.
      (4)   Only one mobile food vendor shall be allowed on any one parcel less
than one-half acre in size. No more than two mobile food vendors shall be
allowed on any one parcel exceeding one-half acre in size. The Zoning Official
may authorize and approve more than two mobile food vendors to operate on a
single parcel on a case by case basis after review of the site plan.
   (E)   Ice cream trucks.
      (1)   Manner of stops. Ice cream trucks shall pull as far as practicable
to the side of the right-of-way when stopping for the purpose of making sales
and shall operate four-way flashers when so stopped. An ice cream truck shall
vend only when the ice cream truck is lawfully stopped. An ice cream truck
shall vend only from the side of the truck away from moving traffic and as near
as possible to the curb or side of the street. An ice cream truck shall not
vend to a person standing in the roadway.
      (2)   In no event shall an ice cream truck stopped for the purpose of
making sales prevent the passage of other motor vehicles on the right-of-way.
      (3)   Trash receptacle required. Each ice cream truck shall provide a
trash receptacle for use of its customers. Prior to leaving each stop, the
operator of the ice cream truck shall remove any litter left at the stop by
customers.
      (4)   Hours of operation. Ice cream trucks may stop for the purpose of
making sales only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
      (5)   Ice cream trucks operating on private property in the same manner
as mobile food vendors shall be subject to the mobile food vendor regulations
as set forth in this subchapter. (Ord. 2021- 02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4- 21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.519 OUTDOOR DINING.
   (A)   Authorization. Outdoor dining is permitted as an accessory use in
accordance with the following criteria set forth in this section.
   (B)   Review process.
      (1)   All outdoor dining proposals shall require the approval of the
city's zoning official.
      (2)   The approval of a master outdoor dining shall be required prior to
the approval of tenant outdoor dining areas.
      (3)   Proposed outdoor dining areas shall require a parking analysis,
detailed seating plan, details of architectural features and amenities as well
as a narrative summary showing all improvements.
   (C)   Standards.
      (1)   Access. An aisle, complying with the minimum width established by
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), as amended from time to time, must
be maintained to the restaurant door and to allow passage in front of the
restaurant along the shopping center.
      (2)   Food preparation. All kitchen and other equipment (for example, bus
service stations, remote menu computer stations, hostess stations) and refuse
containers used to service the open-air café or outside seating area shall be
located within the primary restaurant and dining room.
      (3)   Location. The dining area must be on private property and be
authorized by both the property owner and tenant. The outdoor dining area must
be adjacent to the principal indoor food service establishment.
      (4)   Noise. No sound systems or amplified music shall be permitted
unless the owner of the establishment can verify that such sound system or
amplified music will not interfere with the neighboring properties and uses.
Any and all such sound systems or amplified music shall comply with the City of
Pembroke Pines Code of Ordinances. The burden of proof of compliance with the
requirements herein shall be on the owner of the establishment.
      (5)   Parking. The outdoor dining area, in excess of 50 square feet, will
be interpreted as additional customer service area and will require requisite
parking.
      (6)   Screening. The outdoor dining area shall be screened from all
residential property and appropriately screened from adjacent commercial
property and parking lots. Specific landscaping and/or screening shall be
provided and may be in excess of required landscaping code to effectively
protect other property. Landscaping and screening must be provided to prevent
light spillover onto adjacent uses and/or properties.
      (7)   Setbacks. No outdoor dining shall be allowed within the required
setbacks.
      (8)   Signage. No signs except those required by code shall be allowed
within the outdoor dining area.
      (9)   Lighting. Lighting may be permitted within the outdoor dining areas
in accordance with the standards in §§
155.600 et seq.
      (10)   Architectural features. Dining areas in excess of 50 square feet
shall be contained by architectural features. (Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21;
sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021)
§ 155.520 OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND SALES.
   (A)   Authorization. Outdoor display and sales is permitted as an accessory
to a principal retail uses, in accordance with the following criteria set forth
in this section.
   (B)   Review process. A master outdoor display and sales plan must be
established by the property owner. The plan shall require the approval of the
City's Zoning Administrator via the administrative review process.
   (C)   Standards.
      (1)   Access. An aisle, complying with the minimum width established by
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), as amended from time to time, must
be maintained.
      (2)   Location.
         (a)   The display and sales area must be on private property and be
authorized by both the property owner and tenant.
         (b)   The display and sales area must be adjacent to the principal
establishment and within the bounds of the tenant's lease line.
         (c)   No outdoor sales shall be permitted within any public or private
right-of-way, required parking or traffic circulation area, fire lane or
landscape area.
      (3)   Noise. No sound systems or amplified music shall be permitted
unless the owner of the establishment can verify that such sound system or
amplified music will not interfere with the neighboring properties and uses.
Any and all such sound systems or amplified music shall comply with the City of
Pembroke Pines Code of Ordinances. The burden of proof of compliance with the
requirements herein shall be on the owner of the establishment.
      (4)   Screening. The outdoor display and sales area shall be screened
from all residential property and appropriately screened from adjacent
commercial property and parking lots. Specific landscaping and/or screening
shall be provided and may be in excess of required landscaping code to
effectively protect other property. Landscaping and screening must be provided
to prevent light spillover onto adjacent uses and/or properties.
      (5)   Setbacks. No outdoor display or sales shall be allowed within the
required setbacks.
      (6)   Signage. No signs except those required by code shall be allowed
within the outdoor display and sales area.
      (7)   Hours of operation. Outdoor display and sale shall be permitted
during the hours of operation of the principal use. All items for display and
sale, as well as the structures utilized for display, shall be moved into the
respective store during off hours.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.521 PAWN SHOPS.
   Pawn shops shall be subject to the following standards and regulations:
   (A)   Location near religious institutions, schools, residential districts:
      (1)   In the development, enforcement, and amendment of this LDC, it is
recognized that there are uses and accessory uses which, because of their
nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable characteristics,
particularly when several of them are business and residential areas. Specific
regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will
not contribute to the blighting and downgrading of the surrounding
neighborhood.
      (2)   Pawn shops set forth in this section, shall not be located nearer
than 1,000 feet to the same or any other designated use, an establishment at
which alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed, or to any religious
institutions, or public, private or parochial kindergarten, nursery,
elementary, middle, or high school, or day care center. Measurement of 1,000
feet shall be made in accordance with division (A)(4) of this section.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful hereafter to establish any pawn shop within
the corporate limits of the city if the proposed location is within 500 feet of
a residentially zoned district.
      (4)   For the purposes of this LDC, a designated use or proposed
designated use shall be deemed to be within 1,000 feet or 500 feet of another
designated use or an establishment at which alcoholic beverages are sold or
consumed, church, school, real property, residence, business, or residentially
zoned district, respectively, as defined or described herein, if any part of
the building in which, or lot of land upon which, a designated use is located,
is within 1,000 feet or 500 feet, as measured by an actual or imaginary
straight line upon the ground or in the air, of any part of the building in
which, or lot of land upon which, another designated use or an establishment at
which alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed, a church, school, real
property, residence, business, or residentially zoned district respectively, is
located.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.522 PET HOTELS, DOG DAYCARE.
   Pet hotels and dog daycares shall be subject to the following standards and
regulations:
   (A)   Pet hotels shall only be permitted as an accessory use for businesses
whose principal operations include the sale of pets and pet supplies, and whose
store is at least 15,000 square feet.
   (B)   Adequate soundproofing in any area where animals are boarded. Sleeping
quarters shall be limited to 15% of the total square footage of the business.
   (C)   No exterior cages.
   (D)   Shall contain an approved air-handling system for disinfection and
odor control.
   (E)   Shall contain adequate waste control facilities, such as a flush
system or equal.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.523 RECREATIONAL USES.
   The uses and structures within the REC District shall not be located nearer
to any property in separate and different ownership than the following:
   (A)   Go-cart track, no racing: 50 feet;
   (B)   Mechanical riding devices: 200 feet;
   (C)   Racetrack: 500 feet;
   (D)   Stadium, amphitheater, or arena: 300 feet.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.524 RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION, HOUSE OF WORSHIP.
   Religious institutions and schools incidental to a religious institution
with the R-1A, R-1B or R-1C shall meet the following requirements.
   (A)   This use shall be located on a lot having at least 40,000 square feet
of lot area, and having at least 200 feet of street frontage.
   (B)   The coverage of all roofed structures shall not exceed 25% of the lot
area.
   (C)   No building or roofed structure shall be located within 40 feet of any
other residentially zoned property.
   (D)   No parking area shall be located within ten feet of any lot line.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.525 RESOURCE RECOVERY.
   Resource recovery establishments shall be subject to the following standards
and regulations:
   (A)   An attendant must be kept on duty during hours the disposal area is
open to control deposit of refuse.
   (B)   The disposal area shall be enclosed sufficiently by a fence with gate
or by other means so as to limit use to authorized periods, and for proper
purposes.
   (C)   No burning of refuse shall be permitted within two miles of any
residentially zoned property in the city, except by combustion in a completely
enclosed incinerator of adequate design and operation to prevent emission of
fly ash and dense smoke. There shall be no burning of refuse between the hours
of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (D)   No refuse is to be deposited within any required yard.
   (E)   Refuse is to be compacted daily and topped by a soil cover daily.
   (F)   Maximum depth of fill shall not exceed ten feet above existing ground
level.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.526 SCHOOLS.
   Any public or private elementary, middle or senior high school that seeks
relief by a special exception shall demonstrate compliance with special
exception criteria and the following supplemental standards:
   (A)   Site requirements. The following minimum standards shall apply:
      (1)   Lot size. The lot shall have a minimum lot size of four acres.
      (2)   Schools must be located within freestanding single use structure(s)
unless the school is accessory to a library, community service, museum,
performing arts, theater, cinema, church, Florida college system institution,
and college or university facilities.
      (3)   Barrier. If the site abuts a canal or other water body, a minimum
eight foot high fence shall be installed along the property line abutting the
water body in order to protect the students. If the site abuts a residential
property, a minimum six foot high masonry wall shall be installed along the
property line abutting residential properties. In addition to the requirements
above, the school must provide additional fencing and or gates on their site
plan to ensure the security of the student population.
      (4)   Site plan requirements. A local business tax receipt shall not be
issued until a site plan or site plan modification is approved consistent with
these land development regulations.
      (5)   Off-site improvements. If through the site plan or site plan
modification process the City Engineer, Broward County or state transportation
related agencies deem that off-site improvements are required, such as
sidewalks, traffic signalization, signage, pedestrian and bicycle improvements,
transit amenities, school crossings and zones, and turning lanes, such
improvements and amenities must be constructed and approved before a local
business tax receipt may be issued.
      (6)   Operational management plan. An operational management plan should
be included with the submittal. The plan should include the following
information:
         (a)   General summary of operations on site. Including but not limited
to:
            1.   Five year projected school enrollment with grade
configurations as well as maximum student enrollment.
            2.   Hours of operation.
            3.   Student pickup and drop off times.
            4.   Loading and unloading procedures.
            5.   Onsite queuing and traffic control measures.
            6.   Onsite and off-site traffic improvements associated with
proposal.
         (b)   Traffic and pedestrian operational plan showing the ingress and
egress of pedestrians and all vehicles from the school site during school
during school pickup and drop off hours and safe routes with crossing guards,
where required, necessary to protect the students. This plan must include all
onsite and off-site improvements, as outlined within this section, within a
minimum of 1,000 feet from the school property.
         (c)   Organizational structure. An organizational chart and
explanation showing the hierarchical arrangement of lines of authority, contact
information of such personnel, right and duties of the organization.
         (d)   Traffic and vehicular stacking analysis by a registered traffic
engineer based on maximum enrollment figures provided by the school upon
consideration of the site plan.
      (7)   Applicant will be required to apply for an amendment to the special
exception in the event the applicant wishes to increase maximum enrollment or
change in grade configuration at the facility beyond what may have been
authorized by the original special exception.
      (8)   The minimum regulations set forth in this section shall be applied
and construed in a manner so as not to be more stringent than the latest
edition of the state requirements for educational facilities.
   (B)   Physical environment requirements.
      (1)   Where recreational play areas are provided, a minimum of 50% of the
total recreational play area for the school shall be located outdoors.
Recreational play areas must be clearly delineated on a site plan and cannot be
located within required landscape bufferyards, parking lots or areas of traffic
circulation. Outdoor county or city public recreational facilities or parks
located within Pembroke Pines municipal boundaries may be used to meet this
requirement with proper governmental approvals.
      (2)   Drop-off/pick-up area. A student drop-off and pick-up area shall be
depicted and dedicated to drop-off activities and will not interfere with
onsite parking on the conceptual site plan, which area shall be consistent with
the "Safe Routes to School Guide, Student Drop-off and Pick-up", which guide
was developed by the Pedestrian and Bicycle Information Center. The appropriate
length and dimensions of the dropoff area shall be identified within a stacking
study.
   (C)   Other requirements.
      (1)   School crossing guards. Public and private schools are required to,
and shall provide at their own expense, school crossing guards.
      (2)   Bus storage. Private or public schools shall not store buses on
site.
      (3)   Timing. In order to afford sufficient time to process and secure
required development orders, building permits, and local business tax receipt
approval, a complete special exception use application must be filed with the
Planning and Economic Development Division with all fees paid no later than 90
days after awarding of the charter for the next school year.
      (4)   Schools must apply for local business tax receipt in compliance
with Chapter 115 of the City Code of Ordinances.
      (5)   Special exception applications shall comply with regulations as set
forth in §§
155.300 through
155.313.
      (6)   Signs shall comply with requirements set forth in §§
155.695 through
155.6107.
      (7)   Other. Any other documentation or requirements that the Planning
and Economic Development Division deems relevant to the operation of such use
or safety of the students or both.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.527 SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY/ LAUNDROMAT.
   Self-service, laundry establishments shall be subject to the following
standards and regulations:
   (A)   Service shall be rendered directly to customers who shall bring in and
take away the articles to be cleaned.
   (B)   The establishment shall not provide pick-up or delivery service.
   (C)   The customers shall operate the machines provided to do their own
laundry.
   (D)   The entire cleaning and drying process shall be carried on within
completely enclosed solvent recleaning units.
   (E)   All solvents used in the cleaning process and the vapors therefrom
shall be nonexplosive and nonflammable.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.528 SERVICE STATIONS.
   Service stations shall be subject to the following standards and
regulations:
   (A)   Applicability. Service stations, also known as gas stations, may
include the following accessory uses:
      (1)   Minor auto repair;
      (2)   Car washes;
      (3)   Convenience store.
   (B)   Location. Service stations are to be located only in B-3, C-1, I-L, I-
M and I-H Districts. Service stations are allowed on a corner lot, located at
the intersection of two or more streets, or as an outparcel/free standing
building within a shopping center that is located on a corner lot at the
intersection of two or more streets.
   (C)   Clearance required.
      (1)   Gasoline pumps shall be located not less than 15 feet from any
street line and not less than ten feet from any other property line.
      (2)   No gasoline pump shall be located within 25 feet of any property
which is residentially zoned.
   (D)   Wall or fences required.
      (1)   There shall be a wall or fence, which shall effectively screen
against direct view, and which shall be maintained on all property lines other
than street lines of a lot occupied as a service station.
      (2)   The wall or fence shall be opaque.
      (3)   The above wall or fence shall not be required where the lot abuts
nonresidentially zoned property, provided a proper waste receptacle is
maintained and used which effectively conceals the refuse and rubbish from
public view.
   (E)   Storage of flammable liquids.
      (1)   All gasoline, benzene, diesel fuel, naphtha, or other volatile
flammable liquids stored incidental to the operation of a service station shall
be in underground tanks.
      (2)   The total capacity of underground tanks and storage facilities of
flammable liquids incidental to the operation of a service station shall not
exceed an aggregate total of 100,000 gallons. In the event a service station is
continuously inactive for a period of 30 days or more, then all storage tanks
on the premises shall be emptied.
      (3)   All underground tanks shall comply with all applicable federal,
state, and county codes, laws, and ordinances, which includes all applicable
regulations, including building and fire codes, and all applicable governmental
approvals must be obtained before installation.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.529 SIGN SHOP/MANUFACTURING.
   Sign shops shall not be located less than 100 feet from any residential use.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.530 SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES.
   The following provisions shall apply to all special residential facilities
as defined in this LDC and the future land use element of the comprehensive
plan.
   (A)   Special Residential 1 shall only be permitted for use in a single-
family home with six or fewer residents.
   (B)   Special Residential 2 shall not be permitted to operate within a
single-family home any time and consists of 7-14 residents.
   (C)   Special Residential 3 shall not be permitted to operate within a
single-family home. The facility shall consist of a minimum of 15 residents
with each room a minimum of 540 square feet.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.531 STORAGE OF RENTAL VEHICLES.
   Outside accessory storage of rental vehicles may be permitted as described
below:
   (A)   Site plan. A site plan, or site plan amendment, describing with
particularity the specific storage areas for rental vehicles for each proposed
and/or existing use, must be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Board for
review and decision in accordance with §§
155.300 through
155.313. All parking for the storage of rental vehicles shall be in excess of
required parking for the center. The Planning and Zoning Board must determine
that the location for the storage of vehicles does not interfere or impede with
the use of the parking lot for the customers, employees or owners of the other
businesses in the center.
   (B)   Type of vehicles. Stored rental vehicles may not have more than two
axles. Only vehicles that may be driven with a non-commercial driver's license
issued by the Florida Department of Motor Vehicles may be stored on-site.
Rental and storage of construction and heavy equipment shall not be permitted.
   (C)   Restrictions. No vehicles with advertising, other signage, or greater
than 5,000 pounds may be parked in the front. Any such vehicles must be parked
in the rear of the building and screened from adjacent residential development.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.532 TATTOO PARLORS.
   Tattoo parlors shall be subject to the following standards and regulations:
   (A)   Location near religious institutions, schools, residential districts:
      (1)   In the development, enforcement, and amendment of this LDC, it is
recognized that there are uses and accessory uses which, because of their
nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable characteristics,
particularly when several of them are concentrated in any given location,
thereby having a deleterious effect upon adjacent business and residential
areas. Specific regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these
adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting and downgrading of the
surrounding neighborhood.
      (2)   Tattoo parlor shall not be located nearer than 1,000 feet to the
same or any other designated use, an establishment at which alcoholic beverages
are sold or consumed, or to any religious institutions, or public, private or
parochial kindergarten, nursery, elementary, middle, or high school, or day
care center. Measurement of 1,000 feet shall be made in accordance with
division (A)(4) of this section.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful hereafter to establish any designated use
within the corporate limits of the city if the proposed location is within 500
feet of a residentially zoned district.
      (4)   For the purposes of this subchapter, a designated use or proposed
designated use shall be deemed to be within 1,000 feet or 500 feet of another
designated use, an establishment at which alcoholic beverages are sold or
consumed, religious institutions, school, real property, residence, business,
or residentially zoned district, respectively, as defined or described herein,
if any part of the building in which, or lot of land upon which, a designated
use is located, is within 1,000 feet or 500 feet, as measured by an actual or
imaginary straight line upon the ground or in the air, of any part of the
building in which, or lot of land upon which, another designated use, an
establishment at which alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed, a religious
institutions, school, real property, residence, business, or residentially
zoned district respectively, is located.
      (5)   Where a designated use is located in conformity with the provisions
of this LDC, the subsequent locating of an establishment which sells or permits
the consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises, a religious institution or
school within 1,000 feet, or a residentially zoned district within 500 feet of
the existing designated use shall not be construed to cause the designated use
to be in violation of this LDC.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.533 TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS.
   (A)   Intent. 
      (1)   The regulations and requirements of this division are intended to:
         (a)   Promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens
by regulating the siting of telecommunications towers;
         (b)   Provide for the appropriate location and development of
telecommunication towers and antennas within the city;
         (c)   Minimize adverse visual effects of telecommunication towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative
camouflaging techniques;
         (d)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures;
         (e)   Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of telecommunication towers and antennas by maximizing use of any new
or existing telecommunication towers through shared use — that is, collocation,
to reduce the number of towers needed.
      (2)   Certain restrictions and regulations may be waived by the City
Commission upon a showing of good cause, so long as such a waiver is consistent
with the intent of this division.
   (B)   Telecommunication towers.
      (1)   Freestanding telecommunication towers shall be permitted on city-
owned property upon approval of a lease by the City Commission. The application
for a lease shall include a plan revealing the location and height of the
tower, and any other information requested by the city.
         (a)   Freestanding telecommunication towers shall be permitted, in the
prescribed locations, pursuant to a favorable outcome of the below-described
process as follows:
 
Table 155.531.1: Proposed Tower Location and Approval Process
Tower Type* Zoning District    Approval Process
Guyed       Industrial         Special Exception
Lattice     Industrial and C-1 Special Exception
Monopole    Nonresidential     Site Plan - City Commission and Planning and
                               Zoning Board
           Multi-Family       Special Exception
Stealth     Non-Single-Family  Site Plan - Planning and Zoning Board
 
City-owned property: site plan and lease approved by City Commission in lieu of
these processes.
         (b)   Vacant property in the above-mentioned zoning districts may be
utilized for a tower. However, if the proposed site is vacant, a monopole or
stealth-type stealth facility must be utilized.
      (2)   Minimum standards. All applications shall meet the following
minimum standards:
         (a)   Each application for a proposed telecommunication tower shall
include all requirements for development plan approval. The city may waive all
or some of these provisions for stealth towers which are designed to emulate
existing structures already on the site, including but not limited to light
standards or power poles.
         (b)   A statement shall be submitted, prepared by a professional
registered engineer licensed to practice in the state, which through rational
engineering analysis certifies the tower's compliance with applicable standards
as set forth in the Florida Building Code, amended by Broward County, and any
associated regulations including Electronic Industry Association/
Telecommunications Industry Association standards for wind load, and which
describes the tower's capacity, including an example of the number and type of
antennas it can accommodate.
No tower shall be permitted to exceed its loading capacity. For all towers
attached to existing structures, the statement shall include certification that
the structure can support the load superimposed from the tower. All towers
shall have the capacity to permit multiple users; at a minimum, monopole towers
shall be able to accommodate two users, and, at a minimum, self-support/lattice
or guyed towers shall be able to accommodate three users. However, this
requirement may be waived by the final approving authority for stealth towers.
         (c)   Height/setbacks and related location requirements.
            1.   The height of a telecommunications tower shall not exceed the
height limitation authorized in the zoning district where the tower shall be
located, unless this requirement is specifically waived by the City Commission.
Tower height shall be measured from the crown of the road of the nearest public
street. Antennas located on towers shall not be included in the height
calculations.
            2.   Towers capable of supporting multiple users in excess of the
requirements of division (B)(2)(c)1. of this section may exceed the height
limit of the underlying district by an additional 25%.
            3.   Telecommunication towers shall conform with the setbacks
established for the underlying zoning district.
            4.   All buildings and other structures to be located on the same
property as a telecommunication tower shall conform with the setbacks
established for the underlying zoning district.
         (d)   Aircraft hazard. Prior to the issuance of a building permit by
the city, the applicant shall provide evidence that the telecommunication
towers or antennas are in compliance with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
regulations. Where an antenna will not exceed the highest joint of the existing
structure upon which it is to be mounted, such evidence shall not be required.
         (e)   Approval required from other governmental agencies. Each
application for a telecommunication tower may be required to include written
approval or a statement of no objection from other federal or state agencies
that may regulate telecommunication tower siting, design, and construction.
         (f)   FCC emissions standards. All proposed telecommunication towers
shall comply with current radio frequency emissions standards of the Federal
Communications Commission.
         (g)   Buffering.
            1.   Landscaping, walls, and other buffering shall be consistent
with the requirements of this Code of Ordinances and shall be installed around
the entire perimeter of any fence or wall. Additional landscaping, walls, or
other buffering may be required around the perimeter of the property and around
any or all anchors or supports if deemed necessary to buffer adjacent
properties. The city may require landscaping in excess of the requirements of
this Code of Ordinances in order to enhance compatibility with adjacent
residential and nonresidential land uses.
            2.   Landscaping consistent with perimeter and on-site requirements
of the Code shall be installed around any accessory buildings or structures.
         (h)   High voltage and no trespassing warning signs.
            1.   If high voltage is necessary for the operation of the
telecommunications tower or any accessory structures, "high voltage - danger"
warnings signs shall be permanently attached to the fence or wall and shall be
spaced no more than 40 feet apart.
            2.   "NO TRESPASSING" warning signs shall be permanently attached
to the fence or wall and shall be spaced no more than 40 feet apart.
            3.   The letters for the "high voltage - danger" and "no
trespassing" warning signs shall be at least six inches in height. The two
warning signs may be combined into one sign. The warning signs shall be
installed at least five feet above the finished grade of the fence.
            4.   The warning signs may be attached to free-standing poles if
the content of the signs may be obstructed by landscaping.
         (i)   Equipment storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in
direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of
the telecommunication tower, unless repairs to the tower are being made.
         (j)   Parking. Each tower shall require one parking space, unless such
requirement is specifically waived by the final approving authority, upon a
showing that said parking space does not serve the public interest.
         (k)   Removal of abandoned or unused facilities. All abandoned or
unused telecommunication tower facilities shall be removed by the tower owner/
operator within 90 days of the cessation of use, if requested by the city to do
so. A tower shall be considered abandoned if use has been discontinued for 180
consecutive days. The city may require an applicant at their cost and expense
to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for reasonable
anticipated costs to be incurred in removing towers and related equipment. In
the alternative, the city may place a lien on the property on which the
nonconforming tower is located, after proper notice is given pursuant to
Chapter 32 of this Code of Ordinances. Telecommunication towers being utilized
for other purposes, including but not limited to light stands and power poles,
may be exempt from this provision.
         (l)   Signs and advertising. The use of any portion of a tower for
signs or advertising purposes, including company name, banners, streamers, and
the like, shall be strictly prohibited.
         (m)   Accessory buildings or structures. All accessory buildings or
structures shall meet all building standards as listed in this Code or as
prescribed by other applicable laws and regulations, and as prescribed in
accordance with the provisions of the Florida Building Code, as amended by
Broward County. All accessory buildings or structures shall require a building
permit issued by the city.
         (n)   Colors. Except where superseded by the requirements of other
county, state, or federal regulatory agencies possessing jurisdiction over
telecommunications towers, telecommunications towers shall be painted or
constructed in neutral colors, designed to blend into the surrounding
environment, such as non-contrasting gray.
         (o)   Non-interference. Each application to allow construction of a
telecommunication tower shall include a certified statement that the
construction and placement of the tower will not interfere with public safety
communications.
      (3)   Inspections.
         (a)   Telecommunication tower owners shall submit a report to the City
Manager or designee, certifying structural and electrical integrity on the
following schedule:
            1.   Monopole towers - once every five years;
            2.   Self-support/lattice towers - once every two years; and
            3.   Guyed towers - once every two years.
         (b)   Inspections shall be conducted by an engineer licensed to
practice in the state. The results of such inspections shall be provided to the
City Manager or designee. Based upon the results of an inspection, the Building
Official may require repair, replacement, or removal of a telecommunication
tower.
         (c)   The city may conduct periodic inspections of telecommunication
towers to ensure structural and electrical integrity. The owner of the
telecommunications tower may be required by the city to have more frequent
inspections should there be reason to believe that the structural and
electrical integrity of the tower is jeopardized.
      (4)   Existing towers.
         (a)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section above,
telecommunications antennas may be placed on existing towers with sufficient
loading capacity. The capacity shall be certified by an engineer licensed to
practice in the state.
         (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section above, towers in
existence as of November 6, 1996, may be replaced with a tower of equal or less
visual impact after approval by the City Manager or designee. If the proposed
tower does not receive such approval under this section, its replacement must
be consistent with this LDC.
   (C)   Antennas not located on telecommunications towers.
      (1)   Antennas shall be permitted on the prescribed locations, pursuant
to a favorable outcome of the process described as follows:
Table 155.531.2 Proposed Antenna Location and Approval Process
Antenna or Ground-Based Microwave Dish Zoning Districts Approval Process
Antenna
Table 155.531.2 Proposed Antenna Location and Approval Process
Antenna or Ground-Based      Zoning Districts  Approval Process
Microwave Dish Antenna
Existing Tower:                                
   Add to Existing Tower  N/A               Planning and Zoning Board, non-
                                               quasi-judicial
   Replace on Existing TowN/A               Building Permit
Adding Building:                               
   Visible                N/A               Planning and Zoning Board, non-
                                               quasi-judicial
   Stealth                N/A               Building Permit
   Satellite Earth StationNon-Single-Family Site Plan - City Commission and
                                               Planning and Zoning Board
 
      (2)   Minimum standards. Building or rooftop antennas shall be subject to
the following minimum standards:
         (a)   Building rooftop stealth antennas shall be subject to the
following minimum standards:
            1.   No commercial advertising shall be allowed on an antenna;
            2.   No signals, lights, or illumination shall be permitted on an
antenna, unless required by the Federal Communications Commission or the
Federal Aviation Administration;
            3.   Any related unmanned equipment building shall not contain more
than 750 square feet of gross floor area or be more than 12 feet in height and
shall be screened in accordance with other requirements of the code;
            4.   If the equipment building is located on the roof of the
building, the areas of the equipment building shall not occupy more than 25% of
the roof area and shall be screened from adjacent property; and
            5.   Each application shall contain a rendering or photograph of
the antenna, including but not limited to colors and screening devices. This
shall be subject to administrative review for consistency with the definition
of stealth facility.
         (b)   Satellite earth stations, ground-based microwave dish antennas,
and building rooftop non-stealth antennas shall be subject to the following
minimum standards:
            1.   Antennas may not extend more than 20 feet above highest joint
of a roof. Stealth antennas attached to but not above rooftop structures shall
be exempt from this provision. Antennas may exceed 20 feet above the roof if
approved as a special exception by the City Commission;
            2.   Antennas, and related equipment buildings, shall be located or
screened to minimize the visual impact of the antenna upon adjacent properties
and shall be of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building
or structure upon which it is situated;
            3.   No commercial advertising shall be allowed on an antenna;
            4.   No signals, lights, or illumination shall be permitted on an
antenna, unless required by the Federal Communications Commission or the
Federal Aviation Administration;
            5.   Any related unmanned equipment building shall not contain more
than 750 square feet of gross floor area or be more than 12 feet in height and
shall be screened in accordance with other requirements of the code; and
            6.   If the equipment building is located on the roof of the
building, the area of the equipment building shall not occupy more than 25% of
the roof area and shall be screened from adjacent property.
      (3)   Antenna types.
         (a)   To minimize adverse visual impacts, stealth antenna types shall
be preferred. If a non-stealth antenna is proposed, the applicant shall be
required to demonstrate, in a technical manner acceptable to the city staff,
why the stealth antenna cannot be used for the particular application.
         (b)   This does not preclude a combination of the various types of
antenna.
      (4)   Aircraft hazard. Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the
city, the applicant shall provide evidence that the telecommunication towers or
antennas are in compliance with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
regulations. Where an antenna will not exceed the highest point of the existing
structure upon which it is to be mounted, such evidence shall not be required.
   (D)   Shared use of communication towers.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this LDC, to minimize
adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of
telecommunication towers, colocation of facilities on existing or new towers
shall be encouraged by:
         (a)   Only issuing permits to qualified shared facilities at locations
where it appears there may be more demand for towers than the property can
reasonably accommodate; or
         (b)   Giving preference to qualified shared facilities over other
facilities in authorizing use at particular locations.
      (2)   For a facility to become a qualified shared facility, the facility
owner must show that:
         (a)   The facility is appropriately designed for sharing; and
         (b)   The facility owner is prepared to offer adequate space on the
facility to others on fair and reasonable, nondiscriminatory terms.
      (3)   To satisfy the requirements of division (D)(2)(b) of this section,
the facility owner must submit a written evaluation of the structural capacity
of the tower.
      (4)   Each provider shall submit to the city a list of all of its
telecommunication towers located or proposed to be located within the corporate
limits of the city. The list shall include the location, height, and available
capacity for additional antennas as well as the name, address, and phone and
facsimile number of the applicant. The city shall make these lists available to
applicants to assist in the collocation of antennas.
      (5)   Collocation of communication antennas by more than one provider on
existing or new telecommunication towers shall take precedence over the
construction of new single-use telecommunication towers. Accordingly, each
application for a telecommunication tower shall include the following:
         (a)   A written evaluation of the feasibility of sharing a
telecommunication tower, if an appropriate telecommunication tower or towers
is/are available. The evaluation shall analyze one or more of the following
factors:
            1.   Structural capacity of the tower or towers;
            2.   Radio frequency interference;
            3.   Geographical coverage requirements;
            4.   Mechanical or electrical incompatibility;
            5.   Inability or ability to locate equipment on the tower or
towers;
            6.   Availability of towers for collocation;
            7.   Any restrictions or limitations of the Federal Communications
Commission that would preclude the shared use of the tower.
            8.   Additional information requested by the city.
         (b)   The city may deny an application if an available collocation is
feasible and the application is not for such collocation.
      (6)   A telecommunication tower that is determined to be inappropriate
for sharing shall be assumed to be inappropriate for sharing the same types of
facilities in the future. Such towers will not need to be evaluated in the
future regarding sharing with the same type of facility for which it has been
determined to be inappropriate. The city shall retain a list of such towers and
will provide a copy of the list to all potential applicants. The city may
require additional sharing feasibility evaluations if warranted by changes in
technology.
      (7)   For any telecommunications tower approved for shared use, the owner
of the tower shall provide notice of the location of the telecommunication
tower and the tower's load capacity to the city. The city will maintain and
make this list available to all applicants.
   (E)   Applications.
      (1)   The city shall act promptly on any application submitted in
accordance with the provisions of this LDC. The reasons for rejecting any
application filed under these provisions shall be explained, set forth in
writing, and based on substantial evidence.
      (2)   The issuance of a permit, however, is not a lease, and no
municipally-owned property may be used without a lease agreement with the city.
The city may, as appropriate to protect its property and the public interest,
establish additional requirements beyond the minimum requirements of a permit
for municipally-owned property. Furthermore, nothing in this LDC shall prohibit
the city from requiring additional provisions in a lease.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.534 SEASONAL MERCHANDISE STORAGE.
   Seasonal merchandise storage shall be subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   All merchandise shall be stored in a fully enclosed container.
   (B)   No signage or graphics related to the retailer are permitted on the
storage containers.
   (C)   Number and location:
      (1)   Containers shall be located behind or on the side of the principal
building in a location that does not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or
site operations and minimizes visual impact on adjacent properties and public
rights-of-way. Location of containers for seasonal merchandise storage shall
require review and approval by the Planning and Economic Development
Department.
      (2)   The number of containers permitted shall be determined by the
Planning and Economic Development Department at the time of review.
      (3)   Storage containers cannot be placed within parking spaces.
   (D)   Containers utilized for the storage of seasonal merchandise are
permitted to be on site for a maximum period of ten weeks and shall not exceed
20 weeks within a 12 month period. (Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
NONCONFORMING USES
§ 155.535 SCOPE, APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter are intended to apply only to
nonconforming uses, and are not intended to apply to buildings, structures, and
their lots, existing at the effective date of this LDC which do not meet the
regulations of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.536 EXISTING USE.
   Any lawful use of land or structure existing at the effective date of this
LDC, and which by its terms has become a nonconforming use, is hereby declared
not to be in violation at this Code's effective date. Such a nonconforming use
shall be subject to all of the provisions of this section pertaining to its
continuance, change, and discontinuance.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.537 EXTENSION OF NONCONFORMING USE.
   (A)   The nonconforming use of a building may be extended throughout any
part of a building clearly designed for that use but not so used at the
effective date of this LDC.
   (B)   Any nonconforming use which occupied a portion of a building not
originally designed or intended for that use shall not be extended to any other
part of the building.
   (C)   No nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy any land outside the
building nor any additional building on the same lot, not used for that
nonconforming use at the effective date of this LDC.
   (D)   The nonconforming use of land shall not be extended to any additional
land not so used at the effective date of this LDC, except as provided under §
155.6112.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.538 CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE.
   (A)   In any residential district, any change of a nonconforming use in a
conforming building shall be to a conforming use.
   (B)   In any residential district, a nonconforming use in a nonconforming
building shall be changed only to a use permitted in the particular residential
district involved, except as provided in division (C) of this section.
   (C)   There may be change of tenancy, ownership, or management of a
nonconforming use, provided there is no change in the nature or character of
the nonconforming use, except as may be permitted by this subchapter.
   (D)   In a nonresidential district, a non-conforming use in a nonconforming
structure may be replaced by a new or different use permissible in the same
zoning district as the original nonconforming use or in a more restricted
zoning district; if the Board of Adjustment, after public hearing, finds that
the new or different use will be less detrimental to the surrounding
neighborhood than the old use, and approves the new or different use as being
in accordance with the spirit and purpose of this subchapter.
   (E)   Any change of a nonconforming use of land, except as incidental to a
change of a nonconforming use of a nonconforming structure permitted and
approved under division (D) of this section, shall be to a conforming use.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.539 DISCONTINUANCE, ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   If for any reason the nonconforming use of a building ceases or is
discontinued for a period of one year or more, the building shall not
thereafter be used for a nonconforming use.
   (B)   Any part of a building, structure, or land, occupied by a
nonconforming use, which use is abandoned, shall not again be occupied or used
for a nonconforming use.
   (C)   Any part of a building, structure, or land occupied by a nonconforming
use, which is changed to or occupied by a conforming use, shall not thereafter
be used or occupied by a nonconforming use.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.540 CONTINUANCE.
   Any legal nonconforming use or structure may remain until modified or
altered.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.541 CHANGE IN ZONING CLASSIFICATION OR REGULATION.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall also apply to buildings,
structures, land, premises or uses which hereafter become nonconforming due to
a change or reclassification of district; or which become nonconforming due to
a change in district regulations.
   (B)   Where a period of time is specified in this section for the removal or
discontinuance of nonconforming buildings, structures, or uses, that period
shall be computed from the effective date of the reclassificaton or change of
regulations.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.542 UNLAWFUL USE NOT AUTHORIZED.
   Nothing in this LDC shall be interpreted as authorization for, or approval
of, the continuation of the use of the structure or premises in violation of
any resolution in effect at the effective date of this LDC.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.543 ILLEGAL USE.
   The casual, temporary, or illegal use of land or a building shall not be
sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use or to create any
rights in the continuance of such a use.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.544 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Nothing shall be allowable on the premises in any district provided
for in this chapter that shall in any way be offensive or obnoxious by reason
of the emission of odors, gases, dust, smoke, vibration, or noise, including
the crowing of cocks, barking of dogs, or any noises or odors emanating from
any animal, fish, or fowl. Nor shall anything be constructed or maintained that
would in any way constitute an eye-sore or nuisance to adjacent property owners
or residents or to the community.
   (B)   Each and every one of the following conditions or acts is considered
to be a nuisance. For the purpose of this section, NUISANCE means a person,
thing, or circumstance causing inconvenience or annoyance.
      (1)   Fire hazards. Dry or dead shrubs, dead trees, combustible waste and
refuse, or any material growing on a street or sidewalk or upon private
property within the city which by reason of its size, manner of growth, and
location constitutes a fire hazard to a building or other property or, when
dry, will in reasonable probability constitute a fire hazard.
      (2)   Hazardous obstructions. An obstacle, landscaping, or thing
installed or maintained in the corner setback area, reaching a height higher
than four feet above the adjoining top of curb at the applicable corner of the
street, intersection of four feet above the nearest pavement surface where
there is no curb, or existing traveled roadway at the corner in question where
there is no curb or pavement. Hazardous obstructions do not mean existing or
future permanent buildings, otherwise constructed or maintained in accordance
with applicable zoning and building regulations, public utility poles, trees
trimmed at the trunk at least eight feet above the level of ground surface,
provided that the trees are spaced so that the trunks do not obstruct the
vision of motorists.
      (3)   Animals in residential zones. Prohibited to keep or maintain
chickens or other farm animals, and four or more dogs over the age of four
months old.
      (4)   Polluted water. A swimming pool, pond, or other body of water which
is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered, or not otherwise maintained, resulting in
the water becoming polluted. For the purpose of this section POLLUTED WATER
means water contained in a swimming pool, pond, or other body of water which
includes, but is not limited to, bacterial growth, algae, remains of insects,
remains of deceased animals, reptiles, rubbish, refuse, debris, papers, and any
other foreign materials or matter which because of its nature or location
constitutes an unhealthy, unsafe, or unsightly condition.
      (5)   Public burning. The intentional out-door burning of any material,
structure, matter, or thing unless otherwise specifically authorized.
      (6)   Refuse and waste. Refuse and waste matter, which by reason of its
location and character is unsightly and interferes with the reasonable
enjoyment of property by neighbors, detrimentally affects property values in
the surrounding neighborhood or community, or which would materially hamper or
interfere with the prevention or suppression of fire upon the premises. For the
purpose of this section REFUSE and WASTE means unused or discarded matter and
material having no substantial market value, and which consists of such
materials as: rubbish, refuse, debris, and matter of any kind, including but
not limited to rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, soil,
building materials, crates, cartons, containers, boxes, machinery or parts
thereof, scrap metal and any other pieces of metal, ferrous or nonferrous,
furniture, trimmings from plants and trees, cans, bottles, and barrels.
      (7)   Maintenance of property. It is declared a public nuisance for any
person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any
premises in this city to maintain the premises in such a manner that any of the
following conditions are found to exist thereon:
         (a)   Buildings which are abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed,
or left unreasonably in a state of partial construction.
         (b)   Unpainted buildings causing dry rot, warping, and termite
infestation.
         (c)   Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions and inviting
trespassers and malicious mischief.
         (d)   The accumulation or allowing overgrown and useless vegetation,
but not limited to, grasses, weeds, shrubs, and plot line hedges.
         (e)   Weeds and grass growth in rocked landscaped areas.
         (f)   Driveways containing pot holes or eroded areas.
         (g)   Household items, papers, cardboard, vehicle parts, cans, drums,
wood, and debris stored in an open carport, to the extent that it creates an
eyesore to the abutting resident or residents of the city.
         (h)   Landscape not maintained in a healthy growing condition, yard
and swale areas void of landscape (grass) or other accepted landscape
materials.
         (i)   Nothing shall be allowable on the premises in any district that
shall in any way be offensive or obnoxious by the emission of odors, gases,
dust, smoke, or vibration.
         (j)   Septic tank drain fields, failure of drainfields as evidenced by
odors, saturated adjacent top soil, or unusual growth of vegetation.
      (8)   Permitted fences and utility sheds. Sheds and fences that are
unsightly by reason of disrepair, which includes but is not limited to broken
slats, rotten posts, or other missing members, and in a state of dilapidation
or arrangement that is deemed unsafe for the purpose they were intended.
      (9)   Maintenance of buildings and property or sites under development or
construction. Property which is maintained in such a condition as to become so
defective, unsightly, or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that
the same causes depreciable diminution of the property values of surrounding
property or is materially detrimental to proximal properties and improvements.
This includes but is not limited to the following:
         (a)   Peeled and unpainted surfaces of buildings including wood and
concrete.
         (b)   Graffiti covering exterior surfaces.
         (c)   Rotted or decayed wood trim.
         (d)   Screen enclosures that are required for pools, that contain
missing or ripped sections and screening on main building structures with
ripped and torn panels.
         (e)   Buildings or structures maintained in violation of the South
Florida Code as adopted by the city.
         (f)   Landscape not maintained in a healthy growing condition, yard
and swale areas void of landscape (grass) or other accepted landscape
materials.
         (g)   Construction fencing windscreens with rips, holes, tears,
discoloration, weathering and or general disrepair.
      (10)   Maintenance of premises. So out of harmony of conformity with the
maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution
of the enjoyment, use, or property values of such adjacent properties.
      (11)   Property affecting tax receipts. Property maintained (in such
relation to surrounding property) so as to establish a prevalence of
depreciated values, impaired investments, and social economic maladjustments to
such an extent that the capacity to pay taxes is reduced and tax receipts from
such particular areas are inadequate for the cost of public services rendered
therein.
   (C)   Notice to abate. When the Code Enforcement Officer or Building
Official finds that any premises or property within the city may be maintained
contrary to one or more of the provisions of this section, he shall notify the
owner, lessee, occupant, mortgagee, or beneficiary by written notice, served
personally or posted on the premises, stating the conditions which constitute
the public nuisance and shall order the abatement of the nuisance by a time
period consistent with the nature of the violation. Failure to bring about
compliance within the time stated shall result in a summons before the Code
Enforcement Board, the Special Master, or the County Court. The summons shall
be served according to state statutes.
   (D)   Abatement by the city. If the person fails to abate the nuisance
within the time set forth, the city may proceed to abate the nuisance.
   (E)   Record of expenses. The city shall keep an itemized account of the
expenses involved in abating the nuisance. The city shall post conspicuously on
the property and shall also mail to the owner of the property a statement
showing the expense of the abatement, together with a notice of the time and
place when the statement will be submitted to the Commission for approval and
confirmation, and at which time the Commission shall consider objections or
protests to the cost of the work.
   (F)   Procedure in case of emergency. When the conditions which constitute
the nuisance pose an immediate threat to the public peace, health, or safety,
the Commission may order the nuisance abated immediately or take steps itself
to abate the nuisance, after adoption of a resolution declaring the facts which
constitute the emergency.
   (G)   Graffiti.
      (1)   No person shall write, paint, or draw any inscription, figure, or
mark of any type on any public or private building or other real or personal
property, owned, operated, or maintained by a governmental entity or any agency
or instrumentality thereof or by any person, firm, or corporation, unless the
express permission of the owner or operator of the property has been obtained
and any required permits are obtained.
      (2)   No person shall carry an aerosol spray paint can or broad-tipped
indelible marker with the intent to violate the provisions of division (G)(1).
      (3)   For the purposes of this section, the term BROAD-TIP INDELIBLE
MARKER means any marker or similar implement which contains a fluid which is
oil or water based and which has a flat or angled writing surface 1/4 inch or
greater.
      (4)   For the purposes of this section, EFFECTIVELY OBSCURE shall mean to
clean or remove any and all graffiti and shall not mean the blacking out of and
graffiti.
      (5)   Any person convicted of a violation of this division (G) shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $250 for a first offense and of not more
than $500 dollars for a second or subsequent offense, or by imprisonment in the
county jail for a term not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Where a minor is found to have
violated division (G)(1) or (2) or both, the fine imposed by this section shall
be assessed against such minor’s parents or legal guardian.
      (6)   In addition to any punishment, the court shall order the defendant
to make restitution to the victim for damage or loss caused directly or
indirectly by the defendant’s offense in a reasonable amount or manner to be
determined by the court. Where the defendant is a minor, the court shall order
the parent or legal guardian of such minor to make such restitution.
      (7)   In addition to any punishment, the court may in its discretion
order the defendant to perform monitored community service.
      (8)   Whenever the city becomes aware of the existence of graffiti on an
property, including structures or improvements within the city, a code
enforcement officer is authorized, upon such discovery, to give or cause to be
given notice to remove or effectively obscure such graffiti to the property
owner, the property owner’s agent or manager, or other person in possession or
control of the property.
      (9)   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm owning the property,
acting as manager or agent for the owner of property, or in possession or
control of property to fail to remove or paint over in any aesthetically
acceptable manner any graffiti from such property within ten days from receipt
of the notice described in division (G)(8). If the person or firm owning such
property, acting as manager or agent for the owner of such property, or in
possession or control of such property fails to remove or effectively obscure
the graffiti within the time period enumerated above, the city shall cause the
graffiti to be removed or effectively obscured and charge the property owner,
or property owner’s manager or agent, for the expenses incurred by the city.
The city may sue in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover such expenses,
together with attorney’s fees and costs.
      (10)   Any person or firm owning property, acting as agent or manager for
the owner of such property, or in possession or control of such property who
commits a violation of division (G)(9) shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $500. In deciding the amount of fine to impose, the court shall consider
the efforts taken by the violator, if any, to remove or effectively obscure the
subject graffiti in a timely manner and how often the violator has been
victimized by graffiti during the preceding calendar year. The provisions of
this division (G)(10) shall not apply to a property owner, manager, agent, or
possessor of property if, in the sole determination of the City Manager or his
designee, such property owner, agent, manager, or possessor has been victimized
two or more times by graffiti within any calendar year, and, during such time,
has removed or effectively obscured such graffiti from the property in a timely
manner.
      (11)   There is hereby created the city Anti-Graffiti Trust Fund. Civil
penalties assessed against the violators of this section pursuant to the
procedures set forth in this section ultimately received by the city shall be
placed in the fund. The City Commission shall direct the expenditure of monies
in the fund. Such expenditures shall be limited to the payment of the cost of
removal of graffiti, the costs of administering this section, and such other
public purposes as may be approved by the City Commission by resolution.
   (H)   Schedule of civil penalties.
      (1)   First offense: $ 250
      (2)   Second offense: $500, and/or
      (3)   Imprisonment for not more than 60 days.
      (4)   Any victim who fails to remove or obscure graffiti within the time
period prescribed herein shall be fined not more than $500, to be determined at
the discretion of the City Manager or his designee.
      (5)   In addition to any punishment or fine, the court may, in its
discretion, order the defendant to perform monitored community service. (Ord.
2022-02, passed 6-15-22; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18- 24)
§ 155.550 LIMITATIONS OF USES.
   In the B-1, B-2, B-3 and PO zoning district all activities of permitted uses
including but not limited to sale, display, storage, preparation shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building unless otherwise stated here
within. (Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)ARTICLE 6: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 155.600 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   This subchapter is intended to provide standards that regulate the
physical layout and design of all development within the City of Pembroke
Pines. The provisions of this subchapter shall be in accordance with the
regulations set forth in this LDC.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall obstruct sight distance triangles,
fire hydrants, water valves, water meters, sewer clean-outs, trafficway signage
and utility maintenance to be performed by the city.
   (C)   No buildings, structures, or parts thereof, unless otherwise noted
within the provisions of this LDC shall encroach into any required setback.
   (D)   Planned development districts as defined in §§
155.450 through
155.456 may have standards which differ from those herein. Any deviations from
City Code must coincide with those district's design guidelines.
   (E)   Any use or structure not listed in this subchapter may go through the
interpretation process as outlined in §
155.301(L).
   (F)   The provisions of this subchapter include:
      (1)   Access, loading and parking;
      (2)   Accessory buildings and structures;
      (3)   Bufferyards and encroachment;
      (4)   Development design guidelines;
      (5)   Fences, walls and hedges;
      (6)   Landscaping;
      (7)   Lighting;
      (8)   Signs;
      (9)   Supplemental site development standards;
      (10)   Sustainability.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
ACCESS, LOADING AND PARKING
§ 155.601 GENERAL - ACCESS, LOADING AND PARKING.
   (A)   Purpose. This subchapter is intended to regulate the access,
circulation, loading and parking of all properties within the city.
   (B)   Applicability, The following provisions shall apply to residential and
nonresidential property unless otherwise specified herein.
   (C)   General standards.
      (1)   No land which is residentially-used shall be used as a driveway or
vehicular access for a nonresidential use.
      (2)   All vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats, special use,
or similar vehicle must be parked or stored on a paved surface as defined by §
155.203 of this LDC, unless parked or stored within a fenced area obstructed
from view. This section shall be supplemental to any other provision of this
Code.
      (3)   Uses not specifically listed. The requirements for off-street
parking for any uses not specifically listed in this subchapter shall be
determined by the Planning and Economic Development Department Director. The
applicant may seek an appeal or interpretation of the Director's determination
to the City's Planning and Zoning Board as outlined in §§
155.300 through
155.313.
      (4)   Additional loading, parking, or stacking plans and studies may be
required upon application submittal to the Planning and Economic Development
Department.
      (5)   Fractional measurements. When units or measurements determining
number of required off-street parking and loading spaces result in requirement
of fractional space, any fraction shall require a full off-street parking and
loading spaces.
      (6)   The placement of loading or parking shall not interfere with the
connectivity of the shopping center or community in which it is located. (Ord.
2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-
2021; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6- 18-24)
§ 155.602 ACCESS TO GATED COMMUNITIES FOR EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Access gates to gated communities shall be the types approved by the
Police and Fire Chiefs.
   (B)   Access gates shall be provided with a keypad and lockbox entry system
and shall be installed in an accessible location. If a coded system is to be
used, a coded number will be designated by the Fire Chief and Police Chief for
Fire and Police Department entry.
   (C)   All access gates must be designed to provide automatic entry for
police and fire apparatus through the resident entry lane(s) in the form of one
electronic remote activation system which shall be approved by the Police and
Fire Chiefs. Said access shall be provided at all entry points to the
community.
   (D)   All access gates shall be designed to unlock with a readily accessible
manual release devise.
   (E)   During a power failure, all access gates shall be designed to fail in
the open position.
   (F)   Gated communities that are staffed with security 24/7 are not exempt
from the requirements of this section. (Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought
to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21- 2021)
§ 155.603 GENERAL - OFF-STREET LOADING AND PARKING.
   (A)   Every building, use, or structure erected after the effective date of
this LDC shall be provided with off-street parking facilities in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter for the use of occupants, employees,
visitors, or patrons.
   (B)   These off-street parking facilities shall be maintained and continued
as an accessory use as long as the main use is continued.
   (C)   Parking facilities shall meet landscape requirements for parking areas
and parking islands in accordance with §§
155.661 through
155.663.
   (D)   Where a building existed at the effective date of this LDC, that
building may be modernized, altered, or repaired, provided there is no increase
in floor area or capacity and there is no change of occupancy, without
providing additional off-street parking facilities.
   (E)   Where a building or use, which existed at the effective date of this
LDC is enlarged in floor area, volume, capacity, or space occupied, off-street
parking facilities as specified herein shall be provided for the additional
floor area, volume, capacity, or space so created or occupied.
   (F)   Where a building or use which existed at the effective date of this
LDC is changed in use or occupancy, additional off-street parking facilities
shall be provided to meet the parking requirements of this subchapter.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of any building,
structure, or use affected by this LDC to discontinue, change, or dispense
with, or to cause the discontinuance or reduction of the required parking
facilities; apart from the discontinuance, sale, or transfer of that structure
or use; without establishing alternative vehicle parking facilities which meet
the requirements of this section.
   (H)   It is the intent of this subchapter to require all uses except
agricultural to provide off-street parking.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.604 IDENTIFICATION OF FACILITIES; REQUIRED SURFACE.
   (A)   The required off-street parking facilities shall be identified on the
plan submitted to the Planning and Economic Development Department.
   (B)   Off-street parking facilities including drive aisle and driveways
shall be surfaced with a hard, dustless material and maintained in a smooth,
well graded condition.
   (C)   The required parking shall be completely accessible by the public
during operating hours. Any parking areas not open to the public either behind
a gate, wall, fence, etc. will not count toward the required parking as
identified in this section.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.605 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The off-street parking required by this subchapter shall be provided
and maintained on the basis of the following minimum requirements:
Table 155.605 Minimum Parking Requirements
Use Category            Use Type                 Requirement
Residential
                        Dwelling - Mobile Home   2 spaces per unit (16 feet x
                                                 20 feet or 9 feet x 35 feet)
                                                 2 spaces per unit (1 or 2
                                                 bedroom)
                        Dwelling-Multi-Family    2.5 spaces per unit (3 or more
                                                 bedrooms)
                                                 2.5 guest parking spaces per
                                                 ten units
                        Dwelling - Single Family 2 spaces per unit (16 x 20
                                                 feet)
Residences                                       2 spaces per unit (16 x 20
                        Dwelling - Single-Family feet)
                        Zero Lot Line            2.5 guest parking spaces per
                                                 ten units
                        Dwelling - Two-Family    2 spaces per unit (20 feet x
                                                 20 feet)
                                                 2 spaces per unit (1 or 2
                                                 bedroom)
                        Dwelling-Town House      2.5 spaces per unit (3 or more
                                                 bedrooms)
                                                 2.5 guest parking spaces per
                                                 ten units
                        College Dormitory        1 space per bed
Group Living            Assisted Living Facility
                        or Special Residential   0.5 space per room
                        or Nursing Home
   Community Facilities/Government/Institutional
                        School - Elementary or   20% of "population"
                        Middle
Educational Facilities  School - High            30% of "population"
                        School - University or   35% of "population"
                        College
Government              Library                  5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Religious Institution   Religious Institution    8.5 spaces per 1,000 square
                        [1]                      feet
   Commercial
                        Car Wash - Manual        2 spaces per work station | §
                                                 155.508
Automotive, Boats,      Service Station          3.5 per 1,000 square feet |§
Equipment and Vehicle                            155.527
Sales and Service       Vehicle Rental and       3.5 per 1,000 square feet |§
                        Trailer Storage          155.529
                        Vehicle Sales            3.5 per 1,000 square feet |§
                                                 155.505
Animal Related          Veterinary Office        3.5 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                 feet
                        Office - Call Center     10 spaces per 1,000 square
Office and Professional                          feet
Services                Office - General         3.5 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                 feet
Daycare                 Adult Daycare            3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                        Day Care Center          3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Financial Services      Bank                     3.5 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                 feet
                        Banquet Hall             10 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                 feet
                        Night Club               20 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                 feet
Food and Beverage       Restaurant               10 spaces per 1,000 square
Service                                          feet
                        Restaurant or Outdoor    15 spaces per 1,000 square
                        Dining [2]               feet of customer service area
                        Food Production/Take Out 3.5 spaces per 1,000 square
                        (No Seating)             feet
                        Medical - General        5.75 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                 feet
                        Medical - Hospital       2.5 spaces per 1,000 square
Health Care Related;                             feet
Medical Office          Medical - Specialized    3.5 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                 feet
                        Freestanding Emergency   3.5 spaces per 1,000 square
                        Facility                 feet
Lodging, Visitor        Hotel or Motel (Limited  1 space per room
Accommodations          Service)
                        Hotel (Full Service)     1.25 spaces per room
                        Personal Services        3.5 spaces per 1,000 square
Personal Services                                feet
                        Mortuary or Funeral Home 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                        Amusement Center         5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                        Movie Theater -          1 space per 3 seats
                        Freestanding
                        Movie Theater - In Line  1 space per 5 seats
                        Bowling Alley            7 spaces per lane
Recreation and          Fitness Center/Gymnasium 7 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Entertainment           Specialized Gymnasium    5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                        Stadium or Arena         1 space for every 3 seats
                        Outdoor Recreational     Varies
                        Facility [3]
                        Racquet and Paddle       3 spaces per court
                        Courts
                        General                  3.5 spaces for every 1,000
Retail                                           square feet
                        Home Improvement Center  3 spaces for every 1,000
                        and Furniture Sales      square feet
                        Instructional Services   3.5 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                 feet
Other                   Place of Assembly        5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                        Self-Storage             0.5 spaces for every 1,000
                                                 square feet
   Industrial
Manufacturing and       Manufacturing            1.5 spaces per 1,000 square
Production                                       feet
Storage and Warehousing Warehouse or Wholesale   1 space per 1,000 square feet
   Other
                        Airport - Hangar         1 space per hangar (up to 50%
Miscellaneous                                    interior)
                        Airport - Tie Down       1 space per every 5 tie-downs
[1]   Up to 50% of the required parking maybe surfaced with grass or lawn.
[2]   This requirement shall apply to outdoor dining that is located within the
footprint of the principal building.
[3]   Open lot recreational use parking requirements shall be determined by the
Planning and Economic Development Director or Designee and such requirements
shall be based on the number of people that can reasonably be expected to be on
such premises at one time.
 
      (1)   Other uses not specifically mentioned above shall meet the off-
street parking requirements of the uses listed above which are similar or
compatible as determined by the Planning and Economic Development Director or
Designee.
      (2)   Staff may request a parking study for uses that do not have a
similar or compatible use as determined by the Planning and Economic
Development Director or Designee.
      (3)   Mixed uses. In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for
off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses
computed separately, and off-street parking space for one use shall not be
considered as providing the required off-street parking for any other use.
      (4)   Measurement. For the purpose of this LDC, calculation for parking
is measured from the interior walls of the space.
      (5)   Measurement for outdoor dining. Applicants proposing outdoor dining
shall provide the Planning and Economic Development Department an outdoor
dining plan in accordance with § 155.519. Upon review, dimensions of the area
will be determined.
      (6)   Combined off-street parking. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prevent collective provision for, or joint use of, off-street
parking facilities for two or more buildings, adjacent parcels or uses by two
or more owners or operations, excluding outparcels. However, the total of those
parking spaces when combined or used together shall not be less than the sum of
the requirements of the several individual uses computed separately in
accordance with this subchapter.
      (7)   Off-street parking for nonconforming use. In the case of a building
occupied by a use which is not permitted as a new use in the district in which
the building is located, major repairs, substantial alterations, or extensions
of use shall be permitted unless and until the off-street parking requirements
of this subchapter for a new use of the type involved are applied to existing
use and are fully provided for.
      (8)   Parking of commercial vehicles. Off-street parking facilities
supplied by the owner or operator to meet the requirements of this subchapter
shall not be used by commercial vehicles owned, operated, or used in the
business of the owner or operator during regular hours of business. (Ord. 2021-
02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021;
Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.606 PARKING SPACE DIMENSIONS.
   (A)   Each parking space required and provided pursuant to the provisions of
this Code shall be scaled accordingly and shall contain a minimum of nine feet
in width.
   (B)   Standard parking spaces must adhere to one of the following consistent
with the city's engineering standard which may be amended from time to time (as
maintained by the City Engineer).
   (C)   Each parking space shall be directly accessible from a street or
alley, or from an adequate aisle or driveway leading to a street or alley.
Drive aisle and driveways shall be of sufficient size to permit convenient
maneuvering of cars, and each space shall be accessible without driving over or
through any other parking space.
   (D)   If provided bollards shall be placed 0.75 feet from the parking space
and five feet separation between. Bollards shall be six inches in diameter made
of steel with reflectorized safety paint or other approved sleeve or cover.
   (E)   Parking Space Dimensional Chart.
Table 155.606: Parking Space Dimensions
Parking Type Requirements
Table 155.606: Parking Space Dimensions
Parking Type             Requirements
                         Dimensions              Specific Regulations
                                                 Includes a wheel stop placed 3
                         9 by 19 feet            feet from curb or edge of
                                                 pavement.
                                                 Includes bollards placed 0.75
                                                 feet from the parking space
                                                 and 5 feet separation between.
Standard Vehicle         9 by 19 feet            Bollards shall be 6 inches in
                                                 diameter made of steel with
                                                 reflectorized safety paint or
                                                 other approved sleeve or
                                                 cover.
                                                 [1] Additional 3 foot overhang
                         9 by 16 feet            using a "D" curb, no wheel
                                                 stops.
Parallel                 9 by 25 feet            N/A
Angled Parking (varying) 10' in width by varying N/A
                         length
Motorcycle               4 by 9 feet             N/A
[1]   Any pervious areas adjacent or perpendicular to any parking space does
not count toward the landscape requirements.
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.607 BICYCLE PARKING FACILITY REQUIRED.
   Intent. The bicycle parking requirements established in this section are
intended to encourage the use of bicycles as a means of transportation in the
city. By encouraging the use of bicycles, the public health, safety and welfare
will be furthered through improved air quality, reduced energy consumption, and
more efficient use of vehicular parking facilities. Bicycle parking facilities
shall be installed and maintained by the property owner and are subject to the
following provisions:
   (A)   Location. All bicycle parking facilities provided to satisfy the
requirements of this section shall be located on the same lot or building site
as the uses they serve. Bicycle parking shall be distributed evenly throughout
the site and located as close as is practical to the entrance the parking is
intended to serve, as determined by staff. Bicycle parking shall be situated so
as not to obstruct the flow of pedestrians using the building entrance or
sidewalk.
   (B)   Design.
      (1)   All bicycle parking facilities shall be permanently fixed.
      (2)   Covered bicycle parking facilities shall be encouraged where
feasible.
   (C)   Amount required.
      (1)   Nonresidential: Bicycle parking shall be provided at one space per
10,000 square feet of commercial area up to 20 spaces.
      (2)   Multi-family: Bicycle parking shall be provided at one space per
five units of up to 20 spaces. A minimum of two spaces shall be provided.
   (D)   Exemption. When determined by Planning and Economic Development
Director that the proposed development is not conducive to bicycle parking, the
Planning and Economic Development Director may grant an exemption from the
provision of this division.
   (E)   Fractional measurements. When units or measurements determining number
of required bicycle parking spaces result in requirement of fractional space,
any fraction shall require a full bicycle space.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.608 SHORT-TERM PARKING.
   Short-term parking may be permitted within multi-tenant nonresidential
shopping centers. Short-term parking spaces shall be approved via the
administrative review process as outlined in § 155.301(C). Short-term parking
spaces shall be subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   All short-term parking spaces are deemed exclusive and will only be
permitted when a parking surplus exists on the property.
   (B)   All short-term parking must meet minimum design standards of §
155.606.
   (C)   Short-term parking must not impede normal traffic flow nor interfere
with the operations of emergency equipment.
   (D)   Outparcel buildings and freestanding buildings:
      (1)   Less than 10,000 square feet may be permitted a maximum of three
short-term parking spaces.
      (2)   Between 10,000 square feet and 20,000 square feet may be permitted
a maximum of five short-term parking spaces.
      (3)   More than 20,000 square feet may be permitted a maximum of ten
short-term parking spaces.
   (E)   Office parks or industrial parks may be allotted up to 2% of the total
parking on site to be used for short-term parking space.
   (F)   Tenants within multi-tenant shopping centers:
      (1)   Less than 10,000 square feet may be permitted a maximum of three
short-term parking spaces.
      (2)   Between 10,000 square feet and 20,000 square feet may be permitted
a maximum of five short-term parking spaces.
      (3)   More than 20,000 square feet may be permitted a maximum of ten
short-term parking spaces.
   (G)   Location of short-term parking shall not limit or restrict reasonable
access to the tenant bays and shall be subject to the review and approval by
the Planning and Economic Development Department. (Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-
21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02,
passed 6-15-22; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.609 NON-CONCURRENT PARKING.
   (A)   If there is not sufficient parking within a shopping center per Code
requirements to accommodate a proposed use, the applicant may submit a non-
concurrent parking plan. The plan shall indicate that the amount of parking
require based on the hours of operation for all tenants does not exceed the
supplied parking at any time.
   (B)   Non-concurrent parking agreements shall be reviewed via the
administrative review process as outlined in §§
155.300 through
155.313.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.610 OFF-STREET LOADING.
   (A)   On the same lot with every structure or use hereafter erected or
created, there shall be provided and maintained adequate space for loading and
unloading of materials, goods, or things, and for delivery and shipping; so
that vehicles for these services may use this space without encroaching on or
interfering with the public use of streets and alleys by pedestrians and
vehicles.
   (B)   Off-street loading spaces shall be provided and maintained in
accordance with the following schedule:
Table 155.610: Off-Street Loading Space Requirements
Use Gross Floor Area or Dwelling Units Minimum Number of Off-Street Spaces
Table 155.610: Off-Street Loading Space Requirements
Use                       Gross Floor Area or        Minimum Number of Off-
                          Dwelling Units             Street Spaces
Residential
                          50 - 100 dwelling units    1 space
Dwelling - Multi-Family                              1 space; plus 1 space per
                          Over 100 dwelling units    each additional 100
                                                     dwelling units
Commercial/Industrial/Community Facilities
                          Over 10,000 square feet to 1 space
                          25,000 square feet
Retail Store, Storage     Over 25,000 square feet to 2 spaces
Warehouse, Wholesale,     60,000 square feet
Industrial Plant;         Over 60,000 square feet to 3 spaces
Factory, Freight          120,000 square feet
Terminal, Market,         Over 120,000 square feet   4 spaces
Restaurant, Mortuary,     to 200,000 square feet
Laundry, Dry Cleaning, or Over 200,000 square feet   5 spaces
similar                   to 290,000 square feet
                                                     5 spaces; plus 1 space per
                          Over 290,000 square feet   each additional 90,000
                                                     square feet
Auditorium, Convention    Over 20,000 square feet to 1 space
Hall, Exhibition Hall,    40,000 square feet
Museum, Hotel, Office                                1 space; plus 1 space per
Building, Sports Area,    Over 40,000 square feet    each additional 60,000
Stadium, Hospital, or                                square feet
similar
 
   (C)   Where any structure is enlarged or any use is extended so that the
size of the resulting occupancy comes within the scope of this section, the
full amount of off-street loading space shall be supplied and maintained for
the structure or use in its enlarged or extended size. Where the use of a
structure or land or any part thereof is changed to a use requiring off-street
loading space under this section, the full amount of off- street loading space
shall be supplied and maintained to comply with this section.
   (D)   For the purposes of this section, an off-street loading space shall be
an area at the grade level at least ten feet wide by 25 feet long, with 14-foot
vertical clearance. Each off-street loading space shall be directly accessible
from a street alley without crossing or entering any other required off-street
loading space, and arranged for convenient and safe ingress and egress by motor
truck or trailer combination. The loading space shall also be accessible from
the interior of any building it is intended to serve.
   (E)   Off-street loading facilities supplied to meet the needs of one use
shall not be considered as meeting off-street loading needs of any other use.
   (F)   No area or facilities supplied to meet the required off-street parking
facilities for a use shall be utilized for or be deemed to meet the
requirements of this subchapter for off-street loading facilities.
   (G)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the collective, joint, or
combined provision of off-street loading facilities for two or more buildings
or uses, provided that the off-street loading facilities are equal in size and
capacity to the combined requirements of the several buildings or uses and are
so located and arranged as to be usable thereby.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.611 DRIVE-THRU STACKING SPACES.
   Drive-thru facilities shall comply with the following regulations:
   (A)   Inbound vehicles spaces shall be counted from the first stopping
point, such as a menu board.
   (B)   Outbound vehicle spaces shall be counted from the last vehicle
stopping points, such as the service window.
   (C)   Vehicle stacking lanes shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and 20 feet
in length per required vehicle.
   (D)   Vehicle stacking space shall not encroach upon main vehicle drive
aisle or block adjacent parking spaces and pedestrian walkways.
   (E)   Stacking lanes and their circulation shall include escape lanes at
logical and functional locations for drive-thru uses.
   (F)   Escape lanes may be provided before the ordering station/menu board
where possible dependent upon the site layout.
   (G)   Drive-thru facilities and automatic carwash facilities must provide
inbound and outbound stacking spaces as follows. If a drive-thru property does
not meet one of the categories below, then a stacking study shall be required
to be performed by the applicant and reviewed by the City Engineer for
conformity with this LDC and the city engineering standards.
Table 155.611: Minimum Drive-Thru Stacking Spaces
Type of Facility (Per Lane) Inbound Vehicle Spaces Outbound Vehicle Spaces
Table 155.611: Minimum Drive-Thru Stacking Spaces
Type of Facility (Per Lane) Inbound Vehicle Spaces Outbound Vehicle Spaces
Bank                        3                      1
Beverage / Food             5                      2
Car Wash Automatic as an    8                      3
Accessory
Car Wash Automatic with     18                     5
Attendant
Laundry                     3                      1
Pharmacy                    2                      1
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.612 VALET PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any applicant proposing valet parking shall describe the specific
storage areas for valet vehicles for each proposed and/or existing use, shall
undergo the development review process in accordance with §§
155.300 through
155.313. All parking for the storage of valet vehicles must be in excess of
required parking for the property served by the valet parking. The Planning and
Zoning Board shall make a determination on whether or not the location for the
storage of vehicles interferes or impedes with the use of the parking lot for
the customers, employees or owners of the other businesses in the center.
   (B)   The property owner must provide a valet parking plan to identify the
following:
      (1)   An operations plan.
      (2)   Location of parking exclusively reserved for valet use.
      (3)   Valet loading zones.
      (4)   Valet queuing spaces.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.613 COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PARKING.
   (A)   Parking of commercial vehicles; exceptions. No person shall park,
cause to be parked, or allow to be parked upon property owned or under the
control of that person, or in the streets, alleys, or parkways of the city, any
commercial vehicle or trailers having a length greater than 30 feet measured
from the hitch to the rear of the trailer, tractor trailers, tow trucks, trucks
having a box cabinet, a platform, a rack, a lifting device, a ladder or bucket
or aerial device, a refrigerated box, a utility bed, or having any other
equipment for the purpose of carrying goods other than personal effects of
passengers or performing any work of a commercial nature. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Public safety vehicles.
      (2)   Agricultural or industrial zoning districts.
      (3)   Private property, whereon construction is under way, for which a
current and valid building permit has been issued by the city as to those
vehicles actively engaged in the construction.
      (4)   Those persons performing lawful and authorized work upon the
premises where the vehicle is parked.
      (5)   Personal motor vehicles in residential neighborhoods outside of
enclosed carports and garages.
      (6)   Any vehicle that is parked entirely inside a garage or is parked in
a carport, where no part of the vehicle extends outside the roofline of the
carport.
      (7)   Any vehicle that is concealed by a fitted opaque vehicle cover on a
permitted paved surface. The vehicle cover must be in good condition, with no
rips or tears and no signs of weathering or deterioration. This shall not apply
to commercial vehicles exceeding ten feet in height.
      (8)   Any vehicle that is parked behind a fully opaque permitted fence
within the side setback of the lot. This shall not apply to commercial vehicles
exceeding ten feet in height.
      (9)   Any vehicles with commercial copy or lettering that is concealed
and no exposed equipment.
   (B)   Temporary parking. Nothing herein is to prohibit the reasonable
parking and use of any vehicle or equipment at a location while performing
lawful and authorized work, public or private, at the location, including:
      (1)   Tradesman performing service work or making deliveries of
merchandise.
      (2)   Public utility service work.
      (3)   Temporary parking for the purpose of and while actually loading; or
unloading of a vehicle in preparation for or upon return from the use of that
vehicle; providing, however, that any vehicle so parked shall be kept in the
driveway where possible.
   (C)   Permitted nonresidential uses. Permitted nonresidential uses may
utilize and park on their premises such commercial or other vehicles as may be
necessary and customary for those uses, but this provision shall not be
construed to permit the parking or storage of school buses for private or
parochial schools.
   (D)   Non-accessory commercial vehicles. Commercial vehicles, other than
those accessory to a permitted use, shall not be parked or stored in any
property located in a B-1, B-2, or B-3 District. A lot occupied as a service
station may have stored thereon not over three non-accessory commercial
vehicles, bearing a valid state commercial vehicle license, or which would
require such a license plate if licensed in the state, except commercial
vehicles which would require a state non-GW license.
   (E)   Parking of commercial vehicles, trucks, or trailers prohibited by this
section on the street is prohibited, unless the vehicle is necessary to provide
service to an adjacent property and such service is actively being performed,
or the vehicle is being actively loaded or unloaded. Violators may be issued a
parking citation pursuant to Ch. 70, of the City of Pembroke Pines Code of
Ordinances. (Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered,
Commission passed 4-21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6- 18-24)
§ 155.614 ELECTRIC VEHICLE PARKING.
   Regulation of electric vehicle charging stations is preempted to the state
pursuant to F.S. § 366.94. (Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22;
Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.615 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES - PARKING.
   The following regulations shall apply to recreational vehicles, special
purpose vehicles, boats, and utility trailers:
   (A)   No recreational vehicle, special purpose vehicles, or utility trailer
exceeding ten feet in height from grade shall be permitted to be parked or
stored on residentially zoned property.
   (B)   No boat inclusive of the trailer in which is stored on exceeding 14
feet in height from grade shall be permitted to be parked or stored on
residentially zoned property.
   (C)   No special purpose vehicles shall be permitted to be parked or stored
in residentially zoned property except in an enclosed garage.
   (D)   No more than one recreational vehicle, one boat, and one utility
trailer shall be parked or stored upon residentially zoned property. A boat
adjoined to a boat trailer, or structure designed to be mounted upon or carried
by another vehicle, when so mounted, shall be considered one unit for the
purpose of this section.
   (E)   All recreational vehicles, boats, and utility trailers shall be parked
or stored in the side or rear setbacks of residentially zoned property whenever
possible. It shall be considered impossible to park or store the recreational
vehicles, boats, or utility trailers in the side or rear setbacks if to do so
would require encroachment upon the property of adjacent owners.
   (F)   In the event it shall be impossible to park or store a recreational
vehicle, boat, or utility trailer in the side or rear setbacks, then said
recreational vehicle, boat, or utility trailer may be parked or stored on the
driveway, not less than seven feet from the front property line.
   (G)   In the event a recreational vehicle, boat, or utility trailer cannot
be parked or stored on the driveway as provided in division (E) of this
section, then the recreational vehicle, boat, or utility trailer may be parked
or stored in the front setback, parallel to the main structure, provided it is
parked or stored on a paved surface and that no part of the recreational
vehicle, boat, or utility trailer may extend beyond the paved surface. In no
event shall any such vehicle be permitted to be parked in the swale.
   (H)   No separate unit intended to be mounted upon a truck for the purpose
of converting that truck into a recreational vehicle shall be stored in the
front setback of residentially zoned property.
   (I)   All vehicles herein permitted shall have affixed thereto a currently
valid license tag registered to the vehicle; shall be parked or stored with
wheels and tires mounted; and shall be maintained in a movable condition.
   (J)   No recreational vehicle, boat, or structure designed to be mounted
upon and carried by another vehicle shall be used as an accessory building;
occupied in any manner; or connected to any utility or electrical service,
except as necessary to repair or maintain that vehicle, boat, or structure.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3- 17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed
4-21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
§ 155.620 GENERAL - ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Purpose. This subchapter is intended to regulate the location, height,
and appearance of accessory buildings and structures.
   (B)   Applicability. Accessory buildings and structures as outlined in the
provisions of this subchapter shall include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Accessory buildings, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Sheds;
         (b)   Private detached garages;
         (c)   Storage containers;
         (d)   Accessory dwelling units.
      (2)   Free standing open sided structures, which may be permanent or
temporary, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Gazebos;
         (b)   Trellises;
         (c)   Chickee huts;
         (d)   Pergolas;
         (e)   Canopies.
      (3)   Pools.
      (4)   Residential driveways.
      (5)   Walkways.
      (6)   Decks and patios.
      (7)   Docks.
      (8)   House trailers.
      (9)   Screen enclosures.
      (10)   Portable storage units.
      (11)   Sculptures and statues.
      (12)   Fences and walls, reference §
155.655.
      (13)   Artificial turf.
   (C)   General standards.
      (1)   Unless otherwise noted herein, a residential lot may have one of
each of the following accessory buildings and structures:
         (a)   Shed;
         (b)   Private detached garages;
         (c)   Free standing open sided structures;
         (d)   Accessory dwelling unit.
      (2)   Lot coverage. Accessory buildings and structures constructed, with
solid roofs, in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter shall be
subject to the lot coverage standards of the zoning district in which the
structure is located.
      (3)   Accessory Buildings and Structures Table.
Table 155.620 Accessory Building and Structures
      Setback                                                       Additional
 Type Front Side Street Side Rear Maximum Height Maximum Dimensions Regulations
Table 155.620 Accessory Building and Structures
                   Setback                                Maximum   Maximum    Additional
       Type        Front    Side     Street Side Rear     Height    Dimensions Regulations

                                                          Primary   Minimum
                                                          Building  300 square
       Accessory   Primary  Primary  Primary     Primary  or 24     feet.      §
       Dwelling    Building Building Building    Building feet,     Maximum    155.621
       Unit (ADU)                                         whichever 1,000      (A)(7)
                                                          is less   square
                                                                    feet
                                                                    [1] 100
                                                          Primary   square     [2] If over
                                                          Building  feet       200 square
       Shed        Primary  5 feet   15 feet     5 feet   or 24     [2] 200    feet it shall
                   Building                               feet,     square     meet primary
                                                          whichever feet if    building
Access                                                    is less   located in setbacks
ory                                                                 A or R-E.
Buildi                                                                         [1] Shall not
ngs                                                                            be
                                                                               prefabricated
                                                          Primary   Not to     [2] 8 foot
                                                          Building  exceed the wide garage
       Private     Primary                                or 24     size of    door required
       Detached    Building 5 feet   15 feet     5 feet   feet,     the        [3] 15 feet
       Garage                                             whichever primary    minimum width
                                                          is less   building.  required for
                                                                               vehicular
                                                                               access and
                                                                               connection to
                                                                               the roadway.
       Portable    In       In                                      130 square §
       Storage     Driveway Driveway In Driveway N/A      10 feet   feet       155.625
       Unit
Access Struct ures
ory    for Livest                                                        §
Struct ock and                                                                 155.510
ures   Poultr y
                                                                               When located
                                                                               in A or R-
                                                          Primary              E it may
       Open Sided                                         Building             exceed 200
       Structure   Primary  5 feet   15 feet     5 feet   or 24     200 square square feet
       (Free Stand Building                               feet,     feet       and shall
       ing)                                               whichever            meet the set-
                                                          is less              backs of the
                                                                               primary
                                                                               building
       Non-Roofed  Primary                                Primary
       Structure   Building 5 feet   15 feet     5 feet   Building  N/A        N/A
       (attached)
                   Primar y 5 feet   15 feet to  5 feet
       Pool        Buildi   to Wate  Water line  to Wate  N/A       N/A        N/A
                   ng       r- line              r- line
       Pool,       Primary  2 feet   15 feet     2 feet   N/A       N/A        N/A
Access Therapeutic Building
ory                                                                            [1] Shall
Struct                                                                         includ e 5
ures                                                                40% lot    foot radius
       Driveway,                     15 feet §                     coverage.  between
       Circular*   0 feet   5 feet   155.600     N/A      N/A       40% width  driveway and
                                     (B)                            of lot     lot line.
                                                                               [2] 10 foot
                                                                               minimu m
                                                                               width
                                                                    40% front
       Driveway,                     15 feet §                     lot        [1] 10 foot
       Typical Lot 0 feet   5 feet   155.600     N/A      N/A       coverage   minimum width
                                     (B)                            40% width
                                                                    of lot
                            0 on the
                            zero                                    40% front
       Driveway,            side , 5 15 feet §                     lot        [1] 10 feet
       Zero Lot    0 feet   feet on  155.600 (B) N/A      N/A       coverage   wide minimum
       Line*                the non-                                40% width
                            zero                                    of lot
                            side
       Walkway                                                                 If over 3
       (Single                                                      3 feet in  feet in width
       Family      N/A      2 feet   5 feet      5 feet   N/A       width      a 5 foot side
       Lots)                                                                   setback is
                                                                               required
       Deck or     Primary  5 feet   5 feet      5 feet   N/A       N/A        N/A
       Patio*      Building
       Artificial  Primary                                                     §
       Turf*       Building 5 feet   5 feet      5 feet   N/A       N/A        155.621
                                                                               (A)(7)
       Screen      Primary  5 feet   15 feet     5 feet   Primary   N/A        N/A
       Enclosure   Building                               Building
       Roofed      Primary  Primary  Primary     Primary  Primary
       Structure   Building Building Building    Building Building  N/A        N/A
       (attac hed)
                                                                    Scale to
       Sculpture   Primary  Primary  Primary     Primary  Primary   be         §
       or Statue   Building Building Building    Building Building  determined 155.626
                                                                    upon
                                                                    review
       Liquef ied
       Petrol eum  Primary
       (LP) Tanks  Building 5 feet   15 feet     5 feet   N/A       N/A        N/A
       (above
       ground )
*   Structures at grade shall not encroach greater than two feet into the seven-foot
easement on a zero lot line property.
 
   (D)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Section 102.2(H) of the Florida Building Code waives the building
permit requirements for Chickee Huts constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of
Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. All Chickee Huts
constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe
of Florida.
      (2)   Chickee Huts shall comply with the setbacks, height, and dimensions
of free-standing open-sided structures in Table 155.620. (Ord. 2021-02, adopted
3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-
02, passed 6-15-22; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.621 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   The following regulations are supplemental to the standards identified in §
155.620.
   (A)   Residential districts.
      (1)   Accessory buildings and structures located within the R-MH District
shall be located at least four feet from any side lot line, and at least five
feet from any rear lot line.
      (2)   For waterfront lots located within developments approved under the
design criteria of R-1Z single-family zoning districts, accessory structures at
grade shall be allowed to extend to the zero setback side property line,
excluding structures with a roof.
      (3)   Structures with roofs may extend to the zero setback side property
line if a six foot high concrete block privacy wall is installed along the
entire length of the accessory structure.
      (4)   Pool barriers.
         (a)   Swimming pool barriers shall be permanently affixed.
         (b)   Swimming pool safety barriers shall include either a screened
enclosure, a fence, a concrete block wall, a body of water or other barrier.
         (c)   Physical pool barriers shall be no less than four feet in
height.
         (d)   The safety barrier shall be erected either around the swimming
pool or around the premises on which the swimming pool is located. In either
event, it shall enclose the area entirely, prohibiting unrestrained admittance
to the enclosed area.
         (e)   Gates shall be self-locking and comply with §
155.655.
         (f)   Safety barriers shall meet all applicable state statutes and
building codes as amended from time to time.
      (5)   Decks that are connected to a dock shall be permitted within the
rear setback, however, the portion of the deck within the rear setback shall
not exceed width of the dock.
      (6)   Artificial turf.
         (a)   Artificial turf shall consist of green lifelike individual
blades of grass that emulate natural turf in look and color.
         (b)   All artificial turf shall, at a minimum, be installed according
to the manufacturer's specifications.
         (c)   All artificial turf installations shall be anchored to ensure
that the turf will withstand the effects of wind.
         (d)   All seams shall be secured and edges shall be trimmed to fit
against all regular and irregular edges to resemble a natural look.
         (e)   Proper drainage shall be provided for all artificial turf
installations to prevent excess runoff or pooling of water.
         (f)   All artificial turf shall be maintained in a green fadeless
condition and shall be maintained free of dirt, mud, stains, weeds, debris,
tears, holes, and impressions. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to
cleaning, brushing, debris removal; repairing of depressions and ruts to
maintain a visually-level surface; elimination of any odors, flat or matted
areas, weeds, and invasive roots; and all edges of the artificial turf shall
not be loose and must be maintained with appropriate edging or stakes.
         (g)   All artificial turf must be replaced if it falls into disrepair
with fading or holes or loose areas. Replacement and/or repairs shall be
performed utilizing like materials from the same manufacturer and installed so
in a manner that results in a repair that blends in with the existing
artificial turf.
         (h)   Artificial turf may be located within the front setback when
incorporated as an accent into a driveway.
      (7)   Accessory dwelling unit (ADU).
         (a)   Purpose: Accessory dwelling units are a recognized element of
our neighborhoods and provide a variety of housing types. The following
standards allow the continuation and establishment of this housing type in a
manner consistent with the surrounding development. The provisions of this
section do not override any deed restriction or homeowners' association
declarations restricting accessory dwelling units; however the city has no
authority to enforce such restrictions.
         (b)   Applicability: Establishment or expansion of a lawful accessory
dwelling unit shall be subject to the following requirements:
            1.   An accessory dwelling unit is permitted only as accessory to,
and on the same lot as, a single-family dwelling, and are not permitted as
accessory to a two-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling, or mobile home
dwelling.
            2.   Not more than one accessory dwelling unit per lot is
permitted.
            3.   An accessory dwelling unit may be within or attached to the
principal dwelling (e.g., a downstairs apartment), or exist within or as a
detached structure (e.g., an apartment above a detached garage or a
guesthouse). An accessory dwelling unit attached to the principal dwelling
shall have an operative interconnecting door with the principal dwelling and
shall have principal access only from the side or rear yard of the principal
dwelling.
            4.   The use of a mobile home, recreational vehicle, or a similar
vehicle as an accessory dwelling unit is prohibited.
            5.   An accessory dwelling unit shall not be permitted before
construction of the principal building has commenced or a lawful principal use
is established.
            6.   An accessory dwelling unit shall be subordinate to the
principal use with respect to building height, building area, and building
coverage.
            7.   An accessory dwelling unit shall not be permitted on
properties which are serviced by septic.
         (c)   Lot requirements: Establishment of a new accessory dwelling unit
shall only be allowed if:
            1.   The lot complies with the current minimum lot area
requirements for the zoning district and remains under common ownership.
            2.   A lot containing an accessory dwelling unit shall not be
subdivided to separate the accessory dwelling unit from the principal use,
unless such division can meet all applicable standards of the zoning district
and land development regulations.
         (d)   Building requirements.
            1.   The floor area of any accessory dwelling unit shall not be
less than 300 square feet or exceed 1,000 square feet in area, and all areas
under roof must be less than the floor area of the principal dwelling unit. For
detached accessory dwelling units, this limit shall apply to the combined
square footages of the accessory dwelling unit and any accessory living space
within the same building, including any areas used for storage, bathrooms, or
shared laundry facilities (excluding any enclosed parking spaces).
            2.   An ADU shall operate as a fully functional residence, complete
with kitchen, bathroom, and living and/or bedroom quarters.
            3.   A paved walkway at least two feet in width shall connect the
main entrance of the accessory dwelling unit with the off-street parking
spaces.
            4.   The building containing an accessory dwelling unit shall be
compatible with the style of the building containing the principal use,
including finishes, roof pitch, and paint scheme.
            5.   Where an attached garage on the front façade of a structure is
converted to an accessory dwelling unit, the garage door shall be removed, and
the enclosure must be architecturally compatible with the style of the building
including finishes and color scheme.
            6.   All accessory dwelling units shall be permitted and comply
with the Florida Building Code.
         (e)   Parking and accessibility. Accessory dwelling units shall be
subject to the following parking standards:
            1.   One paved off-street parking space shall be required on the
lot for the accessory dwelling unit. This space shall be in addition to the
required parking required for the principal building. For purposes of this
section, paved shall be defined as concrete, pavers, or asphalt.
            2.   Required off-street parking spaces must be provided within a
paved driveway and be located entirely on the property.
   (B)   Nonresidential zoning districts.
      (1)   Accessory buildings and structures as outlined in this subchapter
shall meet the setbacks of the district in which they are located.
      (2)   Accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed the height or
size of the primary building. (Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.622 DOCKS.
   Docks may be permitted in any residential district on any waterway as an
accessory use to a residential use. The following standards shall apply to
docks:
   (A)   No boat landing, dock, pier, or mooring pile shall be constructed on a
parcel of land which abuts or adjoins a body of water, the width of which body
of water is less than 100 feet between the mean water's edge when measured
perpendicular to the lot at any point of construction.
   (B)   No boat landing, dock, pier, or mooring pile shall be constructed on a
lot which abuts or adjoins a body of water so that it extends as follows:
      (1)   Into the body of water more than 10% of the width of the body of
water, when the width of the body of water is measured between the mean water's
edge perpendicular to the lot at any point of construction.
      (2)   More than 20 feet beyond the mean water's edge, whichever of one or
two is more restrictive and provides for the smaller dock.
   (C)   No boat landing, dock, pier, or mooring pile shall be more than 20
feet in width, running parallel to the shore line, and in no case shall the
total area of the dock exceed 300 square feet, nor shall the dock be at an
elevation higher than 6.0 NGVD.
   (D)   No boat landing, dock, pier, or mooring pile shall be constructed
without a permanent connection to the land.
   (E)   No more than one dock shall be erected on any lot or adjacent thereto.
On lots having more than one building, no more than one dock shall be erected
for each building fronting on a waterway.
   (F)   No boat landing, dock, pier, or mooring pile shall be constructed so
as to encroach upon the side setback.
   (G)   No cover shall be permitted to be erected in connection with a boat
landing, dock, pier, or mooring pile.
   (H)   No ramps for boats or aircraft shall be constructed on any residential
lot.
   (I)   Approval must be obtained from applicable drainage districts for docks
located in a maintenance or drainage easement.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.623 TRASH AND RECYCLING FACILITIES.
   (A)   The provisions of this section are subject to the development review
process outlined in §§
155.300 through
155.313.
   (B)   All dumpsters, trash containers, and contents thereof shall be stored
or concealed by means of fences, walls or opaque landscaping so as not to be
visible from any street or adjoining lot.
   (C)   All screening methods shall be finished to match surrounding
construction or landscape.
   (D)   Dumpsters: Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage
and trash removal when individual collection or indoor storage is not provided.
All areas or receptacles for the storage and disposal of trash, garbage, or
vegetation, such as dumpsters and trash compactors, shall meet the following
standards. These provisions shall not apply to litter containers provided for
convenience of pedestrians.
      (1)   Access. Access to indoor or outdoor collection stations shall be
such that the removal vehicle need not make unnecessary turning or backing
movements.
      (2)   Distance. When required, dumpsters shall be provided within 250
feet from the main entrance (or center of the building, if appropriate) of each
principal building.
      (3)   Setback. The minimum setback for dumpsters from other residential
property lines shall be 25 feet.
      (4)   Screening. All dumpsters or receptacles for the storage and
disposal of trash or garbage shall be screened by a solid opaque enclosure
constructed of brick, concrete, concrete block, or other material, consistent
with the architectural character of the development or principal building. The
open end of the enclosure shall have an opaque gate. All exterior sides of such
enclosure, except the open end, shall be landscaped with shrub material, a
minimum of 24 inches in height, spaced 24 inches on center at planting, or an
alternative acceptable to the Planning and Zoning Board.
      (5)   Alternative methods of solid waste collection, such as centrally
located compactors, trash collection at each door or unit, or trash chutes with
enclosed dumpsters and roll out pads, may be substituted for dumpsters subject
to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Board.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.624 HOUSE TRAILERS.
   (A)   A house trailer shall not be a permitted accessory dwelling unit.
   (B)   No person shall park, store, or occupy a house trailer for living
purposes except:
      (1)   On a parcel of land, not less than ten acres in area, which is
zoned agricultural, and which is used for the growing of fruit, vegetables,
produce, sod, or crops, and where the use of the house trailer is accessory to
the agricultural use.
      (2)   For a period not in excess of six months, on property for which a
building permit for the construction of a permanent dwelling has been obtained,
which construction is actively carried forward to completion within the
aforesaid six months.
      (3)   On property which is zoned R-MH, a house trailer may be occupied as
a single-family dwelling, provided the lot conforms to all of the requirements
of §
155.423.
   (C)   A house trailer may be used as a temporary office or shelter
incidental to construction on, or development of, the premises on which the
trailer is located.
   (D)   Except as provided herein, no house trailer shall be parked or stored
on residentially zoned property, except in a private detached garage or other
accessory building.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.625 PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS.
   (A)   Location of portable storage units.
      (1)   Portable storage units may be temporarily located in single-family
zoning districts so long as they shall be placed only in the driveway, are not
located in the right-of-way and do not obstruct the sidewalk.
      (2)   Portable storage units may be allowed in multi-family zoning
districts only upon the applicant demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the
city, that the specific location and site has sufficient space to place a
portable storage unit and continue to provide adequate parking, public safety
access and comply with all health, safety and welfare concerns.
      (3)   Sites in residential zoning districts are governed by the
provisions of this LDC.
   (B)   Size of portable storage units. The portable storage unit shall be no
larger than 130 square feet in area and no higher than ten feet from grade.
   (C)   Permits.
      (1)   Prior to commencing business in the city, or otherwise placing
portable storage units on sites within the city, the portable storage company
must obtain an annual permit, at a fee of $500, from the city outlining the
obligations and requirements prior to conducting business in the city.
      (2)   The portable storage company, which has obtained an annual permit
to conduct business in the city, shall provide the user, at the point of
purchase, with written information detailing the user's rights and obligations
under this section. The portable storage company shall further provide such
information to users who access the company's services by telephone, the
Internet or other means. The city will provide the portable storage company the
information; the portable storage company shall provide copies to the user at
the portable storage company's expense.
      (3)   Zoning approval is required for the placement of a portable storage
unit on a residential site for any time period greater than 14 days. The owner/
occupant may apply for zoning approval when there is an active building permit
on the subject property. Application for the zoning approval shall be made to
the city on a form provided by the city.
      (4)   The site owner is required to sign the zoning approval application
in order to ensure that the site owner consents to the placement of the
portable storage unit on the site and acknowledges the zoning approval
requirements of this section.
      (5)   No permit or fee is required for the first 14 days.
      (6)   The exterior of the portable storage unit shall have a weatherproof
clear pouch which must display the zoning approval letter at all times.
      (7)   A portable storage unit shall have no signage other than the name,
address and telephone number of the person or firm engaged in the business of
renting or otherwise placing the portable storage unit. The sign must be
permanently adhered to, or painted on, the portable storage unit.
      (8)   Portable storage unit zoning approvals will not be granted to any
portable storage unit company or site property owner or occupant, which is
found to be in violation of the regulations of this section until such
violation is brought into compliance.
      (9)   The Planning and Economic Development Department is delegated with
the authority to monitor progress and extend the amount of days a portable
storage unit is on site.
   (D)   Duration.
      (1)   A portable storage unit may remain at a site for up to 14 days
without a zoning approval.
      (2)   Zoning approval is required for the placement of a portable storage
unit remaining at a site longer than 14 days, up to a maximum time period of 30
days unless otherwise approved by the Planning and Economic Development
Department. The portable storage company shall affix a placard, visible to
public view, on each storage unit specifying the date on which the unit was
delivered to the site. All portable storage units must maintain public safety
access and comply with all health, safety and welfare concerns.
      (3)   The homeowner may apply for an extension beyond 30 days within the
time period as provided in the permit. Such application shall include a scope
of work and justification for an extension of days. The Planning and Economic
Development Department shall monitor progress of the building permit through
inspections and has the authority to grant additional 30 day increments or
more, depending on the inspections and review of the residential property.
      (4)   The Planning and Economic Development Department may rescind zoning
approval after conducting an inspection of the residential property.
   (E)   Maintaining portable storage units.
      (1)   The portable storage unit company shall be responsible to ensure
that the portable storage unit is in good condition, free from evidence of
deterioration, weathering, discoloration, rust, ripping, tearing or other holes
or breaks.
      (2)   When not in use, the portable storage unit shall be kept locked.
      (3)   The owner/occupant of any site on which a portable storage unit is
placed shall also be responsible for ensuring that no hazardous substances are
stored or kept within the portable storage units.
      (4)   In the event of a hurricane warning, as defined by the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) the portable storage unit company
shall use their best efforts to contact customers and remove storage units in a
timely manner prior to the storm.
   (F)   Violations.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any owner/ operator of a portable storage
unit company to place or permit the placement of a portable storage unit on a
site within the city without first obtaining an annual permit and a zoning
approval from the city.
      (2)   A portable storage company that places or allows the placement of a
portable storage unit on a site without first obtaining an annual permit as
required by this section shall be provided a grace period of one business day
from delivery of the portable storage unit to remove the portable storage unit
or obtain an annual permit.
      (3)   A person who allows a portable storage unit to remain at a site for
longer than 14 days without first obtaining a zoning approval as required by
this section shall be provided a grace period of one day from the 14th day of
the placement of the portable storage unit to remove the portable storage unit
or to obtain zoning approval.
      (4)   Should the person or company in violation of the regulations of
this section fail to obtain a permit or remove the portable storage unit at the
termination of the grace period, the person or company shall be considered in
violation of the Code.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for a portable storage unit to remain at a
site in excess of the time periods permitted under this section. Each day that
any such portable storage unit remains at a site in violation of the provisions
of this section shall constitute a violation against the portable storage
company, and against the owner of the site.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.626 SCULPTURES AND STATUES.
   (A)   Sculptures and statues shall be considered permanent accessory
structures on nonresidential property and shall be architecturally compatible
with surroundings.
   (B)   Sculptures and statues shall not:
      (1)   Be used for the purpose of advertising or signage.
      (2)   Exceed the height of the primary building.
      (3)   Be internally illuminated
   (C)   The size of sculptures and statues shall be determined based on the
scale by staff during plan review.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.627 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The provisions of this section are intended to apply only to
nonconforming uses, and are not intended to apply to legally permitted
buildings, structures, and their lots, existing at the effective date of this
LDC which do not meet the regulations of this LDC for height, yards, lot size,
lot area coverage, separation, or other similar dimensional requirements or
limitations. Any additions, extensions, or alterations to such existing
buildings or structures shall comply with all applicable provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Repair, alteration, or enlargement.
      (1)   No structure utilized for a nonconforming use shall be enlarged,
extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered, unless the use is changed to
one which complies with the provisions of this LDC.
      (2)   Repairs, maintenance, and improvement may be carried out in any one
year in an amount not to exceed 25% of the assessed value of the structure for
that year; provided that the work does not increase the cubical content of the
building nor the floor area devoted to the nonconforming use, nor increase the
number of dwelling units.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall prevent compliance with applicable
laws or resolutions relative to the safety and sanitation of a building
occupied by a nonconforming use.
   (C)   Reconstruction after catastrophe. If any nonconforming structure, or
building in which there is a nonconforming use, is damaged by fire, flood,
explosion, collapse, wind, war, or other catastrophe to such an extent that the
cost of rebuilding, repair, and reconstruction will exceed 75% of the
replacement cost of the building or structure, it shall not be again used or
reconstructed except in full conformity with the regulations of the district in
which it is located.
   (D)   Continuance. Any legal nonconforming use or structure may remain until
modified or altered.
   (E)   Unlawful use not authorized. Nothing in this LDC shall be interpreted
as authorization for, or approval of, the continuation of the use of the
structure or premises in violation of any resolution in effect at the effective
date of this LDC.
   (F)   Illegal use. The casual, temporary, or illegal use of land or a
building shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming
use or to create any rights in the continuance of such a use.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
BUFFERYARDS, ENCROACHMENT AND SCREENING
§ 155.630 GENERAL - BUFFERYARDS AND ENCROACHMENT.
   (A)   Purpose. This subchapter is intended to establish additional criteria
for bufferyards and encroachment within residential and nonresidential lots
within the city.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   The following divisions will establish additional lot configuration
criteria and limitations for nonresidential or residential properties.
      (2)   This subchapter shall not apply to free-standing telecommunication
facilities.
   (C)   General standards. Any property requiring a bufferyard shall provide a
maintenance plan indicating which property owner is responsible for the general
maintenance of bufferyard. Maintenance includes but is not limited to
landscaping, lighting, and utilities, and fences or walls.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.631 MINIMUM BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENT - NON-RESIDENTIAL.
   Unless otherwise noted within the LDC, bufferyards shall be a minimum of ten
feet wide along all nonresidential property lines. All bufferyards shall be
fully landscaped in accordance with the provisions outlined in §§
155.656 through
155.682.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.632 BUFFERYARD BETWEEN RESIDENTIAL AND NON-RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   The provisions of this section shall apply to proposed
nonresidential development adjacent to a developed or site plan approved
residential site.
      (2)   If a residential site is proposed adjacent to an existing
nonresidential site, the provisions of this division shall not apply.
   (B)   The goal of the bufferyard is to accomplish the following:
      (1)   To better reinforce compatible development with adjacent
residential and non- residential land uses, particularly low-density
residential uses through proper land use transitions and buffering techniques;
      (2)   To provide more adequately for the proper site for nonresidential
accessory uses such as loading, refuse storage, parking, mechanical equipment
and exterior lighting that can be the cause for noise, dust, glare, and other
nuisances or inconveniences in proximity to low-density residential areas;
      (3)   To provide unobstructed minimal space for fire access, driveways,
and service roads to service nonresidential activities; and
      (4)   To provide unobstructed space for adequate landscaping to screen
and/or soften the visual impact of nonresidential uses that adjoin residential
settings.
   (C)   Bufferyard characteristics.
      (1)   Bufferyards shall be a minimum of 100 feet wide on all adjacent
sides exclusive of street facings. At a minimum the first 50 feet shall be
dedicated to landscaping to permit minimum space for the creation of landscape
berm, mounds, and the planting of vegetation including shade trees and hedge
materials.
      (2)   The following is permitted in bufferyards, only in areas which lie
beyond the required landscaped portions of the bufferyard area:
         (a)   Drainage easements;
         (b)   Fences, walls and hedges;
         (c)   Parking;
         (d)   Service drives;
         (e)   Sidewalks or walkways;
         (f)   Television antennas, satellite dishes;
         (g)   Utility easements.
   (D)   Alternative bufferyard.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Board may approve other means of buffering
including, but not limited to, a solid masonry wall, which shall be a minimum
of six feet in height, for amendments, to nonresidential site plans, when one
of the following apply:
         (a)   The previously approved bufferyard is being reduced in size; or
         (b)   The scope of the site plan amendment includes demolition of more
than 50% of the previously approved structure on a site or plat of land
regardless of ownership.
      (2)   All landscape areas shall be established beyond any and all
required utility, drainage, or other easements that would compromise the
establishment of dense landscaping without interfering with utilities.
      (3)   Landscaping requirements.
         (a)   One shade tree of a height not less than 12 feet with a three
inch caliper trunk measured at a height of four and one- half feet above grade
shall be planted for each 500 square feet of landscaped bufferyard. Provided,
however, one-half of the required trees may be other landscaped material if it
complies with the requirements of this section as determined by the Planning
and Zoning Board.
         (b)   The final landscape design shall provide an effective visual
screen between the two uses within three years of planting. Hedge materials and
suitable ground cover shall be provided. Hedging shall be planted to a height
not less than two feet at installation. Irrigation shall be required in all
landscaped areas.
         (c)   Grass seeding shall be provided during the initial phases of
site development to mitigate against the nuisance factors that occur during
large-scale construction.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.633 PINES BOULEVARD CORRIDOR - BUFFERYARD.
   The following bufferyards shall be established for all properties adjacent
to Pines Boulevard as outlined in the Pines Boulevard Corridor Study and Manual
of Design Guidelines:
   (A)   Properties located east of University Drive shall have a minimum 15
foot landscape buffer between the right-of-way and the base building line.
   (B)   Properties located west of University Drive shall have a minimum 40
foot landscape buffer between the right-of-way and the base building line.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22)
§ 155.634 SETBACK ENCROACHMENT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Every part of every required setback shall be open and unobstructed
from the ground to the sky, except as hereinafter provided or as otherwise
permitted in this subchapter.
   (B)   Setback Encroachment Regulations Table.
Table 155.634 Setback Encroachment Regulations
Type Maximum Setback Encroachment Maximum Dimensions Additional Regulations
     Front Side Street Side Rear
Table 155.634 Setback Encroachment Regulations
             Maximum Setback Encroachment                Maximum    Additional
Type         Front      Side       Street     Rear       Dimensions Regulations
                                   Side
Sills or     1 foot     1 foot     1 foot     1 foot     N/A        N/A
Belt Courses
Cornices,                                                           For yards
Eaves,                                                              less than 5
Gutters,     1/3 of     1/3 of     1/3 of     1/3 of     5 feet     feet, shall
Overhangs,   required   required   required   required   regardless not exceed
and          setback    setback    setback    setback    of setback 1/2 of the
Retractable                                                         setback
Awnings                                                             width.
Chimney,
Fireplace,   2 feet     2 feet     2 feet     2 feet     N/A        N/A
or Pilaster
                                                                    Shall only
Moveable     1 foot     1 foot     1 foot     1 foot     N/A        be placed
Awnings                                                             over doors
                                                                    and windows
Fire
Escapes,                                                            Applicable
Stairways,   3 feet 8   3 feet 8   3 feet 8   5 feet     N/A        in multi-
and          inches     inches     inches                           family or
Balconies                                                           hotel uses
(unenclosed)
Unroofed                                                            First floor
Porches or   5 feet     3 feet     3 feet     10 feet    N/A        only,
Terraces                                                            except for
                                                                    railings.
                                                                    Shall be a
Hoods,       1/3 of     1/3 of     1/3 of     1/3 of     5 feet     minimum of
Canopies, or required   required   required   required   regardless 1 foot away
Marquees     setback    setback    setback    setback    of setback from any
                                                                    lot line.
HVAC or                                                             Single-
Emergency    Not        Not        Not        Not        N/A        family
Generator    Allowed    restricted restricted restricted            districts
                                                                    only
Liquefied
Petroleum    Not        Not        Not        Not
(LP) Tanks   restricted restricted restricted restricted N/A        N/A
(below
ground)
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.635 ENCROACHMENT OF ACCESSORY BUILDING AND STRUCTURES WITHIN EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Drainage easements. An accessory building or structure shall not be
erected over or impair access to a drainage easement or culvert. Approval must
be obtained from applicable drainage district for accessory buildings and uses
located in a drainage easement.
   (B)   Utility easements. An accessory building or structure shall not be
placed within a utility easement without the approval from all applicable
utility companies.
   (C)   Maintenance easements.
      (1)   Lake and canal maintenance easements. An accessory building or
structure shall not be erected over or impair access to a lake or canal
maintenance easement. Approval must be obtained from applicable drainage
district for accessory buildings and uses located in a drainage easement.
      (2)   Zero lot line homes shall have a maintenance easement in accordance
with §
155.652.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.636 HEIGHT LIMITATION ENCROACHMENT SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Penthouses, scenery lofts, towers, cupolas, steeples, and domes, not
exceeding in gross area at maximum horizontal section 30% of the roof area.
   (B)   Airplane beacons, broadcasting towers, antennae, chimneys, stacks,
tanks, and roof structures used for ornamental or mechanical purposes may
exceed one of the following height limitations:
      (1)   Twenty-five percent of the allowable height in any district or;
      (2)   Twenty-five percent higher than the principal building to which it
relates or is attached, whichever is less, unless otherwise waived by the
Commission for the health and safety of the community.
   (C)   Flag poles.
      (1)   Residential properties: 25 feet.
      (2)   Non-residential properties:
         (a)   Forty feet or;
         (b)   Twenty-five percent higher than the principal building to which
it relates or is attached, whichever is less.
   (D)   Parapet walls may extend not more than five feet above the allowable
height of a building. (Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.637 SCREENING OF SERVICE AND MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   All garbage and trash containers or compactors, oil tanks, bottled gas
tanks and irrigation system pumps must be underground or placed in walled-in
areas or landscaped screened areas.
   (B)   All air-conditioning units, mechanical equipment, and the like,
whether roof mounted or at grade shall be shielded and hidden so that they
shall not be visible from a point six feet above the ground from any abutting
public or private right-of-way and/or property line.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
DEVELOPMENT DESIGN GUIDELINES
§ 155.640 GENERAL - DEVELOPMENT DESIGN GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Purpose. This subchapter is intended to establish additional site
design criteria for various building types and lot configurations supplemental
to the requirements of the zoning district in which they are located.
   (B)   Applicability. The following divisions will establish additional
criteria for nonresidential or residential properties exclusively including but
not limited to:
      (1)   Commercial outbuildings;
      (2)   Commercial outparcels;
      (3)   Regional mall developments;
      (4)   Multi-family developments;
      (5)   Townhouse developments;
      (6)   Zero lot line developments;
      (7)   Open space regulations.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.641 GENERAL - COMMERCIAL OUTBUILDINGS.
   The development of commercial outbuildings may be permitted in the B-2, B-
3 and C-1 zoning districts. The objectives of these standards are as follows:
   (A)   To maintain architectural compatibility with the principal design
features of the shopping center;
   (B)   To encourage complimentary amenities;
   (C)   To provide convenient and safe pedestrian connection with the
principal development buildings;
   (D)   To encourage interconnectivity between the shopping center and
outbuilding.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.642 COMMERCIAL OUTBUILDING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Development standards. Commercial outbuildings shall be developed in
accordance to the requirements and limitations of the zoning district in which
they are located.
   (B)   Number of tenants. Commercial outbuildings may be occupied by multiple
tenants.
   (C)   Parking. The required parking shall be counted toward the total
required parking of the shopping center.
   (D)   Architectural compatibility. Commercial outbuildings shall incorporate
elements, including colors or materials that are architecturally compatible
with the principal building.
   (E)   Landscaping. Any additional landscaping required by an outbuilding
shall count toward the total landscaping of the shopping center.
   (F)   Signage. The signage shall comply with the Uniform Sign Plan of the
shopping center in which the commercial outbuilding is located.
   (G)   Process. The development of a new outbuilding shall be subject to the
site plan process as outlined in §
155.301(A).
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.643 GENERAL - COMMERCIAL OUTPARCELS.
   The establishment of commercial outparcel to serve freestanding structures
may be permitted in the B-2, B-3 and C-1 zoning districts. All of the
provisions in this section shall apply unless otherwise stated herein. The
objectives of these standards are as follows:
   (A)   To maximize the visibility of principal developments and shopping
center.
   (B)   To maintain architectural continuity with the shopping center and
incorporate design elements, including colors or materials, consistent with
their individual business.
   (C)   To encourage complimentary amenities.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.644 COMMERCIAL OUTPARCEL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Number of outparcels. All of the following provisions apply to new or
redeveloped outparcel developments.
      (1)   There shall be no more than one outparcel for every ten acres of
total site area.
      (2)   There shall be no more than one outparcel for every 500 feet of
shopping center frontage.
   (B)   Building coverage and distance.
      (1)   Total building square footage for all outparcels shall not exceed
10% of the square footage of the principal building(s) and outbuilding(s).
      (2)   There shall be a minimum of 300 lineal feet of separation between
buildings except when separated by roads or drive aisles.
      (3)   Outparcels shall only be occupied by a single tenant and are
limited to one building per outparcel.
   (C)   Height.
      (1)   Height shall not exceed one story with a maximum height of 30 feet;
and
      (2)   Height shall not exceed the height of the principal building.
   (D)   Access, storage services. Access to the outparcel shall be as direct
as possible avoiding drive aisles and queuing across surrounding parking and
driving aisles. All access to the outparcel must be internalized utilizing the
main access drive of the principal retail center. Storage and service
facilities for all outparcels shall be integrated within the building zone and
preferably constructed as an integral part of the structure. Drive-in
facilities shall be provided on the outparcel site exclusively. In no instance
shall the circulation and access of the principal commercial facility and its
parking and service be impaired.
   (E)   Parking.
      (1)   All required parking for the outparcel shall be located within that
parcel exclusively.
      (2)   Parking provided in the outparcel shall not count toward the
required parking for the shopping center.
   (F)   Architectural compatibility. Outparcel buildings may incorporate
design elements, including colors or materials, consistent with their
individual business brand, but shall not incorporate design elements, including
colors or materials, which the Planning and Zoning Board determines detracts
architecturally from the theme of the principal building.
   (G)   Setbacks. Buildings within outparcels shall not be located within any
required setback of the shopping center where it is located and are not
required to meet bufferyard landscape requirements within the outparcel.
   (H)   Signage. Outparcel signage shall comply with §§
155.699 through
155.6100.
   (I)   Process. The development of a new outparcel shall be subject to the
site plan process as outlined in §
155.301(A).
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.645 GUIDING PRINCIPLES - REGIONAL MALL OUTPARCEL DEVELOPMENT.
   The following provisions shall govern development on properties which have
been approved for the construction and development of a regional mall.
   (A)   Guiding principles.
      (1)   All building elements shall be aesthetically and architecturally
compatible throughout the site.
      (2)   Regional mall and secondary building placement shall maximize
parking, open space, safety and access to the facility.
      (3)   Placement of buildings shall not hinder the operations of the
regional mall.
      (4)   The road network shall be designed to enable efficient vehicular
flow.
      (5)   Building uses shall be supportive and complimentary to the
principal use.
      (6)   Regional mall and secondary building height, width, setback and
landscaping must meet the requirements set forth in the provisions of this
division.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.646 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR REGIONAL MALL OUTPARCELS.
   (A)   Mall outparcel plan requirements. A mall outparcel master plan shall
be submitted by any applicant proposing to add a new outparcel to the mall
property. Applicant shall provide a site plan of the entire mall property as
well as the location of all existing and proposed principal, secondary and
outparcel buildings.
   (B)   Mall outparcels shall be permitted within parcels A, B and C as
defined within the mall development of regional impact.
   (C)   The number of outparcels shall not exceed 13.
   (D)   Maximum outparcel building width. In order to ensure that the
development of the outparcel buildings does not obscure the identity of the
principal commercial uses located behind the outparcels, outparcel buildings
shall not exceed 125 feet in width measured parallel to the abutting public
right-of-way or access road excluding roof overhangs, porte-cocheres and other
similar projections. Further, the combined width of all outparcel buildings
shall not exceed 50% of the road frontage.
   (E)   Maximum outparcel building height. The maximum outparcel building
height shall be one story not to exceed 25 feet above the crown of the road for
the portion of the property located between the regional mall structure and
Pines Boulevard and two stories not to exceed 35 feet above the crown of the
road for the remainder of the property.
   (F)   Setbacks. All buildings along Pines Boulevard shall comply with Pines
Boulevard landscape buffer requirements. All other parcel lines shall provide a
minimum ten-foot landscape buffer and 30 foot setback from the mall access and/
or mall ring road.
   (G)   Landscape requirements. Mall outparcel development sites shall comply
with the city's landscaping requirements for the number, type, size and quality
of both trees and ground cover. Any area not devoted to structured or paved
parking must be landscaped and irrigated in accordance with the minimum
standards set by the city. All landscaped areas shall be protected from
vehicular encroachment by a continuous curb and gutter.
   (H)   Signage. Outparcels within Parcels B and C, located along Pines
Boulevard pursuant to the mall development of regional impact, and shall comply
with the sign requirements of §§
155.699 through
155.6100. Parcel A, located within the main mall parcel pursuant to the mall
development of regional impact, shall be required to amend the mall master sign
plan with standards compatible with the existing development subject to review
and approval by the Planning and Zoning Board.
   (I)   Pedestrian access. The owner/developer of an outparcel site should be
conscious of providing an open space network of pedestrian walkways, open areas
and buffers throughout the site.
   (J)   Walls and fences. No wall, fence or screen enclosure shall be
constructed within any landscape buffer along a property line with a height of
more than six feet above the ground level of adjoining property, and no hedge
or shrubbery shall be permitted with a height of more than eight feet. All
proposed fences, walls, and screens shall be constructed of materials and
utilize colors that are compatible with the principal structure on the site.
There shall be no wooden fences or walls permitted.
   (K)   Parking. Each mall outparcel must provide sufficient parking on-site
to meet the city zoning code requirements in accordance with its use.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.647 USE RESTRICTIONS - REGIONAL MALL OUTPARCELS.
   (A)   Accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be permitted on
outparcel development sites, except that a drive-in teller or drive-up window
and associated menu boards, and the like shall not be considered as accessory
buildings so long as they are integrated with the principal building. Garbage
and trash dumpsters may be kept in freestanding locations, except that they
shall not be permitted along Pines Boulevard, and they must be completely
screened from view by a combination of fences, walls, and screens and
landscaping and shall be submitted as part of and shall be subject to site plan
review. There shall be no freestanding kiosk type buildings or small light
structures permitted in the parking areas or service areas outside of the main
buildings.
   (B)   Service and delivery. All service and deliveries to any building shall
be to the rear of the building where physically possible. There shall be no
outside display or storage of materials, products or goods. No truck or
commercial vehicle of any kind shall be permitted to be parked on the property
for a period of more than four hours between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. unless
said vehicle is temporarily present and necessary and incident to the business
on the property.
   (C)   Limitation on recreational vehicles. No recreational vehicle of any
kind shall be parked overnight and no boats, boat trailers or trailers of any
kind, or campers or mobile homes shall be permitted to park overnight on or
near the property at any time unless kept inside a screened enclosure. No
vehicles shall be used as a domicile or residence, either permanent or
temporary.
   (D)   Screening of service and mechanical equipment. All garbage and trash
containers or compactors, oil tanks, bottled gas tanks and irrigation system
pumps must be underground or placed in walled-in areas or landscaped screened
areas. All air-conditioning units, mechanical equipment, and the like, whether
roof mounted or at grade shall be shielded and hidden so that they shall not be
visible from a point six feet above the ground from any abutting public or
private right-of-way and/or property line. Wood may not be used as a screening
material.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.648 ARCHITECTURAL COMPATIBILITY - REGIONAL MALL OUTPARCELS.
   Mall outparcel buildings may incorporate design elements, including colors
or materials consistent with their individual business brand, but shall not
incorporate design elements, including colors or materials, which the
Architectural Review Board determines detract architecturally from the theme of
the principal building.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.649 SCOPE OF APPLICATION - REGIONAL MALL.
   (A)   The development of any property for retail store, restaurant or other
commercial use which is located on the same platted parcel of land where a
principal structure either exists or is planned to exist (i.e. an outparcel),
regardless of different ownership of the principal structure, shall be subject
to, and developed in accordance with, the requirements of this section.
   (B)   If title to an outparcel is transferred after a master plan or site
plan is approved by the city for the platted parcel where the principal
structure and outparcel are to be located, then the seller is obligated to
disclose to the buyer, by covenants in the deed, the applicability of the
requirements of this section and any additional requirements imposed by the
city in connection with the master plan or site plan approval to the property
being sold.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.650 MULTI-FAMILY - APARTMENTS AND CONDOMINIUMS.
   In addition to the standards within §§
155.400 through
155.456, the following standards shall apply to apartments and condominiums
developed within the Residential Multi-Family (R-MF) zoning district.
   (A)   Building coverage: 30% maximum. Building coverage includes all
habitable space, carports, garages, recreation buildings, and the like. It does
not include uncovered patios and decks, swimming pools, tennis courts,
fountains and the like.
   (B)   Vehicular use area: (Non-pervious) 30% maximum.
   (C)   Required design features:
      (1)   Paved sidewalks (with a minimum width of four feet) shall connect
all buildings, parking lots and tenant facilities.
      (2)   In addition to the required sidewalks in division (D)(1) of this
section, the following list is an indication of desired amenities and design
features. Actual projects may contain some or all of these. The size of the
project, as well as its unit mix, will require different amenity and design
packages. The role of the Planning and Zoning Board in its site plan review is
to ensure that projects will provide a well-designed package of features for
its residents including the following: full masonry construction, tile or metal
roofs, porches for each ground level unit, balconies for all units above ground
level, and clubhouse and recreation center.
      (3)   Recreational vehicle and boat storage shall be provided at the rate
of 300 square feet per 30 dwelling units or fraction thereof. The location,
design and screening of this area shall be included on the site plan and
approved by the Planning and Zoning Board. This requirement may be waived by
the Board provided the site plan contains a prohibition of the storage of these
and similar items.
   (D)   Parking: The Planning and Zoning Board shall determine that parking is
to be distributed throughout the project and must be shown to be convenient and
accessible from all units and amenities. Parking garages and other covered
parking may be counted as required parking if they are not tandem spaces.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, tandem parking spaces may be counted only with
the express approval of the Planning and Zoning Board provided the tandem
parking spaces are compatible with the surroundings, satisfy the needs of the
development, and provide sufficient access.
   (E)   In R-MF Districts, the first five feet of a required front or street
side yard, adjacent to a street, shall be landscaped, and shall not be used for
parking except on lots developed with a one-family or a two-family dwelling;
but this five-foot, landscaped strip may be crossed by sidewalks and driveways
reasonably necessary for access to buildings and permissible parking areas.
Other portions of required yards may be used for accessory parking. This
regulation shall apply only to streets designated as traffic ways by the City
Commission.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.651 TOWNHOUSES.
   In addition to the standards within §
155.425, the following standards shall apply to townhouse development.
   (A)   Access to units. Access to townhouse developments must be convenient
to public streets or private drives. Access to individual units or buildings
may be from streets, drives, pedestrian ways, garden courts, parking areas, or
similar methods.
   (B)   Utilities and services.
      (1)   Each townhouse shall be independently served by separate heating,
air conditioning, electric power, gas, and other facility and utility services,
excluding sewer and water, wherever those utilities and services are provided.
      (2)   No townhouse shall be in any way dependent upon services or utility
lines located within another townhouse or townhouse site, except as may be
installed in public easements.
      (3)   All townhouses must be connected to public water and sewer lines,
and all electrical and telephone lines in a townhouse development site shall be
placed underground.
      (4)   Proper and adequate access for firefighting purposes and access to
services, areas to provide for garbage and waste collection, and for the other
necessary services shall be provided.
   (C)   Parking spaces may be provided on the lot of the townhouse, in
commonly owned or maintained parking bays, or in combination of both.
   (D)   Private open areas. There shall be provided for each townhouse at
least 500 square feet of private open areas, exclusive of parking and service
areas. These areas may consist of one or more locations. Open-roof areas and
balconies designed and planned for patio purposes may be credited for no more
than 50% of the required area.
   (E)   Maintenance of common areas.
      (1)   Provisions shall be made to assure that non-public areas and
facilities for the common use of occupants of a townhouse development, but not
in individual ownership of those occupants, shall be maintained in a
satisfactory manner, without expense to the general taxpayer of the city.
      (2)   This assurance may be provided by the incorporation of an automatic
membership home association for the purpose of continuously holding title to
nonpublic areas and facilities; which may include, but not be limited to
recreational areas, off-street parking bays, private streets, sidewalks, street
lights, and common, open landscaped areas and waterways. These assessments
shall be a lien superior to all others, except mortgage and tax liens.
      (3)   Other methods may be acceptable if they positively provide for the
proper and continuous payment of taxes and maintenance without expense to the
general taxpayers.
      (4)   The instrument incorporating such provisions shall be in legal and
recordable form before issuance of a building permit and shall be recorded in
the public records of the county.
   (F)   The following standards below, as outlined in §
155.425, may be modified by the Planning and Zoning Board where such
variations, when incorporated into the site plan, illustrate that the purpose
and intent of this section will be met by the overall development. The
applicant shall provide a letter of justification stating the necessity for the
standards to be modified and how the proposed meets the purpose and intent of
this section.
      (1)   Unit size;
      (2)   Height;
      (3)   Setbacks;
      (4)   Separation of building;
      (5)   Private open areas.
   (G)   Districts in which townhouse developments permitted. In all districts
permitting multiple-family zoning, townhouse developments will be permitted,
which may vary the regulations of that particular zoning district as outlined
above.
   (H)   Landscaping. Reference multi-family landscaping requirements in §
155.662(B).
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22)
§ 155.652 ZERO LOT LINE HOMES.
   In addition to the standards within §
155.422, the following standards shall apply to zero lot line home development.
   (A)   Traffic ways setback. Notwithstanding any of the setback requirements
identified above, there shall always be a building setback of 25 feet from all
arterial roadways of 100 feet in width as shown on the County Traffic Plan.
   (B)   Openings prohibited on the zero lot line side. The wall of the
dwelling located on the lot line shall have no windows, doors, air conditioning
units, or any other type of openings with the exception of a condensate line.
Atria or courts shall be permitted on the zero lot line side when the court or
atrium is enclosed by three walls of the dwelling unit, and a solid wall of at
least eight feet in height is provided on the zero lot line. The wall shall be
constructed of the same material as exterior walls of the unit, or may be
constructed of decorative opaque glass block. A fixed non- operable opaque
glass window may be used in lieu of glass block to meet the intent of this
section.
   (C)   Maintenance and drainage easements.
      (1)   Lots developed utilizing the R-1Z criteria shall have a perpetual,
seven-foot easement for maintenance of the wall on the lot adjacent to the zero
lot line property line which, with the exception of the following shall be kept
clear of structures.
         (a)   Walls or fences;
         (b)   Structures at grade, not to encroach greater than two feet into
the seven-foot easement.
      (2)   Lots developed utilizing the R-1Z criteria may have overhangs that
encroach into the easement on the adjacent lot a maximum of 24 inches, but the
roof shall be so designed that water runoff from the dwelling places in the lot
line is limited to the easement area.
      (3)   At grade structures encroaching into the five foot required setback
on the zero lot line side shall place a six foot high completely opaque privacy
wall in accordance with §
155.621(A)(2).
   (D)   Parking. All visitor parking must be paved and evenly distributed
throughout the development.
   (E)   Common open space. For the purpose of this section, common open space
shall be defined as recreational facilities including, but not limited to,
swimming pools, clubhouses, bicycle/pedestrian paths, and open recreational
areas for the common use of the owners or residents of the dwelling units.
Common open space is not required but may be permitted. If common open space is
provided, provisions satisfactory to the Planning and Zoning Board shall be
made to assure that non-public areas and facilities for the common use of
occupants of zero lot line developments shall be maintained in a satisfactory
manner without expense to the general taxpayer of the city. These may be
provided by the incorporation of an automatic membership homeowners
association, or condominium for the purpose of continually holding title to the
non-public areas and facilities and levying assessments against each unit for
the purpose of paying the taxes and maintaining the common open space.
   (F)   Sidewalks. Continuous sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of a
public or private street and roads within a development in accordance with §
154.32(S).
   (G)   Elevations. There shall be no more than three consecutive identical
dwelling unit elevations.
   (H)   Garages. All residential units shall contain a minimum of a single-car
garage fully enclosed, and units with three or more bedrooms shall contain a
minimum of a two-car garage fully enclosed.
   (I)   Rear yards and side yards. Where a rear yard is adjacent to another
home's side yard, only single-story homes shall be permitted on both lots,
provided however, subject to the building height restrictions of this section
and upon application to the Planning and Zoning Board, a developer may request
approval to erect two-story homes on either one or both of the lots. The Board
shall consider the character and use of adjoining dwelling units or structures
as well as compatibility and may require additional amenities to be provided in
determining whether to approve the request. (Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21;
sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21- 2021; Am. Ord. 2022, passed
6-18-24)
§ 155.653 OPEN SPACE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Residential. All residential developments shall exhibit and maintain a
total open space requirement at least 35% of the gross area of the development.
The following regulations will apply:
      (1)   The area contained in a continuous, open space pedestrian system;
consisting of permanently maintained walks and trails, green roofs, drainage or
retention areas and buffer yards, not less than ten feet wide; leading to a
natural amenity, recreation facility, or commercial use; offering internal
pedestrian walkways that are not part of the street network; may be counted as
open space.
      (2)   The areas used for plazas and pedestrian connectivity are
encouraged and will count toward open space. This includes transitional or
multi-use spaces or pathways connecting from either man-made or natural
features.
      (3)   The area contained in mini-parks; which may or may not be part of
the open space system, and have a minimum dimension of 100 feet together with,
but not limited to, one of the following: benches, playground apparatus,
barbeque pits, and fire rings; may be counted as open space.
      (4)   No more than 50% of lakes and golf courses shall be counted toward
the total open space requirement.
   (B)   Commercial and office. All commercial and office developments
including B-1, B-2, B-3, C-1, PO, PCD and MXD shall exhibit and maintain a
total open space requirement at least 10% of the gross area of the development.
The following regulations will apply:
      (1)   The area contained in a continuous, open space pedestrian system;
consisting of permanently maintained walks and trails, drainage or retention
areas and buffer yards, not less than ten feet wide; leading to a natural
amenity, recreation facility, or commercial use; offering internal pedestrian
walkways that are not part of the street network; may be counted as open space.
      (2)   The areas used for plazas and pedestrian connectivity are
encouraged and will count toward open space. This includes transitional or
multi-use spaces or pathways connecting from either man-made or natural
features.
      (3)   No more than 50% of lakes and golf courses shall be counted toward
the total open space requirement.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES
§ 155.655 FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES.
   (A)   Purpose. This subchapter is intended to regulate safety, security and
privacy of properties while maintaining visual harmony within neighborhoods.
   (B)   Applicability. This subchapter shall regulate the location, height and
appearance of fences, walls, and hedges within all zoning districts.
   (C)   General standards.
      (1)   Residential.
         (a)   No fence, wall, or hedge shall be erected or maintained along or
adjacent to a lot line on residentially zoned property to a height exceeding
six feet in any yard; except that where the lot line is adjacent to
nonresidential use, there shall be an eight-foot limit on the height of a
fence, wall, or hedge along the lot line. Height shall be measured from grade.
         (b)   The finished side of the fence shall face the abutting property,
adjacent property or the street, when feasible. It shall be the responsibility
of the property owner to provide evidence as to why the finished side cannot
face the abutting property, adjacent property or the street. Such cases shall
be reviewed and approved by the Planning and Economic Development Department
Director or designee as part of the building permit process.
         (c)   Fences and walls shall comply with §
150.55 of the City of Pembroke Pines Code of Ordinances when applicable.
         (d)   A fence, wall, or hedge shall not encroach into the front yard
setback, except as provided herein.
            1.   A fence may be installed in the front yard setback for corner
residential lots where the primary entrance to the residential structure is
located on the street side yard as defined herein. The decision to permit the
installation of the fence in the front yard setback of the corner residential
lot is at the discretion of the Planning and Economic Developmental Department
Director or designee.
            2.   A fence may be installed within the front yard setback of the
R-MH District, subject to the following regulations:
               A.   The fence shall not exceed three feet in height.
               B.   Such fence must be constructed of decorative aluminum or
wood and shall be no more than 50% opaque. No chicken wire or any wire-type
fence shall be permitted.
         (e)   In any residential district, no fence, wall, or hedge shall be
erected, constructed, maintained, or grown to a height exceeding two feet above
the street grade nearest thereto, within the front setback or within 25 feet of
the intersection of any street lines or of the street lines produced.
         (f)   At no time shall the line of sight be obstructed.
         (g)   Ground covers, shrubs and hedges shall not exceed two feet in
height when located within the swale.
         (h)   No barbed wire or barbed wire-topped fences may be erected,
placed, or maintained on any residentially zoned or residentially used
property, other than R-E or A zoning districts.
      (2)   Nonresidential.
         (a)   Fences, walls or hedges may exceed past six feet in height when
utilized to screen mechanical equipment or to enclose sport courts as defined
in §
155.637. The allowable height shall be determined by the Planning and Economic
Development Department Director or designee.
         (b)   The finished side of the fence shall face the abutting property,
adjacent property or the street, when feasible. It shall be the responsibility
of the property owner to provide evidence as to why the finished side cannot
face the abutting property, adjacent property or the street. Such cases shall
be reviewed and approved by the Planning and Economic Development Department
Director or designee as part of the building permit process
         (c)   At no time shall the line of sight for vehicle traffic as
established applicable engineering standards be obstructed.
         (d)   Ground covers, shrubs and hedges shall not exceed 30 inches in
height when located within the swale or interior landscaped areas.
         (e)   No barbed wire or barbed wire-topped fences may be erected,
placed, or maintained on any community facility, recreation, or commercial
zoning districts.
         (f)   Barbed wire or barbed wire-topped fences may be permitted in the
industrial zoned districts through the development review process.
   (D)   Prohibitions. Fences, walls, or hedges shall not obstruct fire
hydrants, water valves, water meters, sewer clean-outs and/or otherwise
precludes any utility maintenance to be performed by the city.
   (E)   Maintenance.
      (1)   The continued maintenance of any fence, wall, or hedge within the
city shall be the responsibility of the owner or other person responsible for
the property upon which such fence, wall, or hedge lies.
      (2)   Fences, walls, and hedges shall always be maintained in a condition
that will ensure safety, functional use, and a proper aesthetic appearance.
Such maintenance shall include but not be limited to painting, pressure
washing, pruning or repairing. (Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be
reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
LANDSCAPING
§ 155.656 PURPOSE - LANDSCAPING.
   The purpose of this subchapter shall be to establish the minimum standards
and requirements of property owners for the installation and maintenance of
landscaped areas. Proper landscaping promotes the general welfare, public
safety, and public health through trees and other plant materials by creating
aesthetically pleasing, sustainable residential and nonresidential environments
that promote improved air quality, an urban canopy, and many other benefits.
(Because the City Commission finds that the peculiar characteristics and
qualities of the city justify regulations to perpetuate this aesthetic appeal
on a city-wide basis, this LDC is enacted.)
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.657 LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All landscape plans shall contain all of the following items for
document plan review by city professional landscape personnel.
      (1)   Landscape plans shall be signed and sealed by a registered
landscape architect or qualified personnel. A digital and hard copy of all
landscape plans shall be submitted to the city for review.
      (2)   Landscape calculation table, on a form provided by the city, shall
be shown on planting plans.
      (3)   Tree survey bearing the seal of a landscape architect or qualified
personnel indicating the location, number, species, DBH, size, and condition of
all existing trees and vegetation on-site to be preserved, relocated, or
removed. In the event there are no trees on-site, the applicant shall submit a
letter stating that there are no existing trees on-site.
      (4)   The location and outline of existing buildings and site
improvements to remain.
      (5)   Location, number, species, size, and condition of existing
vegetation along abutting properties within 25 feet of property line.
      (6)   Location of existing and proposed hardscape features such as
driveways and sidewalks, additional embellishment of walls, fences, gates, and
signs including type and height.
      (7)   A proposed plant list by symbol, quantity, required specifications,
native or non-native, drought tolerance, mature canopy spread, total mature
canopy spread proposed on site, and botanical and common names. The plant list
shall be indicated on all planting sheets.
      (8)   Location and labeling of existing and proposed lighting on site,
proposed fire hydrants, and Fire Department check valves.
      (9)   Location of existing and proposed easements, right-of-ways,
drainage structures, overhead utility wires, vertical features, underground
utilities, controllers, above ground electrical elements, and transformers.
      (10)   All planting and staking details, including but not limited to
planting/staking specifications, general notes, and tree protection details.
      (11)   Location and specification of proposed root barrier.
      (12)   Existing and proposed water bodies, water retention areas, and
berms indicating required slopes.
      (13)   An indication of water source, valves, pumps, backflow preventers,
controllers, main line, lateral lines, sleeves, head types, specifications, and
spacing.
      (14)   Sight triangles shall be depicted on planting plans.
      (15)   Such other information as needed to give a complete understanding
of the proposed plan.
   (B)   Exceptions to these requirements may be granted upon determination of
the city based on scope of work.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.658 LANDSCAPE PLAN REVIEW AND ACCEPTANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Landscape plans shall be required for all site plan submittals unless
determined to be unnecessary by city staff.
   (B)   All proposed and approved landscape plans shall include details
pertaining to plant materials, nonliving durable landscape material, root
barriers, and an irrigation system where applicable.
   (C)   For existing properties, if neither the property owner nor the city
possesses an approved landscape plan for the site, the property owner must seek
a landscape plan to be approved by the city as set forth in §
155.657 if the property owner seeks to obtain any new building permit.
   (D)   All site developments or landscaping improvements to existing sites
shall submit to city landscape personnel a set of landscape plans that comply
with plan details outlined in §
155.642. Once the landscape plans are approved, the property owner can apply
for a landscape permit; work may not begin until city staff has reviewed,
approved, and provided owner with approved permit.
   (E)   City landscape representative(s) shall be charged with the
responsibility to review plans, issue permits, and inspect all details post-
installation for all items found in the landscape plan.
   (F)   Upon completion of the landscape installation, owner or applicant must
request final landscape inspection.
   (G)   Upon completing a final landscape inspection, the owner must file "as-
built" landscape plans with the city within 30 days.
   (H)   All plans submitted shall be retained by the city in accordance with
F.S. Ch. 119, as amended from time to time, and the rules and regulations
promulgated from time to time for records retention by the Bureau of Archives
and Records Management of the Division of Library and Information Services of
the Florida Department of State.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.659 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY OR FINAL LANDSCAPE INSPECTION
APPROVAL.
   (A)   A landscape permit is required for all new construction and
redevelopment of properties located in such districts and the following is
required for permit:
      (1)   Landscape permit application;
      (2)   Permit fee reflective of total landscape costs;
      (3)   A cost breakdown of materials including species, size and labor
costs;
      (4)   Proof of contractor's Broward County local business tax receipt
(LBTR);
      (5)   A copy of contractor's liability insurance;
      (6)   Hard set of plans and a digital copy; quantity to be determined by
the city; and
      (7)   Tree removal/relocation permit if applicable.
   (B)   An owner/contractor cannot begin installation of material until a
landscape application has been received and approved by the city and a
landscape permit has been issued.
   (C)   Conditions: No final certificate of occupancy for new construction or
significant redevelopment projects shall be issued unless the as-built conforms
to the approved landscape and irrigation plan.
      (1)   The landscape architect shall be required to inspect the property
after installation to determine whether landscape and irrigation installation
conforms to the approved plan.
      (2)   The landscape architect shall submit a written report of compliance
to the city upon completion of their inspection.
   (D)   Inspection:
      (1)   The city shall inspect the property to ensure that landscape has
been installed, maintained, and irrigated in accordance with the landscape plan
approved by the city and the provisions of this section. If the inspection
reveals that the approved landscape and irrigation plans have been satisfied,
and the city has received a landscape and irrigation certification letter,
hardcopy of landscape and irrigation plans, and as-built digital file all
signed and sealed by a landscape architect or qualified personnel, then the
final certificate of occupancy may be issued.
      (2)   The property owner/developer shall be responsible for payment of a
landscape inspection fee prior to issuance of final certificate of occupancy.
   (E)   Replacement of material:
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the property owner to maintain the current
approved landscape plan for the property including, but not limited to,
replacing dead and poorly performing plant and other landscape material. The
city has the right to inspect all properties to ensure that landscaping has
been properly installed, maintained, and irrigated in accordance with the
approved landscape plan and require the property owner to make all appropriate
corrections.
      (2)   The property owner has 90 days to replace all substandard and
missing landscaping to ensure compliance with this section upon notice from the
city. If unable to achieve scope of work within a 90 day period an extension
may be granted based on significant progress and communication with city
landscape personnel.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.660 LANDSCAPE PARAMETERS - GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS.
   (A)   All areas within a property not considered a building, structure,
sidewalk, parking area, and other approved vehicular use area shall have the
maximum coverage of living plant material where possible. All non-living
durable landscape material shall not be considered an appropriate substitution
for living plant material unless clearly stated on an approved landscape plan.
   (B)   All properties and approved landscape plans shall follow the Florida
Friendly Landscaping Program (FFLP) guidelines as hereby adopted by the city
with the exclusion of the wildlife section. The city further agrees to adopt
the plant lists within the FFLP as a guideline for the city's approved plant
list.
   (C)   All properties and approved landscape plans are required to have at
least 50% native and drought-resistant plant materials within the total site
vegetation excluding sod.
   (D)   During any construction, protective barriers of specifications
approved by the city shall be placed and maintained around the drip line of all
trees to be retained on the site to prevent their destruction or damage. The
developer shall use every precaution possible to avoid damaging the trees by
preventing the use or storage of materials or equipment, or the contamination
of soil with such materials as paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar,
and the like, within the "drip line".
      (1)   No attachments, other than those of a protective or nondamaging
nature, shall be attached to any tree except those trees approved by the city
to be eliminated and not to be retained or relocated.
      (2)   All trees damaged as a result of construction or the operation of
heavy equipment in the vicinity of a tree shall be replaced in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
   (E)   Sight distances. When a drive aisle intersects a public right-of-way
or when the subject property abuts the intersection of two or more public
rights-of-way, all landscaping within the triangular areas shall conform to
Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) Roadway and Traffic Design
Standards for Design Construction, Maintenance and Utility Operations on the
State Highway System, Standard Index 546, and Engineering Division details R13,
R14, and R15, as amended and updated from time to time.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.661 MINIMUM LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS - ALL PROPERTIES.
   (A)   All landscaped areas shall be installed according to the approved site
plan and shall be maintained by the property owner, including but not limited
to replacing dead and poorly performing material. The city has the right to
inspect all properties to ensure landscaping has been properly installed,
maintained, and irrigated in accordance to the approved landscape plan.
   (B)   A property owner can receive credits toward the minimal landscape
requirements for the preservation, replacement, or relocation of existing plant
material on site prior to development if determined by city landscape
personnel, an adjustment will preserve the intent of this section.
   (C)   All common areas, excluding totally enclosed privacy areas, for
attached and detached single-family units shall be fully landscaped and
irrigated. Common areas require one tree for every 1,000 square feet and shall
require no more than 50% sod.
   (D)   Recreational facilities both commercial and private, shall be
substantially landscaped. The landscape at recreational facilities such as but
not limited to clubhouse, pool area, and gym cannot be utilized in fulfilling
or contributing to minimal landscape requirements for general planting
requirements outlined in §§
155.662 and
155.663.
   (E)   Utility structures, garbage, and refuse areas shall be screened with
landscaping material to the extent that these areas are not visible at a
maximum height of six feet from abutting properties or adjacent right-of-ways.
   (F)   The property owner is responsible for the landscape development and
maintenance of the non-paved portion fronting on the property where a waterway
directly abuts public right-of-way and where the ingress and egress from a
property is over the waterway in accordance with an approved site plan and
according to South Broward Drainage District standards.
   (G)   Trees in excess of five shall have no more than 20% of a single
species:
      (1)   All properties three stories and below minimum:
         (a)   Twenty percent of required trees meet 14-16' H with 3" diameter
at breast height.
         (b)   Twenty percent of required trees meet 12-14' H with 2" diameter
at breast height.
         (c)   Sixty percent of required trees required meet § 155.664(M).
      (2)   All properties four stories and above minimum:
         (a)   Thirty percent of required trees meet 14-16' H with 3" diameter
at breast height.
         (b)   Thirty percent of required trees meet 12-14' H with 2" diameter
at breast height.
         (c)   Forty percent of required trees required meet §
155.664(M).
   (H)   Landscaping for boulevard strips, medians, and swales - all
properties.
      (1)   All medians within or adjacent to a development shall be landscaped
and irrigated by the developer as per an approved site development plan where
such modifications are determined necessary by city staff.
      (2)   The boulevard strip shall be sodded. Where the area is bordered by
a sidewalk and curbing, it shall be contoured to insure satisfactory surface
run-off. Planting will be considered in this area provided that the stock is of
type as specified in the approved list for boulevard planting and that the
planting does not encroach beyond the center line closest to the public right-
of-way. Landscaping to incorporate xeriscaping principles is encouraged.
      (3)   Where the area is not curbed, the block drainage pattern must
remain unobstructed. Planting shall not take place in the center line of the
swale. Planting, however, will be considered on the residential side of the
slope provided that the material is as specified in the approved list for
boulevard planting and that the planting does not take place closer than two
feet from the center line of the swale.
      (4)   For trees located in a boulevard strip or swale, special attention
should be made to ensure that there is adequate root and canopy space at
maturity.
      (5)   All planting on city property must be as per an approved site plan.
   (I)   Landscape adjacent to public right-of-ways - all properties.
      (1)   A ten foot strip of land adjacent to the right-of-way shall be
provided for and landscaped for property areas adjacent to public right-of-ways
where the property will not be entirely visually screened by an intervening
building or structure from the abutting right-of-way. All required landscaped
strips shall be landscaped 100% coverage of turfgrass or other approved
groundcover along with one tree for each 50 lineal feet or fraction thereof, or
one tree for every 250 square feet. Necessary drive aisles may be subtracted
from the above lineal dimensions where determining the required number of
trees.
      (2)   The above required trees shall be located between the abutting
right-of-way and development of the property. A hedge, wall, berm, or other
durable landscape barrier of at least two feet in height shall be placed along
only the perimeter of the landscape strip. If the durable barrier is of
nonliving material, a hedge, vine or other living material shall screen the
street side of the barrier. Barrier placement shall not impede sightlines.
      (3)   Utility easements shall be excluded from this section's provisions
regarding trees only and dedicated alleyways shall be excluded from this
section's provisions regarding trees, hedge material and berm requirements,
unless they are commercial alleyways abutting residential property as in this
division (I) of this section.
   (J)   Landscaping adjacent to abutting properties - all properties.
      (1)   On the site of a building, structure, or open-lot use providing an
off-street parking area or other vehicular use area, where the area will not be
entirely screened visually by an intervening building or structure from
abutting property, screening shall be required as provided within this section.
      (2)   The buffer screening shall comply with the setback and yard
requirements as provided in §
155.632.
      (3)   Walls, hedges, or other durable landscape barriers at least three
feet in height, with appropriate spacing as provided in the SFWMD Guide, shall
be accepted as screening material if that material can provide the required
full screening from the abutting property.
      (4)   In addition, trees and landscape beds shall be located between the
common lot line and the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area.
The required number of trees shall be calculated as one tree provided for every
50 lineal feet or fractional part thereof. Each tree shall be planted in at
least a 100 square feet planting area consisting of grass, groundcover, or
other landscape material with a minimal dimension of at least ten feet. Non-
living durable landscape material shall not be acceptable material for these
landscape beds.
   (K)   Diversification of ground cover, shrub and hedge material is required
for all properties. The amount of diversification required shall be determined
by staff based on the size and scope of the project. (Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-
17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022,
passed 6- 18-24)
§ 155.662 SPECIFIC MINIMUM LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Minimum landscape requirements for single-family, townhouse and mobile
residential properties.
Table 155.662 Minimum Landscape Requirements for Single-Family,
Townhouse [1] and Mobile Home Lots
Lot Type Lot Size Minimum Number of Trees Minimum Number of Minimum Number of
                  [2][3]                  Shrubs            Accent Plans
Table 155.662 Minimum Landscape Requirements for Single-Family,
Townhouse [1] and Mobile Home Lots
                                   Minimum Number Minimum Number Minimum Number
Lot Type    Lot Size               of Trees [2]   of Shrubs      of Accent
                                   [3]                           Plans
Single-     Less than 4,000 Square
Family and  Feet                   1 tree         Ten            Two
Townhomes
Single-     4,000 – 5,999 Square 2 trees of 2
Family and  Feet                   different      Ten            Two
Townhomes                          species
Single-                            3 trees, at
Family and  6,000 – 7,999 Square minimum 2      Ten            Two
Townhomes   Feet                   different
                                   species
Single-     Greater than or equal  3 trees, at
Family and  to 8,000 Square Feet   minimum 2      Ten [4]        Two
Townhomes   [4]                    different
                                   species [4]
Mobile Home All Sizes              One tree       Ten            N/A
Note(s):
[1]   Townhouse lots may be evaluated on a lot by lot basis for compliance with
the provisions of this section.
[2]   A minimum of one tree on site must be a canopy tree.
[3]   Where possible located in the front of the lot including swale area.
[4]   For all lots larger than 8,000 square feet in area, additional trees and
shrubs shall be provided at the rate of one tree and three shrubs every 2,000
square feet of lot area; however, there shall be no more than ten trees and 30
shrubs required per acre.
 
      (1)   Swale trees shall consist of canopy trees. Alternative species may
be utilized in lieu of canopy trees, as determined by the Planning and Economic
Development Department Director or designee, in cases where canopy trees are
not viable. The trees shall be planted to ensure that there is adequate root
and canopy space upon maturity. Root barriers shall be installed, if, as
determined by the Planning and Economic Development Department Director or
designee, they shall be required to allow for future controlled growth.
      (2)   The complete site area shall be landscaped in accordance with the
approved site plan. For residential properties over 10,000 square feet, the
area in excess may be plugged, sprigged, or seeded.
      (3)   The owner of an existing nonconforming single-family residence,
under this subsection, may apply for mitigation pursuant to §
155.680.
   (B)   Minimum landscape requirements for multi-family residential
properties.
      (1)   All landscape areas shall be installed according to the approved
site plan.
      (2)   Multi-family properties shall comply with the following minimum
requirements:
         (a)   Shrubs:
            1.   Twenty-five per unit (first floor);
            2.   Five additional shrubs per unit (second and third floors); and
            3.   No additional shrubs required for units above fourth floor.
         (b)   Trees:
            1.   One and one-half canopy trees per unit (first floor);
            2.   One additional canopy tree per unit (second floor);
            3.   One-half additional canopy tree per unit in excess of two
stories.
   (C)   Minimum landscape requirements for nonresidential properties.
      (1)   For nonresidential properties the planting requirement shall be
calculated on the following basis:
         (a)   One tree every 5,000 square feet of gross area.
         (b)   Ten shrubs every 5,000 square feet of gross area.
      (2)   Grass areas shall be sodded. Areas in excess of 20,000 square feet
may be plugged, sprigged, or seeded.
      (3)   The base of all ground signs must be adequately landscaped. Permit
applications for ground signs must be accompanied by a landscape plan compliant
with the following standards:
         (a)   Landscape area must consist of two layers of shrubs,
groundcover, annual or perennial flowers, or some combination of live plants to
compliment and enhance the sign. Sod may not be used to meet this requirement.
         (b)   Sign landscaping is subject to landscape provision of this
subchapter.
         (c)   Ground sign landscaping shall be installed and maintained in a
manner that does not obstruct the information displayed on the sign.
      (4)   For industrial properties:
         (a)   A planting area, having a street frontage of not less than ten
feet and a depth of not less than 20 feet, shall be provided and maintained on
every lot in an I-L District. This area shall be located adjacent to a side lot
line or in another manner which provides a total street frontage of not less
than ten feet. Where a single structure occupies more than one lot, the
landscaped area required by this division for each lot shall be provided. The
area may, however, be combined and located in the same manner as if the total
area occupied by the structure were a single lot.
         (b)   A planting strip not less than 50 feet in depth shall be
provided along main arteries.
         (c)   Areas not covered by buildings, parking, driveways, or walled
storage areas, shall be planted and landscaped; and shall be properly
maintained by the owner of the property. Planting and landscaping plans for all
areas required by this section shall be submitted when building plans are
submitted to the Planning and Economic Development Department for review.
         (d)   No parking shall be allowed on any planting or landscaping area
required by this section and those areas shall not be considered as providing
any of the paved parking area required by this section.
         (e)   Open storage, garbage and refuse. The storage of vehicles,
equipment, materials, and supplies shall be within a building or within an area
enclosed by a wall, fence, hedge, or other device which will effectively screen
that storage from public view. Garbage or refuse shall be stored only within a
building.
         (f)   A perimeter buffer shall be used to provide a transition between
one type of land use and another. This buffer shall be a continuous area of
land along the perimeter of a parcel of land, including; landscaping, berms,
walls, fences, and building setbacks.
   (D)   Minimum landscape requirements for green walls.
      (1)   A green wall, also referred to as a living wall or a vertical
garden, is an internal or external wall partially or completely covered with
vegetation that includes a support structure, growing medium, and integrated
water delivery system. Green walls can contain one planting bed in the ground
at the base of the wall; this is limited to one or two stories buildings with
vine coverage; planting boxes at the bases of each floor for multi-story
buildings, or individual planting cells uniformly dispersed over the entirety
of the structure. Green walls can conserve energy and promote a healthy
landscape.
      (2)   Installation of a green wall shall require a building permit. The
plan set submitted for the building permit application shall include, at a
minimum, the following:
         (a)   The delineation of and the total area of green wall,
         (b)   The specifications for the irrigation system,
         (c)   The structural components of the support system and demonstrated
compliance with the Florida Building Code,
         (d)   Identification of the planting medium, and the structure, size
and location of planting cells and/or planting beds,
         (e)   A planting chart that includes plant identification, quantities
and specifications,
         (f)   The plant installation specifications including how vines/plants
will initially be fastened to the structure.
      (3)   A green wall shall comply with all the following installation
standards:
         (a)   Shall include an irrigation system,
         (b)   The area delineated as green wall shall contain 100% living
plant material and shall not incorporate artificial plant material into the
green wall,
         (c)   Green walls greater than 20 feet in height:
            1.   Shall have planting cells uniformly dispersed over the entire
green wall area or have planting beds at multiple heights along the green wall
area,
            2.   Planting cells and planting beds shall be of sufficient size,
spacing, and quantity to provide for a minimum of at least 60% coverage by
installed plant materials on the delineated green wall area upon installation,
and
            3.   Installed material shall be of sufficient density and fullness
to meet at least 60% coverage of the delineated green wall area upon
installation.
      (4)   All green walls shall comply with the following additional
standards:
         (a)   Installed plants shall be maintained and replaced as needed to
ensure at minimum of 85% viability of quantity of installed material,
         (b)   Installed material shall attain a 95% coverage of the delineated
green wall within one year of installation, and
         (c)   The green wall shall be maintained in an attractive condition
free of weeds, debris and structural defects.
      (5)   Green wall systems shall be permitted in all zoning categories.
Nothing contained in this LDC, including design standards or guidelines
included or referenced herein, shall be deemed to prohibit the installation of
a green wall that meets the requirements of this section, as accessory
equipment.
      (6)   The green wall structural components (non-vegetative components)
shall be in conformance with §
155.626.
      (7)   To be deemed a green wall it must cover at least 40% of the
building elevation.
   (E)   Minimum landscape requirements for a green roof.
      (1)   A green roof, also referred to as a living roof, is a roof of a
building that is partially or completely covered with living vegetation and a
growing medium, planted over a waterproofing membrane. A green roof also
includes additional layers such as a root barrier and drainage and irrigation
systems. A green roof can be comprised of a single planting bed or multiple
individual planting bed components integrated as a single roof system.
      (2)   Installation of a green roof shall require a building permit. The
plan set submitted for the building permit application shall include, at a
minimum, the following:
         (a)   A delineation of and the total area of the green roof,
         (b)   Specifications for the irrigation system,
         (c)   Specification on the structural components of the green roof
system and demonstrated compliance with the Florida Building Code,
         (d)   Identification of the planting medium, and structure and
location of planting cells if comprised of multiple integrated component beds,
         (e)   A planting chart that includes plant identification, quantities
and specifications, and installation.
      (3)   A green roof shall comply with all the following installation
standards:
         (a)   Shall include an irrigation system, and
         (b)   Plant material shall meet at least 85% coverage of the
delineated green roof area upon installation.
      (4)   A green roof shall comply with the following additional standards:
         (a)   Installed plants shall be maintained and replaced as needed to
ensure at minimum of 85% viability of quantity of installed material,
         (b)   Installed material shall attain an 100% coverage of the
delineated green roof area within one year of installation, and
         (c)   The green roof shall be maintained in an attractive condition
free of weeds, debris and structural defects.
      (5)   Nothing contained in this LDC, including design standards or
guidelines included or referenced herein, shall be deemed to prohibit the
installation of a green roof that meets the requirements of this section, as
accessory equipment to conforming buildings.
      (6)   Due to design considerations and functionality requirements, a
green roof system shall be in conformance with height limitations in §
155.636.
      (7)   To be deemed a green roof it must cover at least 25% of the roof
surface.
   (F)   Minimum landscape requirements for a vegetable garden. A vegetable
garden shall comply with F.S. § 604.71. (Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought
to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21- 2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-
15-22; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18- 24)
§ 155.663 PARKING ISLANDS.
   (A)   Landscaping of interior parking areas, also defined as parking islands
and other vehicular use areas within a property shall be a mixture of ground
cover, turfgrass, hedge material, trees, and palms with no more than 50% of
total island areas planned or installed as turfgrass, sod or mulch. Interior
islands must be a minimum ten feet wide from inside of curb adequately
landscaped and contain minimum of one tree. The intent of interior parking
islands is to create a fully landscaped parking lot without disrupting
continuous parking stalls and to lower the area ambient surface temperature.
   (B)   Parking lot landscaping should be designed to be sustainable and to
function as part of the development's stormwater management system.
   (C)   For other vehicular use areas only, where the strict application of
minimal landscaping requirements will seriously limit the function of the area,
the required landscaping may be located near perimeter of the paved area,
including those perimeters that may be adjacent to a building on the site. The
required interior landscaping which is relocated as provided herein shall be in
addition to the perimeter landscape requirements.
   (D)   Concrete curbing, wheel stops permanently anchored three feet away
from landscape area at a four-inch height, or other approved equal shall be
installed to prevent encroachment of vehicles into the required landscape area.
   (E)   Individual interior parking lot areas shall be a minimum of 100 square
feet total adequately landscaped with shrubs, groundcover, or other authorized
landscape material not to exceed 24 inches in height in addition to
requirements listed below. The landscape areas shall be located in such a
manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving.
   (F)   Parking lots shall comply with the following minimum requirements:
      (1)   One tree:
         (a)   Every five parking spaces; and
         (b)   Every 100 square feet of interior landscaping;
      (2)   Ten square feet of interior landscaping every parking space up to
50 spaces;
      (3)   One hundred square feet of landscaping every ten parking spaces
over 50 spaces;
      (4)   One square foot of landscaping:
         (a)   Every 100 square feet of paved areas up to 50,000 square feet;
and
         (b)   Every 200 square feet of paved area over 50,000 square feet; and
      (5)   Interior parking landscape requirements shall be reduced by 25% for
areas zoned for industrial use.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.664 PLANT MATERIAL DESIGN AND INSTALLATION STANDARDS.
   (A)   All areas not covered by main and accessory structures, walks and
vehicular use areas shall be fully landscaped with living plant material. Non-
living landscape materials shall not be considered as substitution for living
plant material unless specifically approved on the landscape plan.
   (B)   Landscaped areas shall be constructed with no more than 25% of the
total area of gravel, stone or other similar materials. Landscape areas shall
not be used for parking.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of a property owner that all plant material and
non-living durable landscaping material shall be installed and perpetually
maintained in a manner as determined by qualified city staff to be generally
consistent with proper horticultural practices found in the most recent
editions of the following:
      (1)   Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants from the Florida Department
of Agriculture Division of Plant Industry;
      (2)   Florida Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water
Resources by the Green Industries from the Florida Department of Environmental
Protection;
      (3)   Selecting and Planting Trees for the South Florida Urban Forest
from the Florida Urban Council;
      (4)   The Right Tree in the Right Place brochure from Florida Power and
Light;
      (5)   American National Standards Institute A-300 and Z-133; and
      (6)   Principles and Practices of Planting Trees and Shrubs by Gary W.
Watson and E.B. Himelick.
   (D)   All installed plant material shall be a minimum grade of Florida #1 or
better as identified in Grades and Standards by the Florida Department of
Agriculture, where applicable.
   (E)   All landscape areas excavated shall be filled with 50% muck soil mix.
   (F)   All plant installations shall conform to all applicable regulations in
regards to planting distances away from above ground utility structures and
lines and shall not be installed underneath roofs, overhangs, and balconies
unless their mature height does not encroach upon the structure.
   (G)   All plant material shall not impede line of sight as stated in §
155.660.
   (H)   For proper plant material health, all landscaped areas shall have a
readily available water supply or an appropriate and functional irrigation
system. Refer to irrigation requirements in §
155.666.
   (I)   Sod.
      (1)   All irrigated landscape areas shall use solid St. Augustine,
Bermuda or Palmetto Sod laid on a smooth planting base with tight joints at
100% coverage at time of planting and cut to fit all landscape planters and
curb areas unless otherwise approved by the Director of Planning and Economic
Development Department.
      (2)   Bahia sod may only be used on vacant land parcels for future
development and may be sodded utilizing Bahia sod until such time that approved
development of parcel commences.
      (3)   Sod areas shall be identified and labeled on the landscape plans.
   (J)   Groundcover installation standards:
      (1)   Groundcover shall be installed using a minimum of six inches in
depth of new topsoil.
      (2)   All property other than the required landscaped strip lying between
the right-of-way and off-street parking area or other vehicular use area shall
be landscaped with at least grass or ground cover.
      (3)   Turfgrass installation shall be completed by sodding and shall
supply 100% coverage immediately upon installation. No more than 25% of total
landscaped area shall be installed as turfgrass or mulch.
      (4)   Wherein sod installation is impractical, qualified city landscape
personnel may allow seeding or sprigging with prior written approval. Grass
seed shall be clean and at least 90% weed free and free of noxious pests or
diseases. The grass seed bags shall have Florida Department of Agriculture tags
indicating compliance with the state's quality control program.
      (5)   Other ornamental groundcovers used in lieu of turfgrass shall be
installed to allow 75% coverage at installation and must have 100% within three
months after planting.
   (K)   Vine installation specifications: Vines shall be a minimum of 30
inches in height at installation and may be used in conjunction with fences,
screens, or walls to meet physical barrier requirements as specified.
   (L)   Shrubs and hedges:
      (1)   Shrub, flower, and hedges shall be installed using a minimum of six
inches in depth of new topsoil.
      (2)   Shrubs shall be installed with a minimum 24 inches in height and 12
inches in spread, unless otherwise directed, immediately upon planting.
      (3)   Shrubs shall be installed in a manner that prevents both intrusion
and touching building surfaces from branches by the end of one year's growth.
      (4)   Layering of shrub rows shall be done in accordance with the tallest
mature shrubs placed in the back and progressively shorter mature shrubs placed
progressively in the front section.
      (5)   Hedges, where required on an approved landscape plan or by Code,
shall be planted to form a future continuous, unbroken, solid visual screen
within a maximum of one year after installation date.
   (M)   Trees: The minimum new tree installation requirements shall be
delineated into four categories based on mature tree height and diameter at
breast height.
      (1)   Category I or known as large sized canopy tree: minimum of 14-16'
in overall height and 3" diameter at breast height;
      (2)   Category II or known as medium sized canopy tree: minimum of 12-14'
in overall height and 2" diameter at breast height;
      (3)   Category III or known as small sized canopy tree: minimum of 10-12'
in overall height and 1.5" diameter at breast height; and
      (4)   Category IV or known as palm category: minimum of 10' in overall
height as determined by measurement from the ground to the top frond. In no
circumstance shall Category IV trees be construed as a hedge.
      (5)   At the time of installation, a hole twice the size of the trees
root ball must be excavated and backfilled with new 50% soil muck mix.
      (6)   All guys and staking material shall be removed when the tree is
stable and established, but in no case more than one year after initial
planting of the tree. Stabilization shall be in accordance with ANSI A-300 and
Z-133. Trees shall be re-staked in the event of blow over or other failures of
the staking and guying.
         (a)   Nursery support must be removed at the time of installation;
this will not be acceptable as the approved form of staking.
         (b)   Trees shall be staked every 120 degrees with a biodegradable
twine keeping the tree upright or shall have three straps of biodegradable
twine keeping the tree upright.
   (N)   Trees shall be species having an average mature spread of crown of 30
feet or greater and having trunk(s) which can be maintained in a clean
condition over six feet of clear wood. Trees having an average mature spread of
crown less than 30 feet may be substituted by grouping to create the equivalent
of a 30-foot crown spread, this shall not include any non-trees. The average
mature canopy spread shall be determined by current University of Florida IFAS
extension office publications. City staff reserves the ability to determine the
mature canopy spread if a publication cannot be found on any particular
species.
   (O)   In the event canopy requirement cannot be met due to site limitations
as determined by city landscape personnel, the equivalent value of the canopy
tree shall be deposited into the City's Landscape Fund.
   (P)   A preferred tree planting list identified by category and type is on
file with city landscape personnel. The types of trees on this list may be
amended from time to time.
      (1)   With regards to the approved species lists provided by the city
landscape personnel, the scientific name shall take authority over the common
name as amended by the scientific community from time to time.
      (2)   Tree species not on the above approved lists can only be installed
with prior written permission from the city.
      (3)   Palms at a 3:1 ratio minimum ten feet in height, ten feet in
spread, planted in close proximity to each other shall be considered as one
canopy.
      (4)   All trees shall be planned to ensure that there is adequate root
and canopy space at maturity. Trees planted within ten feet of a paved surface
or a form of infrastructure (determined to have an invasive root system) shall
require an approved root barrier system.
      (5)   All shade trees must be located a minimum of 15 feet from
streetlight, and palms and small trees must be located a minimum of seven feet
six inches away from street light.
      (6)   Trees shall have a six foot clear trunk to allow unobstructed
pedestrian movement under or around tree canopy.
   (Q)   All species as defined as Category I invasive materials in the most
recent document compiled by the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council (FLEPPC) for
the south region are prohibited from new installation. An exception may be made
if, in the opinion of the city licensed landscape arborist or professional
landscape inspector a Category I species will not be harmful in that particular
area or to the immediate surrounding environment, it shall be allowed. (Ord.
2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-
2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.665 NON-LIVING DURABLE LANDSCAPE MATERIAL DESIGN AND INSTALLATION
STANDARDS.
   (A)   Any person, company, partnership, corporation, or service that
installs non-living durable landscape material shall adhere to guidelines set
forth in this subchapter when applicable, and shall be installed to meet all
other applicable ordinances and code requirements.
   (B)   Mulch.
      (1)   A minimum of three inches of shredded, organic, heavy metal-free
mulch shall be installed around all tree plantings and landscape beds
surrounding ornamental groundcovers, shrubs and hedges.
      (2)   The use of mulch obtained from Melaleuca, Eucalyptus, or other
invasive plant species is encouraged in order to reduce their impact on the
environment and to preserve the remaining native plant communities.
      (3)   Tree rings shall be a minimum of 12 inches away from the tree trunk
flair but shall not be permitted within the first two inches from the tree
trunk.
   (C)   Decorative rocks. Decorative rocks may be used in lieu of mulch
installation with sizes ranging from two to four inches.
   (D)   Artificial turf. Reference §§ 155.620 through 155.621. (Ord. 2021-02,
adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021; Am.
Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.666 IRRIGATION STANDARDS.
   (A)   All landscape areas shall be provided with a permanent irrigation
system maintained in good working order and designed to minimize water on
impervious areas. The irrigation system must be designed to have a minimum of
100% coverage, with 50% minimum overlap.
   (B)   All trees and palms located on non-single family residential
properties, require the installation of an individual bubbler per tree and/or
palm.
   (C)   Each main line and zone valve shall comply with the guidelines set
forth in the City Code as amended from time to time, and the latest revision of
the Florida Irrigation Society Standards and Specifications. An irrigation
system serving more than one property within a development or subdivision shall
contain one or more main lines with separate manual zone valves for each
individual parcel serviced by the system.
   (D)   Irrigation systems shall be installed and maintained to eliminate
water loss due to damaged, missing, or improperly operating sprinkler heads,
emitters, and pipes and to minimize water on impervious areas.
   (E)   Low-volume drip irrigation systems, emitter irrigation, and rain
sensors where practical shall be encouraged to promote good Florida-friendly
principles.
   (F)   Amounts and hours of watering shall be in conformance with City Code
Chapter 50 as may be amended from time to time, by reference as though fully
set forth herein and shall be effective within the municipal limits of the
city.
   (G)   Reclaimed water shall be used in accordance with applicable federal,
state, and local laws, rules and regulations. Pursuant to this section,
reclaimed water may be used for irrigation of residential and nonresidential
lawns, golf courses, cemeteries, parks, landscaped areas, edible crops (as set
forth in Code 62-610, Florida Administrative Code), highway medians, dust
control, on construction sites, mixing of concrete, and cleaning of roads and
sidewalks.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
LANDSCAPING - TREE PRESERVATION
§ 155.668 GENERAL INTENT STANDARDS AND DUTIES - LANDSCAPING.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish tree preservation standards
within the city. The intent is to perpetuate the protection, preservation, and
conservation of existing trees, natural areas, and landscaped open space as an
effective means of conserving energy and to preserve trees to improve the
aesthetic quality of the city thereby promoting the health and general welfare
of the citizenry. Owing to these many benefits provided by trees, it is the
intent of the city to protect this valuable resource through permitting for
tree removal. In the evaluation of a tree removal permit, priority shall be
given to protected trees for the preservation or relocation, replacement, and/
or payment into the City Landscape Fund. In addition, it is the policy of the
City Commission that every effort shall be made to preserve and maintain
natural vegetation within the city as identified in the City's Comprehensive
Plan.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.669 MAINTENANCE STANDARDS - ALL PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Any person, company, partnership, corporation, or service that
administers tree maintenance practices within the city shall adhere to all
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) practices found under A300 and
Z133.
   (B)   Utility companies shall be permitted to perform necessary tree pruning
around electric or utility conductors to prevent disruption of utility service
or for safety reasons.
   (C)   Necessary precautions to prevent damage to paved surfaces and
infrastructure, particularly public works, must be taken. This may require the
installation of a root barrier system.
   (D)   Trees located within swales shall be maintained in accordance with
Chapter 52 of the City of Pembroke Pines Code of Ordinances. (Ord. 2021-02,
adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021; Am.
Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.670 DUTIES OF PROPERTY OWNER FOR GENERAL LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Property owner shall utilize tree installation and maintenance
practices that follow guidelines set in The Florida Friendly Landscaping
Program; such as staking, palm pruning and tree shaping while avoiding hat
racking and over-lifting of the tree canopy.
   (B)   Property owner shall maintain their lawn, hedges, trees, plants,
ground covers and all other landscaping components free of refuse and unsightly
debris, and present the property in a healthy, neatly trimmed fashion. Hedges
shall be properly maintained to keep a neat orderly appearance and shall not
exceed six feet in height for residential and eight feet for nonresidential
properties.
   (C)   In no case shall trees, hedges or other foliage visually or physically
obstruct the right-of-way.
   (D)   The duties of the property owner extend to landscape maintenance of
adjacent right-of-ways, all easements, waterways directly abutting public
right-of-ways, and where the ingress and egress from a property is over the
waterway.
   (E)   All fertilizer applicators will adhere to the standards set forth in
the Florida Friendly Landscaping and Green Industries Best Management Practices
from the Florida Department of Environmental Protection.
   (F)   Property owner shall remove dead trees and their stumps, hazardous
trees, or hazardous part(s) of the tree from the owner's property or the swale
abutting owner's property upon notice by the city. The property owner shall
apply for a tree removal permit prior to the removal of any tree. Upon the
approval of the tree removal permit, you will have 90 days to remove and
mitigate the tree as per permit specifications.
   (G)   For the purposes of division (F) of this section, dead trees shall be
defined as follows:
      (1)   A palm shall be considered dead if more than 80% of the fronds are
dead, leaving no more than three fronds remaining.
      (2)   Slash Pine (Pinus elliottii var. densa). The trees shall be
considered dead if all of the pine needles are dead (red rusty color) or have
fallen from the tree, and no new needles are budding out.
      (3)   All other species of tree: the tree shall be considered dead if all
of the leaves or fronds have fallen or are dead and clinging to the tree. For
species other than palms, the following criteria shall be applied in
determining that the tree is dead:
         (a)   No new buds are appearing.
         (b)   The twigs at the ends of the branches are dry and brownish in
color, both in the cambium and the pith (outer and inner layers of wood
respectively), and snap when broken.
         (c)   The cambium layer (just beneath the bark) is brown and dry when
cut to a depth of one and one-half inches at three and one-half feet above
ground level for mature trees, and to a depth of one and one-half inches for
smaller saplings.
   (H)   For dead and hazardous trees, in the event the property owner does not
uphold their duties, the city shall cause the tree or tree parts to be removed
and shall bill the property owner for the cost of removal. In the event the
property owner shall not pay the cost within 30 days, the city shall file a
lien against the property for the cost of removal. Code Compliance shall have
the discretion to allow property owner to pay the bill for removal in
installments, in which event he shall apply interest at 6% per annum on the
unpaid balance until paid in full.
   (I)   Property owner shall remove all species as defined as category one
invasive material in the most recent document compiled by the Florida Exotic
Pest Plant Council (FLEPPC) for the south region, except where, in the opinion
of the city licensed landscape arborist or professional landscape inspector
such a Category I species will not be harmful in that particular area or to the
immediate surrounding environment.
   (J)   Property owner shall restore canopy loss as a direct result of natural
causation. Canopy restoration shall occur 120 days from notice of violation for
residential, commercial, and common area property. Any homeowner's association
or condominium association may petition the Code Compliance Department for an
extension of the timeframe set forth herein by submitting a plan detailing
their efforts to comply with the terms of this section and consistent with the
terms set forth in §
155.677. (Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 155.671 TREE MAINTENANCE COMPANIES WORKING IN PEMBROKE PINES.
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity engaged in the business
of tree maintenance or soliciting property owners for tree maintenance within
the city must obtain a city local business tax receipt (LBTR). Proof as a
current International Society of Arboriculture Certified Arborist or a current
Class A or B Tree Trimmer License issued by the Broward County Environmental
Licensing and Building Permitting Division shall be submitted at the time of
application.
   (B)   The person or business entity shall immediately notify the city at the
loss of the above certified arborist or the Class A or B licenses. The person
or entity will immediately lose the above LBTR for tree maintenance until proof
of current license(s) is shown.
   (C)   The city may request that Broward County revoke a LBTR in the event
standards set in §
155.669 are not met by the tree maintenance provider within Pembroke Pines.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.672 IMPROPER TREE MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Any person, company, partnership, corporation, or service that
administers tree maintenance practices within the city that does not adhere to
all American National Standards Institute (ANSI) practices found under A300 has
committed tree abuse. Common tree abuse practices include but are not limited
to the following:
      (1)   Hat-racking defined as indiscriminate cutting of branches to stubs
or lateral branches that are not large enough to assume the terminal role.
      (2)   Shaping defined as topiary pruning of Category I, II, and III
trees.
      (3)   Destruction of a tree's natural habit of growth.
      (4)   Removing over 25% of the tree's canopy at one pruning event.
      (5)   Over thinning of interior canopy.
      (6)   Over lifting of lower canopy.
      (7)   Use of climbing spikes, nails, or hooks into a tree except for the
purposes of total tree removal or any action specifically permitted by
standards set by ANSI A300 or Z133.
      (8)   Bark removal.
      (9)   Excessive root pruning as determined by an ISA Certified Arborist.
   (B)   Property owners are allowed to topiary prune only on trees with
written city approval or identified on an approved landscape plan from the city
as appropriate for topiary pruning.
   (C)   Pruning or removal of aerial roots is prohibited unless for the
prevention of damage to paved surfaces and infrastructure, as well as the
health, safety, and wellbeing of citizens such as but not limited to clearing
of sightlines, traffic areas, pedestrian walkways, and utilities.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.673 REMEDIAL MEASURES FOR TREE ABUSE BY PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   Tree abuse is a violation under City Code.
   (B)   The property owner is solely responsible for any person that commits
tree abuse as defined in §
155.672 and shall be responsible for undertaking remedial measures and/or fines
for the abused tree(s) on their property. If owner provides sufficient proof of
company contracted then additional measures set forth in §
155.671 shall apply.
   (C)   Remedial measures may include but are not limited to any or a
combination of the following actions: no action for a prescribed time,
corrective pruning to improve the health and form of affected trees,
probationary period under a pruning plan developed by a ISA Certified Arborist,
or tree removal if the natural habitat of the tree has been destroyed and
cannot be corrected.
   (D)   Any tree removals under division (C) of this section shall apply for
tree removal permit and follow permit requirements.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.674 TREE REMOVAL OR RELOCATION PERMIT.
   (A)   No property owner shall cut down or relocate any tree without first
obtaining a permit from the city as herein provided. No trees shall be removed
from any public land, including, but not limited to street right-of-way and
swale areas, without the approval of the city.
   (B)   A tree removal or relocation permit shall be in a written form
provided by the city for the property owner to request a tree removal or
relocation. The applicant must state on the form the reason for the tree
removal or relocation. The property owner or agent must fill out and sign the
permit, provide the required documentation, and indicate that they will follow
all terms and conditions associated with the permit issuance.
   (C)   In addition, the property owner must attach the following items at the
time of the permit application:
      (1)   Letter from their homeowner association stating that the owner has
their permission to act and either a photo of the tree or a detailed map
indicating the tree location. Properties not under a homeowner association are
not required to have said letter.
      (2)   A sketch or map indicating the location and number of trees slated
for removal/relocation.
      (3)   At least one color photo of each tree being applied for. Attach
additional photos as needed.
      (4)   Form of payment with appropriate fees: check, money order, etc.
      (5)   A copy of the notice of code violation (if applicable).
   (D)   If all documentation is not received at the time of application, city
officials may not proceed with processing the permit until all requested
information is received.
   (E)   The application fee shall be $10 for single-family, detached owner-
occupied properties. The application fee for nonresidential and multi-family
shall be $50 for the first ten trees (any site proposing to remove more than
ten trees shall be processed as a landscape permit). Common area HOA shall be
considered nonresidential properties. The fee is due at the time of the
application submission and will not be returned if permit is denied by the
city.
   (F)   Application fees shall be waived for species identified as Category I
invasive trees in the most recent document compiled by the Florida Exotic Pest
Plant Council (FLEPPC) for the south region. Replacement value shall be
determined by qualified city staff.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22)
§ 155.675 STANDARDS FOR TREE REMOVAL OR RELOCATION PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Application for a permit request by this section shall be reviewed by
the city that may include a visual inspection of the site. The city shall upon
visual inspection of the tree determine whether requested tree(s) meet removal
or if relocation is more beneficial than removal, the city may require the
property owner to relocate the tree at the owner's expense.
   (B)   The city shall as a condition of the issuance of a tree removal permit
require replacement tree(s) for canopy replacement at the property owner's
expense.
   (C)   The following conditions must be proven to the city to issue a tree
removal or relocation permit:
      (1)   The tree unreasonably restricts the permitted use of the property.
      (2)   A proposed development cannot be located on the site without tree
removal.
      (3)   The property owner has made every reasonable effort to incorporate
existing trees in the development project and to minimize the number of trees
removed.
      (4)   The tree is significantly damaging existing structures and cannot
be mitigated through proper arboricultural practices or reasonable
modifications to the property.
      (5)   The tree interferes with utility services and cannot be mitigated
through proper arboricultural practices.
      (6)   The tree creates an on-going safety problem for the existing
development and cannot be mitigated through proper arboricultural practices.
      (7)   The tree is obstructing safe sightlines.
      (8)   The tree is growing too close in proximity to another more valuable
tree(s) to permit normal growth and development of the affected tree(s).
      (9)   The tree is of poor quality and condition but is not considered a
hazardous tree.
      (10)   It is in the public interest and welfare that the tree be removed
for a reason other than set forth herein.
   (D)   All tree replacements or relocations shall be completed within six
months of the permit issuance unless the property owner receives written
notification from the city granting an extension.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.676 CONDITIONS FOR TREE REMOVALS AND RELOCATION PERMITS.
   (A)   Tree relocations and replacement trees shall be located within the
site or, with concurrence of the city, on public or private land within a
reasonable proximity of the site. Sites can also include public land in the
city or donating to any citizen or citizen groups for the purpose of public
interest and welfare as prior approved by the city.
   (B)   Relocated trees and replacement trees shall be planted in the area
with adequate space for root and canopy growth and development and shall be
planted in a location that will not interfere with existing or proposed
utilities or other cables either above or below ground. The city may refer the
installation site to such city departments or other utility agencies having an
interest to determine the effect on public welfare, adjacent properties, or
other public services and facilities before permitting the relocation or tree
replacement site.
   (C)   The property owner shall refrain from causing unnecessary damages to
other trees remaining on the site while planting or preparing the site for
relocation or replacement.
   (D)   All new trees and palms shall be installed using commonly accepted
industry practices for tree/palm installation. Remedial corrections may be
requested by the city landscape representative if installation was done
contrary to industry standards. The property owner is responsible for removing
all landscape supports after proper establishment or a maximum of one year
after installation.
   (E)   All replacement trees shall be a minimum tree grade of Florida #1 or
better as identified in Grades and Standards by the Florida Department of
Agriculture.
   (F)   All permitted tree removals shall include removal of their stumps.
   (G)   Native replacement canopy trees must be used in removals of native
trees.
   (H)   A list of preferred tree species updated at the discretion of
qualified city staff is available through city landscape personnel.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.677 CANOPY TREE AND PALM REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   The property owner shall install one and one-half replacement canopy
trees of equivalent canopy area for every one non-specimen canopy tree
permitted to be removed. City officials shall round up to the nearest whole
number to calculate the required amount of replacement canopy trees. Existing
site vegetation may be taken into consideration by city staff when determining
replacement.
   (B)   For specimen trees only, the replacement canopy tree calculation shall
be obtained by a certified arborist using tree appraisal guidelines set in the
most recent edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal published by the Council
of Tree and Landscape Appraisers and submitted to the city for review.
Appraisal guidelines shall determine a dollar value for the requested removed
tree which shall include purchase price of the replacement trees plus
installation cost. The city shall use the specimen tree's dollar value to
calculate the compensatory required number of replacement canopy trees.
   (C)   The ultimate goal of the city shall be to replace canopy for canopy.
The following replacement canopy tree minimum specifications shall be for
Category I through IV, as listed below.
      (1)   Category I canopy trees: minimum of 14' in height and 3" diameter
at breast height.
      (2)   Category II canopy trees: minimum of 12' height and 2" diameter at
breast height.
      (3)   Category III small trees: minimum of 10' in height and 1.5"
diameter at breast height.
      (4)   Category IV palms: minimum of 10' in height and a mature canopy
spread of 10'.
   (D)   The property owner shall install one Category IV palm for every one
palm removed. A multi-trunked palm shall be considered as one palm. Three
Category IV palms in close proximity to each other may be used as one canopy
replacement tree.
   (E)   If the number of required replacement trees is greater than five, the
city shall require the property owner to install no more than 20% of any given
species.
   (F)   Written approval must be obtained from the city prior to installation
if the minimum tree size is commercially unavailable. Credit at the city's
discretion may be given to a property owner for the installation of larger
trees.
   (G)   If determined by the city that the replacement value for a removed
tree is not feasible due to lack of available planting space on site only, the
property owner shall hire qualified landscape personnel and submit a mitigation
plan in accordance with the conditions set forth in §
155.680. This requirement may be waived by city landscape personnel for limited
scope projects.
   (H)   Property owner may be required to submit a mitigation plan in
accordance with conditions set in §
155.680 for removal of Category I invasive tree in the most recent document
compiled by the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council (FLEPPC) for the south
region.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.678 RELOCATION OF TREES.
   (A)   Relocation of non-specimen trees.
      (1)   All relocations shall be in accordance to industry standards set by
the International Society of Arboriculture, as amended. Industry standards
extend to post-installation phase including but not limited to bracing,
watering, and fertilization.
      (2)   All root and canopy pruning shall be conducted prior to the tree's
relocation and transportation.
      (3)   During relocation and transplantation, the root ball shall be
protected and kept moist at all times.
      (4)   Trees with a dormancy period shall be transported during the
dormancy phase.
      (5)   No trees shall be relocated or transplanted during periods of
strong, dry winds or during a water shortage as determined by the South Florida
Water Management District.
   (B)   Relocation of specimen trees.
      (1)   Relocated specimen trees may require a bond issuance to insure the
survival of the specimen trees designated for preservation, unless otherwise
exempted in writing from the city, from the property owner.
         (a)   Bonding specifications.
            1.   The bond shall meet the approval of the City Attorney and may
be in the form of a letter of credit, cash bond or other form accepted by the
City Attorney. The bond must be drawn upon a bank or saving and loan
institution or insurance company authorized to conduct business in the State of
Florida.
            2.   This bond shall be in addition to any other bond that may be
required by any other government agency.
            3.   The amount of the bond shall be determined based upon
computations calculated in accordance with the most current version of the
Guide for Plant Appraisals published by the Council of Tree and Landscape
Appraisers.
            4.   Governmental entities shall be exempt from this bond
requirement so long as sufficient security is provided as accepted by the City
Attorney.
         (b)   Bond release requirements.
            1.   The specimen tree relocation bond will be released upon
successful tree relocation as set forth in this section and written approval is
obtained from the City Landscape Division.
            2.   Written approval by the city landscape personnel may only be
obtained upon the completion of construction activities and where it is
determined by the city landscape personnel that the tree is not effectively
destroyed one year from the date of relocation.
            3.   The city may release a bond where a tree relocation permit is
transferred. The release of the bond may be conditioned upon the posting of a
new bond by the subsequent permittee.
      (2)   If within one year of relocation the tree is determined to be
effectively destroyed, the bond shall be drawn upon in accordance with the
value of the tree pursuant to the most recent edition to the Guide for Plant
Appraisals published by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers. Such
funds will be deposited into the city’s Landscape Fund and shall be used by the
city to replace the effectively destroyed tree.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.679 ENFORCEMENT - LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   The City Manager shall designate personnel to be responsible for
implementing and enforcing the provisions of this section and any pertinent
policies of the City Commission and shall prescribe the duties thereof.
   (B)   Police officers and Code Compliance Officers, including, but not
limited to the city landscape personnel, shall enforce the provisions of this
section. Violation of any provision of this section may be pursued by the
appropriate remedy in court or by the Code Compliance Board as contemplated in
§
10.99 of the City of Pembroke Pines Code of Ordinances.
   (C)   Police, Code Compliance, or the city landscape personnel may order
that work not in accordance with the section's provisions be stopped and such
persons performing work shall immediately cease such work. The work may not
resume until such time as the person is in compliance with this section.
   (D)   During emergency conditions caused by a hurricane or other disaster,
the provisions of this section shall be suspended by resolution of the city,
until the end of the emergency period.
   (E)   Violations of this section shall be punishable a provided by §
10.99 of the City of Pembroke Pines Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.680 MITIGATION PLAN.
   (A)   Residential. The residential mitigation plan is intended to provide
homeowner associations the ability to meet minimum landscape requirements while
not compromising infrastructure. This plan shall provide alternatives to the
requirements set forth in this section and will be determined by the landscape
division of the Planning and Economic Development Department upon review and
inspection.
   (B)   Nonresidential. The nonresidential mitigation plan is intended to
provide property owners the ability to meet minimum landscape requirements. The
guidelines shall provide alternatives to the requirements set forth in this
section. Nonresidential properties may also contribute to the Landscape Fund as
defined in §
155.681 in addition to the proposed mitigation plan. This plan will be reviewed
by the landscape division of the Planning and Economic Development Department.
   (C)   Items subject to a mitigation plan may include but shall not be
limited to:
      (1)   The removal of Category I invasive materials as defined by the
Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council,
      (2)   The substitution of any tree(s) of lesser size(s) than previously
approved by the city due to existing approved site limitations.
      (3)   The substitution of any tree(s) species which if planted would
cause property damage.
   (D)   The city landscape personnel will review the plan based on quality of
material and site limitations. Once the property meets the intent of the
purposes of the section, the approved landscape plan will stay on file with the
city and act as the new standard for the property until modifications to site
are made.
   (E)   Mitigation credits shall apply: The property owner's registered
landscape personnel shall appraise the tree's current value pursuant to the
newest edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal published by the Council of
Tree and Landscape Appraisers to be reviewed by city landscape personnel. Value
shall include trees required for replacement, cost of installation, and
maintenance. Contribution to City Landscape Fund or landscape contribution on
said property will act in lieu of tree replacement.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.681 LANDSCAPE FUND.
   There is hereby established a Landscape Fund for the deposit of funds in
accordance with the provisions of this section. Landscape Fund shall directly
benefit landscape improvements and green initiatives within the city. If it is
determined that mitigation cannot occur on the proposed site at the time of
tree removal or landscape plan review, staff of the Landscape Division shall
determine the value of contribution to the Landscape Fund for those qualifying
projects.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.682 EXEMPTIONS - LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   All properties on or within the immediate vicinity of the North Perry
Airport shall comply with federal regulations set forth by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) regarding canopy height considerations only where
applicable. Any other conflicting FAA landscape regulations with the City Code
will be judged on a case by case basis.
   (B)   All waterways or waterway maintenance easements shall be landscaped to
the water's edge in accordance with the applicable drainage or water management
district standards and shall be shown on the landscape plan.
   (C)   Where there may be interference with existing or proposed utilities,
either above or below ground.
   (D)   All landscaping shall comply with all applicable federal and state
regulations.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
LIGHTING
§ 155.685 PURPOSE AND INTENT - LIGHTING.
   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to ensure that exterior
(outdoor) lighting positively enhances the visual impact of a building or
project on surrounding properties and uses. To that end, exterior lighting at a
building or project should be designed, operated, and installed in a consistent
and coordinated fashion to provide safe, convenient and efficient lighting for
customers, pedestrians and vehicles, while avoiding the creation of hot spots,
glare, obtrusive light, light pollution, light trespass, and visual nuisance.
Also, exterior lighting should accentuate key architectural elements of a
building or project, and highlight or otherwise emphasize landscape features.
   (A)   Guiding principles.
      (1)   Lighting designs shall be of a consistent design within each
respective site, and should minimize light trespass/pollution and impact on
neighboring properties and natural habitats, while ensuring safety, security,
utility, productivity, commerce, livability, and enjoyment. Lighting equipment
should be responsibly selected and sourced through careful consideration of the
short and long-term financial, environmental, and social costs incurred through
lighting.
      (2)   Energy and resource should be conserved to the greatest extent
possible. Designs should be practical as well as financially and
technologically feasible, based on industry-acceptable best practices. Energy
efficient practices and lighting is encouraged.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.686 GENERAL LIGHTING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Lighting. Shall at a minimum meet all applicable local, state, and
federal codes and regulations.
   (B)   Exterior lighting plan. An exterior lighting plan, including a
photometric plan (which covers the parcel which is the site of the building or
project in question), appropriate pole, fixture, and lamp cut sheets, and
descriptions of lenses and appropriate data tables, shall be submitted for site
plan review.
      (1)   The exterior lighting plan shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer, who shall certify that the exterior lighting plan
complies with this section.
      (2)   The photometric plan shall be prepared in a scale that is easily
legible. The current edition of the IES Lighting Handbook, published by the
Illumination Engineers Society is the standard to be used by the engineer as a
guide for the design and testing of lighting plans.
      (3)   The standards contained therein shall apply unless standards
developed and adopted by this section or subsequent amendments are more
restrictive, in which case the more restrictive standards shall apply.
      (4)   Lighting equipment must be of commercial quality and listed with a
Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) such as Underwriters
Laboratories (U.L.) or Electrical Testing Labs (ETL).
   (C)   Pole lighting height standard. All private, pole mounted, outdoor
surface lot lighting shall be limited to 30 feet in height above grade. Non-
vehicular pedestrian areas shall incorporate pedestrian scale lighting where
appropriate.
   (D)   Illumination levels. The maximum illumination for a project shall be
12 f.c. with the minimum average illumination, at grade, to be not less than
two f.c., average maintained over the site. The illumination level at the
property line of any project shall be a maximum of 0.5 f.c. To avoid glare or
spill light from encroaching onto adjacent properties, illumination shall be
installed with house side shields and reflectors, and shall be maintained in
such a manner as to confine light rays to the premises of the building or
project. Color correlated temperature (CCT): The maximum CCT for a site shall
be as follows:
 
Table 155.686 Color Correlated Temperature (CCT)
Location                                   Maximum Color Correlated Temperature
B-2, B-3, C-1, I-L, I-M and I-H Zoning     4,000 K
Districts
B-1, PO, A, U, A-E, R-R, REC and CF Zoning 3,000 K
Districts
Residential Common Area                    3,000 K
Natural Areas, Preserves and               3,000 K
Environmentally Sensitive Areas
 
   (E)   Installation. The lighting installation shall not be placed in
permanent use until a letter of compliance from a registered engineer or
architect has been provided stating that installation has been field checked
and meets the requirements of this section.
   (F)   Architectural and landscape lighting.
      (1)   Lighting should be designed, installed, and controlled to ensure
that the lights only illuminate the intended object(s).
      (2)   The placement of light poles shall consider existing and proposed
ultimate growth of all landscaping and tree canopies to minimize or prevent
conflicts between landscaping and lighting systems.
      (3)   To the extent practical and where possible, lighting fixtures shall
be directed downward rather than upward. Directional shielding shall be
implemented to minimize or prevent glare, light trespass, and light pollution.
      (4)   When up lighting is required, lighting systems should be low in
intensity and incorporate full shielding.
      (5)   Ground mounted lighting should be screened from view.
   (G)   Construction lighting.
      (1)   All construction site lighting fixtures must be full cut-off or
directionally shielded fixtures that are aimed and controlled so the directed
light is substantially confined to the object intended to be illuminated and
not directly visible outside of the property.
      (2)   Interior construction lights shall be extinguished after the work
has been completed for the day unless needed to ensure safety, security, or
legal compliance.
      (3)   A building is no longer considered under construction once exterior
walls and windows are installed and permanent lighting replaces temporary
lighting as the primary source of light for the building.
   (H)   Nonconforming lighting.
      (1)   When 50% or more of any component (e.g., luminaires, poles) of the
exterior lighting system at a building or project is upgraded, changed, or
replaced (not including regular maintenance), such component for the remainder
of the exterior lighting shall be brought in compliance with all applicable
requirements of this section.
      (2)   In the event less than 50% of the exterior lighting system is being
replaced and the Planning and Economic Development Director or designee
determine that an equivalent replacement is no longer obtainable, due to
obsolescence or lack of supply, such component for the remainder of exterior
light shall be brought in compliance with all applicable requirements of this
section.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22)
§ 155.687 NON-RESIDENTIAL LIGHTING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Light fixtures; types.
      (1)   Pole mounted light fixtures on nonresidential properties shall be
full cutoff fixtures, and shall be incorporated as an integral design element
that compliments the design of the building or project through style, material
or color. Exception - non-cutoff fixtures for pedestrian scale lighting for
walkways may be utilized for nonresidential projects upon review and approval
of the Planning and Zoning Board. Planning and Zoning Board consideration may
be with restrictions.
      (2)   Lighting of buildings shall be limited to wall washer type fixtures
or up-lights, which do not produce spill light or glare. Sag lenses, convex
lenses, and drop lenses shall be prohibited.
      (3)   Security lighting. Attached building fixtures, utilized for parking
lot security purposes only, may be aimed no higher than 45 degrees above
straight down.
      (4)   Time controls and dimmers. Nonresidential lighting shall be
installed with time controls and dimmers which will assure that the required
illumination shall be provided at dusk and that light levels are reduced not
later than one hour by a minimum of 25% after the close of operations to the
minimum levels needed to ensure safety and security.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.688 OUTDOOR DINING AND RETAIL LIGHTING.
   (A)   Exterior dining and retail areas, including but not limited to car
dealerships, gas stations, outdoor markets, and drive-through facilities,
require lighting necessary to allow customers to comfortably eat and review
outdoor merchandise for extended times, and create safe pedestrian passage.
   (B)   Canopied areas. At a canopied area, such as those found at drive-
through facilities at banks, service stations, convenience centers, and car-
washes, lighting under the canopied area shall be either recessed or cut-off
fixtures. The maximum, footcandle level (under such canopied area) shall be 24
f.c. at grade, with a maximum to minimum ratio of 2:1. The remainder of the
site shall be subject to illumination levels required per general standards.
   (C)   Outdoor dining areas.
      (1)   Lighting fixtures must be included and reviewed as part of the
outdoor dining proposal.
      (2)   The lighting must be decorative and compliment the architectural
character of the building and area as determined by the city's Zoning Official.
      (3)   Lighting must be installed at a scale that is deemed appropriate
for the outdoor dining area as determined by the city's Zoning Official,
however, lighting shall not be installed or extend beyond the roof line of the
primary building.
      (4)   Lights mounted on the building shall not cause direct glare or
other visual obstruction to pedestrians or vehicle drivers along the street and
public walkway, and should illuminate only the sidewalk area.
      (5)   Full cutoff fixtures are required for any lamp type with an initial
output of greater than or equal to 2,000 lumens.
      (6)   All fixture types will be allowed for any lamp types below 2,000
lumens. Shielding of fixtures is not required but recommended.
      (7)   Lighting shall not be affixed or mounted to public property or
landscaping.
      (8)   Lighting shall not expand beyond the approved outdoor dining area.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.689 LIGHTING OF RESIDENTIAL COMMON AREAS.
   (A)   Residential common areas (clubhouses, guardhouses, entry features,
pool areas, private residential parks, tot lots, etc.) shall require the
following light design standards.
   (B)   Full cutoff fixtures are required for any lamp type with an initial
output of greater than or equal to 2,000 lumens.
      (1)   Examples of lamp types of 2,000 lumens include the following:
         (a)   100 watt standard incandescent;
         (b)   15 watt cool white fluorescent;
         (c)   15 watt compact fluorescent;
         (d)   18 watt LED fluorescent; and
         (e)   20 watt warm white LED light bulb.
   (C)   All fixture types will be allowed for any lamp types below 2,000
lumens. Shielding of fixtures is not required but recommended.
   (D)   Featured up lighting for landscaping, buildings, and water features
may be allowed, provided light sources are completely shielded from public
view.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.690 LIGHTING OF NATURAL AREAS, PRESERVES AND ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE
AREAS.
   (A)   Lighting systems in natural areas, preserves and environmentally
sensitive areas shall employ adaptive lighting techniques such as dimmers,
shielding, anti-glare filters, and time controls in order to minimize the
effect on the natural habitat and wildlife in the area.
   (B)   Amber colored LEDs are encouraged where possible in the design.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.691 PROHIBITED LIGHTING.
   (A)   High intensity, special purpose lighting such as aerial lasers and
"searchlight" style lights.
   (B)   Low pressure sodium lighting.
   (C)   Search lights, laser source lights, strobe or flashing lights, motion
or illusion lights or any similar high-intensity light shall not be permitted,
except in emergencies by police and fire at their direction.
   (D)   Mercury vapor lamps.
   (E)   Lighting that can be confused for a traffic control device.
   (F)   Blinking, flashing, moving, flickering, changing intensity, changing
color lights not otherwise permitted in this section as determined by staff of
the Planning and Economic Development Department.
   (G)   Any exposed lamp or bulb visible from the property boundary of parcel
on which the light is located.
   (H)   Unshielded accent building mounted luminous tube.
   (I)   Lighting used to internally illuminate an awning of a building.
   (J)   Sag lenses, convex lenses, and drop lenses.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.692 EXEMPTIONS - LIGHTING.
   (A)   Public facilities including but not limited to parks; lighted
recreation and athletic areas, courts and fields; and water and wastewater
treatment facilities shall be exempted from these standards.
   (B)   Lighting for airports is subject to regulations set forth by the
Federal Aviation Administration.
   (C)   Lighting for public streets, roads, and right-of-way.
   (D)   Emergency lighting for non-structural/ temporary purposes including
but not limited to:
      (1)   State of emergency;
      (2)   Law enforcement;
      (3)   Fire services; and
      (4)   Emergency medical services.
   (E)   Exterior seasonal lights are exempt from the standards provided they
meet the following conditions:
      (1)   Are installed properly and in compliance with all applicable codes
and regulations;
      (2)   Do not pose a threat to the safety and security of occupants,
visitors, motorists or passersby;
      (3)   Are not a nuisance to those in the surrounding area or motorists;
and
      (4)   Suspended in a way which do not pose a safety or fire hazard.
   (F)   Traffic signs or lights as part of road work and maintenance
activities (i.e. repairs, setup, and tear-down) may supersede the lighting
restrictions to ensure the safety and security of maintenance staff.
   (G)   Automated teller machines must meet the requirements set forth in F.S.
§ 655.962 and as amended.
   (H)   Other federal or state properties and or use which may have
regulations which supersede municipal requirements.
   (I)   Municipal signage.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
SIGNS
§ 155.695 PURPOSE - SIGNS.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to create the framework for a
comprehensive but balanced system of sign control, thereby facilitating a clear
and pleasant communication between people and their environment. It is the
belief of the City Commission that the nature of signs is to provide an index
to the needed goods and services. It is the intention of this subchapter to
authorize the use of signs which are:
      (1)    Appropriate in dimension and scale with surrounding buildings,
shopping center and community.
      (2)   Content neutral.
      (3)   Expressive of the identity of individual proprietors or the
community as a whole.
      (4)   Legible under the circumstances in which they are seen.
      (5)   Effective in indexing the environment.
      (6)   Promotive of the aesthetics, health, safety, welfare, and the
assurance of protection of adequate lighting, energy, and air space within the
city by regulation of the posting, displaying, erection, use, and maintenance
of signs.
      (7)   May also be determined by staff to ensure the sign is complimentary
to the surrounding community.
   (B)   Applicability. The provisions of this subchapter include but are not
limited to:
      (1)   General standards;
      (2)   Location;
      (3)   Sign plans;
      (4)   Permanent signs;
      (5)   Temporary signs;
      (6)   Nonconforming signs;
      (7)   Exemptions;
      (8)   Prohibitions;
      (9)   Inspection and violations.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.696 GENERAL STANDARDS - SIGNS.
   The following general standards shall apply to all signs city-wide:
   (A)   Obscene. It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign
or other advertising structure any obscene or indecent matter. No sign shall
display any statement, word, character, or illustration of an obscene nature,
as defined by F.S. Ch. 847, as may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Measurement. A sign calculation graphic will be maintained in the
Planning and Economic Development Department.
   (C)   Misleading. It shall be unlawful for a person to display false or
misleading statements upon signs, intended to mislead the public as to anything
sold, any services to be performed or information disseminated. The fact that
any sign or display shall contain words or language sufficient to mislead a
reasonable and prudent person in reading same, shall be prima facie evidence of
a violation of this section by the person displaying the sign or permitting
same to be displayed.
   (D)   Non-commercial copy. Any sign authorized in this subchapter may
contain non-commercial copy in lieu of any other copy. However, in
nonresidential zoning districts, the area of a sign containing non-commercial
copy shall be construed to count towards the total signage area allowed for the
sign type that it most closely resembles. Any sign allowed under this
subchapter may contain, in lieu of any other message or copy, any lawful non-
commercial message that does not direct attention to a business operated for
profit, or to a product, commodity or service for sale or lease, or to any
other commercial interest or activity, so long as said sign complies with the
size, height, area and other requirements of this subchapter.
   (E)   In accordance with F.S. § 526.111, 526.121, and 553.79, as may be
amended from time to time, this subchapter shall not apply to the design,
construction, or location of signage advertising the retail price of gasoline.
   (F)   In accordance with F.S. § 533.79, as amended from time to time, this
subchapter does not authorize the city to adopt or enforce any regulation that
conflicts with or impairs corporate trademarks, service marks, trade dress,
logos, color patterns, design scheme insignia, image standards, or other
features of corporate branding identity on real property or improvements
thereon used in activities conducted under F.S. Ch. 526, or in carrying out
business activities defined as a franchise by Federal Trade Commission
regulations in 16 C.F.R. § 436.1, et seq. This division does not affect any
requirement for design and construction in the Florida Building Code.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.697 LOCATION - SIGNS.
   No sign or support shall be placed in such position or manner as to obstruct
or interfere, either physically or visually, with any fire alarm, police alarm,
traffic signal, sign, or any devices maintained by or under public authority;
or ingress or egress from any public or private right-of-way, roadway, or
driveway.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.698 SIGN PLAN.
   (A)   Uniform sign plan.
      (1)   Shopping center signs. A uniform sign plan shall be required by the
city for all attached tenant wall signs within shopping centers. The owner or
owner-designated agent of a shopping center must create or revise a uniform
sign plan to reflect the requirements of this section prior to the issuance of
any future sign permits by the city. Uniform sign plans shall:
         (a)   Be coordinated through and approved by the shopping center
owner.
         (b)   Be presented for the whole shopping center, which shall be
compatible with the architectural design of the entire center and enhance the
aesthetics of the center.
         (c)   A uniform sign plan shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning
Board. The process to modify an existing uniform sign plan shall be determined
by the Zoning Administrator. Signs utilizing white or black faces and/or
legally registered and recognized logos, trademarks, or letter style shall be
considered and may be permitted with approval of both the landlord and the
city. Logos, trademarks, or letter styles that are of a different color than
the approved uniform sign plan color guidelines will be considered during the
permitting process upon review of compatibility issues by the city's Zoning
Official. State or nationally registered trademarks/logos that the Zoning
Official deems to be egregious or objectionable may be denied. The decision of
the Zoning Official is appealable to the Planning and Zoning Board.
         (d)   Box or cabinet signs shall be allowed when presented as part of
a uniform sign plan.
         (e)   Tenant signs within a uniform sign plan shall be limited to the
following:
            1.   One font;
            2.   One text color;
            3.   One background color;
            4.   One sign frame color;
            5.   Uniform material type; and
            6.   One type of interior illumination.
         (f)   Uniform sign plans shall include the following standards and
specifications:
            1.   Height (sign copy). Sign copy shall have a maximum of 48
inches;
            2.   Length (sign structure and sign copy). Sign copy shall be
limited to a maximum of 75% of leased frontage.
            3.   Tenants shall be allowed a maximum of 1.5 square feet per
lineal foot of leased frontage, or 120 square feet whichever is less;
            4.   Brightness. Illuminated and other lighting effects shall not
create a nuisance to adjacent property or create a traffic hazard;
            5.   Typical sign type;
            6.   Sign material(s);
            7.   Method of illumination;
            8.   Hours of illumination; and
            9.   Maximum sign coverage (as a percentage of sign band).
         (g)   Uniform sign plans must incorporate illustration(s) of typical
tenant sign to include:
            1.   Dimensions of proposed sign to show height, length and width
of sign (sign structure and sign copy);
            2.   Area of proposed sign face and logos;
            3.   Exterior color(s) of typical sign including sign face and
frame;
            4.   Font on sign face; and
            5.   Elevation(s) of a typical tenant storefront(s) with the
proposed sign location. Tenant sign must be centered both vertically and
horizontally on the sign band.
         (h)   Tenants are allowed one sign on each shopping center bay primary
frontage.
         (i)   Tenants occupying a corner bay within a shopping center shall be
allowed an additional sign on the store's secondary frontage which shall not
exceed the size of the sign on the primary frontage. Sign area for both signs
shall not exceed a maximum area of 120 square feet.
   (B)   Master sign plan. Signs for regional malls, as defined in §§
155.200 through
155.204, hospitals or licensed facilities, as defined in F.S. § 395.002, may be
established through a master sign plan. Sign standards as to type, number,
size, height, or other design provisions established in addition to or in lieu
of the restrictions placed on signs by this section are to be incorporated into
the master sign plan.
      (1)   Requirements.
         (a)   Master sign plans shall illustrate all proposed signs in
sufficient detail so as to provide knowledgeable review and design specificity.
Master sign plans shall show, describe or illustrate all signs proposed to be
located on a lot and the buildings and structures therein, whether existing or
new, and whether permitted by right or as additional signage under these
regulations.
         (b)   Regional mall, hospital or licensed facility use must be the
primary use of the property for which the master sign plan is created.
         (c)   Minimum lot size of five acres is required to develop a master
sign plan for hospitals or licensed facilities.
         (d)   Master sign plans shall not be exempt from §§
155.699 and
155.6100.
         (e)   Upon approval, the master sign plan shall supersede any
conflicting restrictions and regulations of the sign code unless specifically
listed within.
      (2)   Master sign plan application. An application for a master sign plan
shall include the following information:
         (a)   Accurate site plan, including location of building(s), parking
lot(s), driveway(s), and landscaped area(s);
         (b)   A drawing showing details of construction and foundation of
proposed sign(s);
         (c)   An accurate indication of the location of each present and
proposed future sign of any type, whether requiring a permit or not;
         (d)   An elevation drawing or photo depicting the proposed location of
sign(s) on buildings, walls or windows;
         (e)   A scaled drawing showing the size, shape, design, colors,
materials, lighting and letter styles of proposed sign(s);
         (f)   Exterior paint or stain samples of the colors to be used in the
construction of proposed sign(s);
         (g)   Computation of the maximum total sign area. For buildings with
two or more separate businesses, computations shall identify the total maximum
area each individual business will be allowed;
         (h)   Plans, including window signage, should indicate the area(s) of
the window(s) to be covered and the general type of window signs (for example,
painted, etched, stenciled, and the like);
         (i)   Master sign plans must be signed by all owners or their
authorized agents;
         (j)   Any other maps, drawings or materials as required by the
Planning and Economic Development Department (including a colored rendering of
the sign) to adequately describe the sign proposal.
      (3)   Master sign plan review. An application for a master sign plan
shall be reviewed by Planning and Zoning Board and be determined consistent
with §
155.695.
      (4)   Individual sign permits. Individual sign building permits are
required for all signs contained within an approved master sign plan.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22)
§ 155.699 PERMANENT SIGNS.
   Only such permanent signs as are detailed herein below shall be permitted to
be erected or maintained upon any building lot, lot, or parcel of land:
Table 155.699: Permanent Signs
Sign Type Maximum Square Maximum Number of Maximum Height Additional
          Footage        Signs                            Regulations
Table 155.699: Permanent Signs
Sign Type       Maximum Square  Maximum Number  Maximum Height  Additional
                Footage         of Signs                        Regulations
                                                                Allowed where
                                                                there are two
                                To be           Shall be in     or more
Directional and                 determined by   conformanc e    buildings; a
Informationa l  1.5 square feet staff based on  with engineerin building has a
Signs                           shopping center g standards in  drive thru; or
                                design and      Ch. 52          a building is
                                circulation                     not visible
                                                                from primary
                                                                frontage
                                1 per ingress                   Not to exceed 3
Directory Sign  32 square feet  to the site     8 feet          signs per
                                                                shopping center
                                                                Illuminated
                                1 per drive                     sign shall not
Menu Board      32 square feet  thru lane       N/A             be visible from
                                                                adjacent right-
                                                                of-way
Model Home      3 square feet   1 per model     N/A             N/A
Signs
Nameplate/                      1 in the front
Identificati on 3 square feet   and the rear of 3 inches        N/A
Sign                            the building/
                                ten ant bay
                                                                Shall count
Outparcels and                                                  towards the
Freestanding    24 square feet  1               7.5 feet        maximum allowed
Building                                                        sign area for
Monument Sign                                                   the site (120
                                                                square feet)
                                                                No more than 60
                                                                square feet of
                                                                signage shall
                Up to 120                                       be placed on
Outparcels and  square feet for                                 the primary
Freestanding    the site        N/A             N/A             facade.
Building Wall   (including                                      Secondary sign
Signs           monument sign)                                  area shall be
                                                                equal to or
                                                                less than the
                                                                sign on the
                                                                primary facade
Parking                         1 per
Identificati on 1.5 square feet designated      8.5 feet        N/A
Signs                           parking space
                24 square feet  2, one facing
                facing Pines    Pines Boulevard
                Boulevard or    or other
Regional Mall   other arterial  arterial
Outparcel       roadway and 16  roadway, and    7.5 feet        N/A
Monument Sign   square feet     the second
                facing the ring facing the ring
                road or         road or
                interior of the interior of the
                site            site
                                                                No more than 40
                                                                square feet of
                                                                signage shall
                                                                be placed on
Regional Mall                                                   the primary
Outparcel Wall  80 square feet  N/A             N/A             facade.
Sign                                                            Secondary sign
                                                                area shall be
                                                                equal to or
                                                                less than the
                                                                sign on the
                                                                primary facade
                                                                No more than 60
                                                                square feet of
                                                                signage shall
                Up to 120                                       be placed on
Regional Mall   square feet for                                 the primary
Secondary       the site        N/A             N/A             facade.
Building Sign   (including                                      Secondary Sign
                monument sign)                                  area shall be
                                                                equal to or
                                                                less than the
                                                                sign on the
                                                                primary facade.
                                1 per
                                subdivision
                                entrance. Signs
Residential                     located on      15 feet above
Subdivision     32 square feet  either side of  grade[1]        N/A
Sign                            the entrance
                                shall be
                                counted as 1
                                sign
                                                                Price panels
Service Station 36 square feet  1               7.5 feet        shall not
Monument Sign   total                                           exceed 24
                                                                square feet
                                                                No more than 60
                                                                square feet of
                                                                signage shall
                                                                be placed on
                Up to 120                                       the primary
Service Station square feet for                                 facade.
Wall Sign       the site        N/A             N/A             Secondary sign
                (including                                      area (including
                monument sign)                                  canopy) shall
                                                                be equal to or
                                                                less than the
                                                                sign on the
                                                                primary facade.
                                1 per shopping
                                center, plus
                                one additional
                                if the shopping
                                center fronts
                                on two main                     A third
                                thoroughfare s                  monument sign
                                of at least                     shall be
                                secondary                       permitted if
Shopping Center 48 square feet  arterial        9 feet          the shopping
Monument Sign                   designation (80                 center meets
                                feet right-of-                  both of the
                                way), or the                    aforementione d
                                shopping center                 standards
                                has a minimum
                                1,500 lineal
                                feet of
                                frontage along
                                a single
                                thoroughfare
                25% of the area
Supergraphic s  of the primary  N/A             N/A             N/A
                building face
Tenant Bay Wall Master or       Master or       Master or       Master or
Sign            uniform sign    uniform sign    uniform sign    uniform sign
                plan            plan            plan            plan
[1]   The sign copy is limited to 15 feet above grade, the structure may extend
past 15 feet from grade.
All electrical wiring, conduit, connections and the like shall be internally
routed, so they are not exposed to view. Electrical boxes shall be painted to
match the facade or concealed where feasible.
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.6100 PERMANENT SIGNS - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Bus bench advertising signs. Bus bench advertising signs must be
located on bona fide bus stops, one bench per stop. Signs shall conform to the
conditions of the city's contract entered into with a qualified bus bench
provider.
   (B)   Changeable copy signs.
      (1)   The following uses may be permitted an additional 50 square feet of
sign area to display changeable copy
         (a)   Changeable copy wall signage may be permitted for outparcels and
freestanding buildings which are occupied by:
            1.   Theaters.
         (b)   Changeable copy monument signage may be permitted for outparcels
and free standing buildings which are occupied by:
            1.   Community facilities;
            2.   Schools;
            3.   Religious institutions.
         (c)   Changeable copy signage may also be permitted for inline tenant
bays which are occupied by multi-screen theater tenants.
      (2)   Theaters may be permitted additional sign area to display
changeable copy, not to exceed 25 square feet per additional screen with a
maximum of 175 square feet of total sign area, if the theater contains eight or
more screens.
   (C)   Directory signs. Directory signage may be permitted with shopping
centers, office and/or industrial parks upon satisfying the following design
criteria and gaining the approval of the Planning and Zoning Board.
      (1)   Directory signs shall be designed, built and maintained by the
center owner.
      (2)   Individual tenant identification lettering shall not be less than
two inches in height.
      (3)   Location. Entry areas where vehicular pull-off zones are provided.
Within pedestrian zones as part of an information kiosk or as a map-board. The
placement of directory signs shall in no manner impede traffic flow or
visibility or cause any parking reductions.
      (4)   Colors/materials. Compatible with the center's approved colors and
principal signage features identified in the uniform sign plan.
   (D)   Outparcels and freestanding buildings.
      (1)   The maximum allowable sign area for an outparcel or freestanding
building shall be 120 square feet or 1.5 square feet per foot of frontage,
whichever is less.
      (2)   The maximum allowable letter height on a sign for an outparcel or
freestanding building shall be 48 inches.
      (3)   Signs on outparcels and freestanding buildings may be placed on any
elevation.
   (E)   Regional mall outparcels.
      (1)   Materials used for freestanding signs must be compatible with
materials used in the building.
      (2)   Wall signage: letters shall not exceed 48 inches in height.
      (3)   There shall be no advertising flags, pennants, streamers or the
like displayed on any building or on the property, except for grand opening or
special promotional displays which shall be limited to no more than 30 days.
   (F)   Service stations.
      (1)   Signage on structures and canopies shall have a maximum letter
height of 36 inches.
      (2)   Monument signs. Monument sign displays must include price panels.
The monument sign may be internally illuminated.
         (a)   The number of signs for self-service and full-service shall be
equal.
         (b)   All price panels for gasoline products at service stations shall
display the highest price if there is a difference between the cash and credit
prices.
         (c)   All price signs for gasoline products at gasoline service
stations shall display separately and specifically, with equal prominence, the
full-service price and the self-service price, in numbers or letters of equal
size and on equally sized backgrounds with the same color combination and with
equal illumination, if any. The number of signs for self-service and full-
service shall be equal.
   (G)   Shopping center monument signs.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided for herein, shopping centers shall be
entitled to one monument sign.
      (2)   Monument signs in shopping centers shall be subject to the
guidelines set forth in §
155.698(A). Monument signs utilizing legally registered and recognized logos,
trademarks or letter style shall be considered and may be permitted with
approval of both the landlord and the city. Logos, trademarks or letter styles
that are of a different color than the approved uniform sign plan color
guidelines will be considered during the permitting process upon review of
compatibility issues by the city's Zoning Official. State or nationally
registered trademarks/logos that the Zoning Official deems to be egregious or
objectionable may be denied. The decision of the Zoning Official is appealable
to the Planning and Zoning Board.
      (3)   The name and street address of the shopping center shall be posted
on the top of each sign; however, it shall not be factored into the total
square footage. The name and address shall be no larger than nine square feet
and one and one-half feet in height. The numbers of the street address shall be
no less than six inches in height. If a shopping center does not have a name,
the street address shall be included on the sign in accordance with this
section.
      (4)   Each monument sign shall contain no more than four panels on a
maximum of two sides, not including the name and street address of the shopping
center. Each panel shall be limited to two lines of text.
      (5)   Monument signs may include the property management or leasing
information on the base of the sign. Such information shall not be illuminated
and have a maximum size of five square feet, which shall not count towards the
overall square footage of the monument sign or count as a panel.
      (6)   Monument signs shall have sufficient architectural spacing between
sign panels to ensure legibility, subject to approval by the Planning and
Economic Development Department.
      (7)   Shopping center monument signs shall be separated by a minimum of
500 feet.
      (8)   All signs shall comply with §
52.10(B)(4) of this Code of Ordinances.
   (H)   Supergraphics. Supergraphics are permitted by approval of the Planning
and Zoning Board. The criteria for supergraphics are as follows:
      (1)   The proposed general design, arrangement, texture, material,
colors, lighting, placement, and the appropriateness of the proposed
supergraphic must rationally relate to other signs and the other structures,
both on the premises and in the surrounding areas.
      (2)   The supergraphic shall contain no lettering or business
identification or logo or symbol used as a sign.
      (3)   The number of items (scenes, symbols, shapes) shall be consistent
with the amount of information which can be comprehended by the viewer and
shall avoid visual clutter.
      (4)   The shape of the supergraphic shall not create visual clutter.
      (5)   The size, style, and location of the supergraphic shall be
appropriate to the activity of the message.
      (6)   The supergraphic shall compliment the building and adjacent
buildings by being designed and placed to enhance the structure.
      (7)   The supergraphic should be consolidated into a minimum number of
elements.
      (8)   No additional or increased lighting shall be permitted which would
cause attention to be focused upon the supergraphic. Normal wall lighting, at
the intensity as for unadorned walls, may be provided.
      (9)   The supergraphic may be placed on any building face but shall not
exceed 25% of the area of the primary building face.
   (I)   Under-canopy signs may be permanently installed in shopping centers
perpendicular to the store front, equidistant between the store front and the
canopy edge, centered in the store frontage. This sign shall be no longer than
50% of the width of the canopy up to a maximum of four feet in length. The
depth shall meet ADA requirements. Internal illumination shall be allowable.
Under-canopy signs must be uniform throughout the shopping center and must be
provided through the owner of the shopping center or agent. (Ord. 2021-02,
adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-21-2021; Am.
Ord. 2022, passed 6-18-24)
§ 155.6101 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   The city has the authority to remove all temporary signs installed or
placed on public or private rights-of-way. Temporary signs that are
freestanding signs shall not be placed within the sight triangle of an
intersection as required by §
155.600.
   (B)   During such periods of time as are designated by the United States
Weather Bureau as being a hurricane warning or severe storm warning or alert,
the owner, occupant, or user of the property where the temporary sign is placed
shall take precautions for removing or securing such signs, in accordance with
the pertinent provisions of the Florida Building Code, as may be amended from
time to time. If the property owner fails to remove a temporary sign during
such weather conditions, the city may remove those signs it deems to be a
danger to the public safety and welfare, and the cost of the sign removal shall
be charged to the property owner.
   (C)   Unless otherwise noted within the provision of this LDC, all temporary
signs shall be non-illuminated.
   (D)   Only such temporary signs as are detailed herein below shall be
permitted to be erected temporarily upon any building lot, lot, or parcel of
land:
Table 155.6101: Temporary Signs
Sign Type Maximum Square Maximum Number of Maximum Height Duration Removal
          Footage        Signs
Table 155.6101: Temporary Signs
               Maximum       Maximum      Maximum
Sign Type      Square        Number of    Height   Duration      Removal
               Footage       Signs
Nonresidential
                                                   Sign may be   Prior to the
Ground signs                                       displayed on  issuance of a
for Parcels    32 square     1 per        7.5 feet site while    certificate of
Under          feet          frontage              construction  occupancy or
Construction                                       is active     certificate of
                                                                 completion
                                                   Not erected   Within three
                                                   until the     days of
Leasing Banner 32 square     1 per vacant          property or   closing or the
-              feet          tenant       N/A      tenant bay is signing of a
Nonresidential                                     offered for   lease
                                                   sale, rent,   agreement
                                                   or lease
Real Estate                                        Not erected   Within three
Sale -                                             until the     days of
Nonresidential 32 square     1 per street          property or   closing or the
and Multi-     feet          frontage     7.5 feet tenant bay is signing of a
Family                                             offered for   lease
Residential                                        sale, rent,   agreement
                                                   or lease
                             1 per tenant          During        Removed at the
Sidewalk Signs 6 square feet or business  3.5 feet operating     close of
                                                   hours         business
                                                   Displayed no  Within 24
                                                   more than     hours of the
Special Event  32 square     1            N/A      seven days    conclusion of
Banners        feet                                prior to the  the special
                                                   date of the   event
                                                   special event
Temporary      32 square                           Up to 90 days
Banner Signs   feet          1            N/A      after         N/A
                                                   installation.
Residential
               4 square feet                       No more than
Non-Commercial per sign and  N/A          5 feet   120 days in   N/A
Signs          8 square feet                       any 12-month
               per parcel                          period
                                                   Not erected   Within three
Real Estate                                        until the     days of
Sale and       4 square feet 1 per street 5 feet   property is   closing or the
Leasing                      frontage              offered for   signing of a
                                                   sale, rent,   lease
                                                   or lease      agreement
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6102 TEMPORARY SIGNS - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   Nonresidential.
   (A)   Leasing banners.
      (1)   Leasing banners shall include those signs containing verbiage
indicating the vacancy of non-residential buildings.
      (2)   Leasing banners shall be located on a vacant tenant bay sign band
within a shopping center; or primary frontage of freestanding building or
outparcel.
      (3)   Leasing banners shall conform to the uniform sign plan, where
applicable or be compatible with the architecture/building design in buildings
where a uniform sign plan is not required.
      (4)   Building permits shall be required for leasing banners.
   (B)   Fence signs for parcels under construction.
      (1)   Signs shall consist of banners, wraps or similar material and shall
be securely affixed to the fence on which they are located, and any portions of
a sign that become partially detached shall be promptly re-affixed to the
fence; and
      (2)   Signs and the fencing to which they are affixed shall be maintained
in good condition at all times and graffiti or other forms of defacement shall
be removed or repaired promptly.
      (3)   Sign may be displayed while construction is active. The sign shall
be removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate
of completion.
   (C)   Banner signs.
      (1)   All banner signs shall require a building permit.
      (2)   Banners shall be placed on the primary facade of the building and
within the tenant's lease lines.
      (3)   Temporary banners:
         (a)   Temporary banners shall not be permitted after 90 days of an
active local business tax receipt by the city.
         (b)   Temporary business identification banners shall conform to the
uniform sign plan, where applicable, or be compatible with the architecture/
building design in buildings where a uniform sign plan is not required.
      (4)   Special event banners:
         (a)   Special event banners shall include those signs used to market
or advertise a special event.
         (b)   Special event banners must be approved in conjunction with the
approval of a special event.
         (c)   Special event banners shall conform to the architecture/building
design in buildings where a uniform sign plan is not required.
   (D)   Window signs and coverings. Window signs and coverings shall comply
with the following requirements:
      (1)   Window signage/graphics/lettering/logos.
         (a)   Window graphics/signage includes all lettering, advertising,
logos, graphics, pictures, and the like, excluding the business address and
hours of operation.
         (b)   This section applies to clear windows, windows completely
covered by approved gray scale window perforation and windows completely
tinted.
         (c)   Window graphics/signage area for all windows shall not exceed
20% of the total window area.
         (d)   Any window perforation and/or tinting used to highlight only a
portion of a window, whether or not it has graphics/signage, counts towards the
20% coverage limitation.
         (e)   Window graphics/signage coverage shall be determined by
measuring the outside perimeter of the graphics or sign.
         (f)   Window signs and tinting shall not be installed in a manner
which would unreasonably obstruct the view of public safety personnel.
      (2)   Window treatment/window coverings.
         (a)   Any type of material(s) covering/ blocking windows, including
but not limited to, curtains, drapes, blinds, solar screens, and storm
shutters, other than those specifically addressed in this section, will not
count towards the overall sign area permitted for windows, and shall not
include any type of graphics/ signage.
         (b)   Window covering shall be 65% to 100% gray scale, or color of
surrounding wall only, and be consistent across the frontage of a business.
         (c)   No reflective and/or bronze tinting allowed.
      (3)   Entry doors.
         (a)   Entry doors to a business shall be considered clear zones for
security and safety purposes and shall remain clear of any window graphics/
signage.
         (b)   Clear security/safety window covering is allowed on entry doors.
         (c)   Each place of business may exhibit the street address and hours
of operation on entry doors. Letters within such signage shall not be greater
than two inches in height, and may only consist of solid vinyl letters, with no
background color, or window perforation.
      (4)   Neon signs shall be limited to one for every other (alternating)
vertical window panel surface with no two adjacent window panels containing
such a sign and no sign exceeding three square feet. No duplicate sign shall be
allowed on a single building face. Where these signs are of a type which plugs
into an existing electrical outlet, they shall be exempt from existing
electrical permit requirements.
   (E)   Freestanding on site "open hours" and open house signs shall be
allowed in addition to other permitted signs. Said "open hours" and open house
signs may only be displayed when the premises are actually available for
inspection by the prospective buyer or tenant, and shall be limited to three
signs total.
   (F)   Sidewalk signs. Sidewalk signs shall comply with the following
requirements:
      (1)   Location.
         (a)   Located on a paved private walkway in a manner that the walkway
continues to meet the minimum ADA requirements.
         (b)   Sidewalk signs shall be placed on a private sidewalk of business
storefront, or on private property of a freestanding building on a parcel or
outparcel and shall be located within five feet from the store front entrance
for which it is associated.
         (c)   No signs shall be placed in the public right-of-way.
      (2)   Display characteristics. Sidewalk signs shall be freestanding,
double-sided, single panel signs on a base. Sandwich or A-frame sign designs
are prohibited.
      (3)   Hours of display.
         (a)   Sidewalk signs shall only be displayed during business hours.
         (b)   Sidewalk signs shall be removed at the close of business each
day.
         (c)   Sidewalk signs shall be moved inside during high winds or other
weather conditions that might cause the signs to pose a hazard to public
safety.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6103 SIGNS ON RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Only noncommercial signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental
entity or public utility shall be allowed upon public property or in a public
or private right-of-way.
   (B)   Only signs placed at the direction of the city, or as may be required
by this subchapter, may be allowed on public property. This includes signs
posted to provide notice for governmental action or events, digital display
signs erected by the city on public property, and any city gateway signs
installed by the city in public or private rights-of-way.
   (C)   Non-complying signs on public property. Any sign installed or placed
on public property, except in conformance with the provisions of this section,
shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition to
other remedies, the city shall have the right to recover from the owner or
person responsible for the placement of the sign the full costs of its removal
and disposal.
   (D)   Signs on public property.
      (1)   The City Manager or designee may allow temporary signs to be placed
on public property.
      (2)   To protect the health, safety and welfare of motorist and
pedestrians; signs may not be placed within parking spaces or on driveways.
      (3)   Signs shall not be placed in any manner as to damage infrastructure
or create hazards or in conflict with line of sight.
      (4)   Signs may only remain in place during hours of operation.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6104 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   A sign or advertising structure existing within the city limits on the
effective date of this section, or a sign or advertising structure existing in
an area annexed to the city after the effective date of this LDC, which by its
height, square foot area, location, use, or structural support, does not
conform to the requirements of this section, shall hereafter be termed
nonconforming.
   (B)   Any nonconforming sign that shall cease being used or cease being
leased for a continuous period of one year shall not be reused for sign
purposes unless and until it is used in conformity with the standards of this
subchapter.
   (C)   Nonconforming signs shall not be altered or enlarged unless they are
made to conform to all the requirements of a new sign or advertising display.
   (D)   If any nonconforming sign is damaged by any cause or is otherwise in
need of repair to such an extent that the cost of repairing the sign equals 50%
or more of the original invoiced cost of the sign, then its classification as a
nonconforming sign under this section shall be automatically revoked and
repairs shall be made so that the sign shall meet all the requirements of this
section.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6105 EXEMPT SIGNS.
   All vehicle signs shall be exempt from all provisions of this subchapter
except when those signs are utilized at a specific location or site for
advertising or display purposes in addition to or in lieu of a permanent or
temporary sign as permitted under this subchapter.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6106 PERMIT AND FEE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS - SIGNS.
   (A)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to install,
alter, or cause to be installed or altered within the municipal limits of the
city, any sign, whether permanent or temporary, without first having obtained a
permit from the Building Department.
   (B)   Signs exempt from permit requirements. The following signs, while
covered by the general provisions of this subchapter, shall be exempt from the
permit requirements of this subchapter. This exemption specifically in no way
waives requirements of structural or safety requirements outlined by this
subchapter or the Florida Building Code.
      (1)   Signs installed under the direction of a federal, state, county, or
municipal agency.
      (2)   Window signs.
      (3)   Real estate signs.
      (4)   Nameplate signs and identification signs when letters for those
signs do not exceed six inches in height and when those signs do not exceed two
square feet in overall dimensions.
      (5)   Signs indicating the availability of accommodations in hotels,
motels, and the like, when those signs conform to all other provisions of this
subchapter; and when signs do not exceed 1/4 square feet.
      (6)   Public safety signs.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6107 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (A)   The following are those signs which shall not be permitted within the
municipal limits of the city:
      (1)   Animated signs.
      (2)   A-frame sign.
      (3)   Snipe signs.
      (4)   Flags, or pennants, when used for advertising purposes, except as
provided under §
155.6100.
      (5)   Exposed neon tubes or bare bulb signs or neon borders inside window
frames.
      (6)   Permanent signs which are illuminated from outside the boundaries
of the sign by visible lighting fixtures.
      (7)   Roof signs.
      (8)   Billboards.
      (9)   Box or cabinet signs, with flat faced vinyl against a Plexiglas, or
other flat material, background.
      (10)   Vehicle, mobile billboard, or trailer signs when used on a given
location or site in addition to or in lieu of a temporary or permanent sign
permitted under this section, unless required by governmental agencies.
         (a)   When a vehicle or trailer indicates the name of a business on
it, such vehicle or trailer, when not in use for its intended purpose of
transportation, shall be required to be parked in the rear of the parking lot
or in the rear of the building which contains the business.
      (11)   Vehicle removable signs when the sign is projected in excess of 18
inches from the foremost point of attachment of the sign to the vehicle.
      (12)   Signs projecting in excess of 18 inches from the foremost point of
attachment of the sign to the structure upon which it is constructed.
      (13)   Painted wall signs.
      (14)   All abandoned signs, sign cabinets, poles, frames, structures, and
electrical fixtures must be removed by owner/lessee or agent.
      (15)   Pole signs, including when attached to a vehicle or structure,
except as in §
155.696.
      (16)   Projecting signs.
      (17)   Inflatable balloons, regardless of the method of inflation, and
regardless of whether they are tethered.
      (18)   Banner signs, including when attached to a vehicle of any kind or
structure unless otherwise permitted.
   (B)   Sandwich signs and snipe signs, as set forth in division (A)(2) and
(A)(3) of this section, are classified as litter, as defined by §
94.46 of this Code of Ordinances, and may be removed by the city. Persons
placing these signs within the municipal limits of the city may be subject to a
citation for violation of §
132.04 of this Code of Ordinances or may be further subject to the issuance of
a notice to appear by the City of Pembroke Pines Police Department.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 6-15-22)
§ 155.6108 INSPECTION OF SIGNS BY CITY; SIGNS IN VIOLATION.
   (A)   The Chief Building Official shall inspect, or cause to be inspected,
all permanent signs located within the city at least once in each year, prior
to the renewal of their local business tax receipts.
   (B)   Upon inspection, this section shall require the owner of any sign
found to be in defective condition, or which does not comply with the terms,
conditions, and provisions of this section, to be repaired or removed within 30
days from the date of notice of the defect. If the Chief Building Official
shall ascertain and determine that the maintenance or use of the sign adversely
affects the public safety, he may require the immediate removal at owner's
expense or prohibit the use of the sign until those defects shall have been
remedied.
   (C)   The Chief Building Official shall then have the authority, upon two
weeks' notice, to remove any sign which is not properly maintained, and without
notice in the event the sign is found, in their determination, to constitute a
danger to human life or encroaches on a public right-of-way. In the event of
removal of a sign pursuant to this section, the owner/lessee or agent shall
bear the cost of removal in addition to the penalties.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 155.6110 SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS - GENERAL.
   (A)   Purpose. This subchapter is intended to identify supplemental site
development standards in addition to those defined in §§
155.400 through
155.456 and §§
155.500 through
155.543.
   (B)   Applicability. This subchapter shall regulate the following:
      (1)   Elevation of filled land;
      (2)   Excavation;
      (3)   Floor area ratio;
      (4)   Relation of grade of floors to crown of street;
      (5)   Residential use in a nonresidential district;
      (6)   Sewage disposal;
      (7)   Waterways.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6111 ELEVATION OF FILLED LAND.
   (A)   Any filled land created contiguous to the mainland or to any developed
island in the city shall be filled so that the settled elevation of the filled
land shall not be less than five and one-half feet.
   (B)   All elevations required in this section shall be measured above mean
sea level, U.S.C. and G.S. datum.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6112 EXCAVATION.
   (A)   Permit required; permit renewal.
      (1)   A permit for new excavation shall be obtained from the City
Engineering Department.
      (2)   After an original permit for an excavation has been issued, the
enforcing officer shall issue a renewal permit for the continuance of the
excavation in accordance with the original permit and plans, where the work has
been conducted in accordance with those plans and with these regulations.
      (3)   Within 30 days after this Code is adopted, owners or operators of
existing excavations shall submit to the enforcing officer a plat showing their
presently owned property adjacent to and forming a continuous property with the
existing excavation area. The plat shall also show future right-of-way lines
and the final limits to which the owner or operator plans to carry excavations
in that property. These plats are to be kept for record, and the excavations
indicated thereon will be exempt from the requirements of these regulations,
with the following exceptions:
         (a)   The owners or operators of excavations existing at the time this
Code is adopted shall apply for an excavation permit within 30 days after this
section is officially adopted.
         (b)   Divisions (A)(5) and (A)(6) of this section shall apply to
excavations existing at the time this section is officially adopted.
      (4)   Yearly renewals of the excavation permit shall be granted to the
owners and operators of excavations existing at the time this section is
adopted, provided the applicable requirements are complied with.
      (5)   Any extension, beyond the excavation limits shown in each plat
required by division (A)(3) of this section to be filed with the Engineering
Department, shall be treated as a new excavation; and shall, therefore, be
subject to the full requirements of these regulations.
      (6)   Where excavation has been discontinued for a period of six months
or more, or has been abandoned, any renewal or resumption of excavation shall
be required to be subject to a permit for a new excavation, and the issuance of
a permit therefor shall be subject to all the requirements of this section for
a new permit.
   (B)   Application for permit; plans and surveys. Applications for original
permits shall be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   A lot plan to show the property owned or controlled by the
applicant with reference to streets, highways, and contiguous platted areas.
      (2)   Cross-sections to show approximate elevation and grades at the
final outside boundaries of excavation.
      (3)   A final grading plan to show the ground elevations of the land
immediately adjacent to the side of the excavation and all of bounding streets
or roads.
      (4)   Upon completion of the excavation, and when there is a question
that the excavation is in accordance with the plans approved, a topographical
survey may be required showing elevations and cross-sections of the final
outside boundaries of each excavation at 100-foot intervals.
      (5)   The plans, maps, elevations, and cross-sections required by this
section shall be made by a surveyor-engineer registered as such by the state.
   (C)   Performance bond. The applicant for a permit for an excavation shall
post a performance bond which, shall be determined by the City's Engineering
Division for each waterway to be excavated conditioned upon complete compliance
with the regulations of the city pertaining to the initiation, conduct, and
completion of excavations in a manner conforming to this subchapter, within a
period of not more than one year after the excavation has been carried to the
extent authorized by a valid permit, or after work on excavation has been
abandoned or discontinued for a period of six months or more.
   (D)   Zoning limitations.
      (1)   The use of heavy machinery for extraction and removal of natural
material or deposits is permissible where the removal has been approved and
authorized by permit.
      (2)   The land area exposed by the extraction and removal of natural
materials or deposits shall be left suitable for future use and development
purposes in accordance with the final grading plan and in accordance with any
zoning regulations applicable thereto.
      (3)   New excavation shall be a permissible use only in a zoning district
wherein that use is permissible under this Code, subject to the provisions of
this section.
      (4)   An existing excavation for which a permit is issued pursuant to §
155.6102(A) may be continued and extended pursuant to that permit and shall not
be construed to be a nonconforming use.
   (E)   Location. No excavation shall be allowed within 50 feet of the future
right-of-way line for any street or highway, nor within 100 feet of any private
property line for lots less than one acre and 30 feet of any property line for
lots one acre or greater.
   (F)   Posting of warning signs. During the excavation operations, the
premises shall be suitably posted with warning signs of such character and
location as may be adequate to warn the public concerning possible hazards.
   (G)   Conduct of excavation operation.
      (1)   The grading, leveling, and sloping of the final banks shall be on a
progressive basis as the project develops and the excavation progresses.
      (2)   If sand is encountered during excavation, the vertical cut at the
final bank shall be modified in such a manner that the required perimeter slope
of one vertical to five horizontal will be sustained and maintained.
      (3)   The property shall be staked along the property line and the top-
slope line in the portion of the final perimeter to which the excavation
extends during the period covered by the yearly permit in effect. Stakes shall
be maintained in proper fashion during that period so that the limits of
excavation slopes and grade levels in that portion of the final perimeter may
be easily determined and verified.
      (4)   During the entire operation, dynamite shall not be used except in
accordance with state regulations.
      (5)   The hours of operation shall be limited to the period between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
      (6)   Every owner or operator of any excavation shall be insured to the
extent of $100,000 against liability arising from any activities or operations
incidental to excavation carried on or conducted pursuant to any permit or
approval given for that excavation by the city.
      (7)   All excavation access-roads shall be well sprinkled to minimize
dust. This sprinkling shall not be required 500 feet or more from a public
street or highway.
   (H)   Clean-up and rehabilitation.
      (1)   Upon completion of the project, the property shall be dressed up so
that it will be left in a presentable condition.
      (2)   The perimeter of the excavation shall be properly backfilled and
graded. Slopes shall comply with §
154.31(E).
      (3)   Whenever excavation operations on any property shall have been
completed, abandoned, or permanently discontinued, then all plants, buildings,
structures (except fences), and equipment shall be entirely removed from that
property; and all stockpiles, topsoil, refuse, or waste materials shall be
removed, redistributed on the premises, or backfilled within the pit, within
one year after the completion. However, the provisions of this division shall
not apply to any plants, buildings, structures, equipment, or stockpiles
whenever and so long as any rock, gravel, or other materials shall be available
from other properties for processing by or through any such plants, buildings,
structures, or equipment.
      (4)   These provisions shall not apply to any portion of an existing
excavation which was in existence at the time of the passage of these
regulations.
   (I)   Filling of excavations; permit required. Excavations may be filled if
a permit is obtained from the Engineering Division, subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   The applicant for permit and the owner of property shall comply
with such terms and conditions as may be required to prevent objectionable
odors; to prevent the operation from becoming detrimental to the health,
safety, and general welfare of the adjacent neighborhood; and which will
prevent promiscuous dumping by unauthorized persons.
      (2)   That a top-dressing, consisting of not less than one foot of clear
fill, shall be provided so that the property shall be in a clean, presentable,
and sanitary condition.
      (3)   That the owner of the property, and the operator, shall post a bond
in such amount as may be determined by the enforcing officer as necessary to
insure compliance with the terms and conditions as may be established for the
filling permit.
      (4)   No permit shall be issued for, or excavation or other area filled
with refuse, debris, junk, organic material or garbage, unless the use conforms
to all applicable zoning resolutions and conforms to any applicable regulations
of the appropriate health officials.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6113 FLOOR AREA RATIO - NON-RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Floor area ratio is the gross floor area of all buildings or
structures on a lot divided by the total lot area.
   (B)   The maximum floor area ratio of proposed nonresidential development,
including mixed use developments (FAR's are provided for within the proposed
mixed use-residential land use category - Section F (Permitted Uses) of the
city comprehensive plan, upon lands designated commercial, commercial
recreation, office park, industrial, employment center, employment center -
low, conservation - reserve water supply areas, conservation - natural
reservations, local activity center, transit oriented corridor, transit
oriented development, and regional activity center shall be as follows:
      (1)   0.25 for buildings not exceeding one story;
      (2)   0.50 for buildings two stories or greater;
      (3)   All buildings greater than 0.50 up to 1.0 shall be subject to the
special exception process as outlined in §§
155.300 through
155.313.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6114 RELATION OF GRADE OF FLOORS TO CROWN OF STREET.
   The top surface of all floors of residential buildings shall be not less
than 18 inches, and of nonresidential buildings shall be not less than six
inches, above the highest point of the crown of all streets adjacent to the lot
upon which the buildings are located.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6115 RESIDENTIAL USE IN NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   The following regulations shall apply where a lot in a nonresidential
district is utilized for a permitted residential use:
   (A)   The use and the lot shall conform to the district regulations for lot
size, lot coverage, front setback, side setbacks, rear setback, and lot area
per room specified for that particular residential district in which the
residential use would first be permitted from a height limit standpoint, except
as modified by divisions (B) and (C) of this section.
   (B)   Where a residential use is located on the first ground floor and there
is also a principal nonresidential use on the first or ground floor, the lot
shall be provided with a rear setback and with side setbacks extending to the
rear setbacks, for the portion of the lot occupied by the residential use.
   (C)   Where the residential use is located above a principal nonresidential
use, the lot shall be provided with a rear setback and with side setbacks on
each side, provided that the setbacks may begin at the level of the lowest
floor used for residential purposes, and a side setback shall not be required
on a street side of the lot.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6116 SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   Regardless of other provisions of this Code, under all classifications and
in all districts sewage collection and transmission systems shall be permitted,
paid for and installed by the developer to discharge sewage, either by gravity
or pumped, from the subject lot(s) to the city sewerage system. Lot plans
accompanying building permit applications shall show clearly the proposed
sewage disposal system. Such systems shall conform to the standards and
requirements of the appropriate health officials. Onsite sewage disposal
systems, septic tanks and drainfields are prohibited.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6117 WATERWAYS.
   (A)   Location of waterways.
      (1)   No portion of a waterway shall be created within a public road
right-of-way or within reservations dedicated for roadway purposes.
      (2)   No waterway shall be located within 100 feet from an existing or
future right-of-way line of a street, unless the waterway is designated to
cross the street, and the waterway conforms to all of the provisions of this
Code.
      (3)   No waterway shall be created or maintained in such a location, or
in such a connection with, or in such relation to, other existing waterways as
to endanger through excessive salinity existing potable water resources, or to
unreasonably change the existing limits of saline water penetration.
   (B)   Permits.
      (1)   No waterway shall be created unless a permit has been first
obtained from the City Engineer. The exception to this shall be waterways that
serve less than 640 acres, used for the conveyance of irrigation to or drainage
from agricultural lands to other waterways leading to major discharge points,
and those waterways controlled by the applicable flood control district.
      (2)   No permit shall be issued by the City Engineer for a waterway
unless the City Engineer finds the proposed waterway to be in conformity with
all of the requirements of these regulations; and the application therefor has
been approved by the Planning and Zoning Board as being in conformity with the
zoning, and platting regulations, and any comprehensive plan.
      (3)   Permits shall not be required for waterways created in an area
covered by, and in conformity with, a recorded subdivision plat.
   (C)   Application for permits.
      (1)   Application for such permission shall be made to the City Engineer,
by letter, stating the reason for alteration or construction of the waterway.
This letter shall be accompanied by four sets of plans prepared by a surveyor
or engineer, registered as such by the state, showing the location, proposed
cross- sections, structures in or across the waterway, and other details as may
be required by the City Engineer.
      (2)   If the requested waterway is to serve as a drainage system for a
subdivision, the design calculation used in arriving at the waterway cross-
section area and structures therein, showing degree of protection from flooding
of the subdivision, estimated water surfaces, and other pertinent data used in
the design of the waterway, shall be submitted. This shall be done by an
engineer duly registered as such by the state.
      (3)   All information requested shall be referenced, all elevations shall
refer to U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, mean sea level datum. All points or
cross-sections of interest shall be stationed from a known reference point.
      (4)   Inspection. The City Engineer shall inspect waterways and all
structures in or across any waterway during their construction period. As-built
drawings shall be submitted to the City Engineer upon completion of all work in
or across the waterway with as-built cross-connections of the waterway every
100 feet, or as often as may be necessary to determine the change in cross-
section area.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
SUSTAINABILITY
§ 155.6120 PURPOSE AND INTENT - SUSTAINABILITY.
   The purpose of the sustainability code is to establish a program and
administrative procedures which minimize environmental impacts of development;
reduces the use of natural resources; creates a healthier and more sustainable
living environment; promotes economic and environmental health through
sustainable and environmental friendly design parameters; while providing
leadership to both the private and public sectors in the area of green building
practices.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6121 APPLICABILITY - SUSTAINABILITY.
   The requirements of this section shall apply to the following types of
development:
   (A)   All new and redevelopment applications for residential, commercial,
office, industrial, hotels, and civic uses which require site plan approval §
155.301(A).
   (B)   For any city-owned civic or office construction project, the city is
expected to incorporate the requirements of this LDC unless the City
Commission, in its sole discretion, determines that the cost (e.g., time,
function, or funding) associated with the requirements significantly outweighs
the benefits to the city, provided the project remains in compliance with F.S.
§ 255.2575 Energy-efficient and sustainable buildings.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6122 SITE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS - SUSTAINABILITY.
   At the time of site plan application submittal to the Planning and Economic
Development Department, the applicant must submit:
   (A)   A narrative which lists green building techniques and practices which
may include but are not limited to the sustainable options outlined in §
155.6123. The aim of the narrative is to demonstrate how the developer will
address specific local objectives related to: environmental design, energy
efficiency, and conservation of resources, infrastructure, transportation and
waste management which are found within the city's green plan. The materials
and practices listed should exceed current building code requirements.
   (B)   If the applicant is pursuing a certification through a recognized
third-party green building certification program (USGBC, FGBC, NGBS, etc.), the
points table specific to that program, the designated level of certification,
and proof of application into the green building program must be submitted.
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
§ 155.6123 SUSTAINABLE OPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions contained herein are intended to provide options for
the installation of environmental design on buildings and structures within the
city. If constructed or implemented, the provisions set forth in this LDC shall
be met.
   (B)   Sustainability Options Table. This table shall determine the
sustainability elements encouraged for site plan approval in accordance with
the requirements set forth in §
155.6122. In addition to the options listed, city staff may consider other
sustainable elements which are not listed.
Table 155.6123 Sustainable Options and Requirements
Category Element Section
Table 155.6123 Sustainable Options and Requirements
Category                  Element                                    Section
                          Cool Pavement
Environmental Design      Green Roofs                                155.662(E)
                          Green Walls                                155.662(D)
Environmental Design      Multi-Use Path or Trail
                          White Roof
                          Daylight Controls
                          Energy Star Rated Appliances
Energy Efficiency         Higher SEER AC than required by FBC
                          Low Flow Fixtures and Toilets
                          Photovoltaic Solar System
                          Tankless Hot Water Heater
                          Electric Vehicle Charging Stations         155.614
Conservation of Resources Fuel Efficient Parking Spaces
                          Landscape Irrigation Rain Sensor
                          Use of Native Plant Material
                          Enhanced Hurricane Resistant Structure
                          Freeboard
                          Green Infrastructure or Low Impact
Infrastructure            Development
                          SITES, USGBC, FGBC, NGBS or other Building
                          Certification
                          Use of Reclaimed or Recycled Building
                          Materials
Transportation            Bike Storage or Parking                    155.607
                          Transit Stop Improvements
Waste Management          Diversion of Waste from Landfill
                          Recycling                                  155.623
 
(Ord. 2021-02, adopted 3-17-21; sought to be reconsidered, Commission passed 4-
21-2021)
CHAPTER 156: CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Section
General Requirements
   
156.01   Establishment; activity and permit approval
   
156.02   Definitions
Concurrency Requirements
   
156.10   Development subject to adequacy determination
   
156.11   Development exempt from adequacy determination
   
156.12   Maintaining level of service standards
   
156.13   Measurement of capacities
   
156.14   Determination of available capacity
   
156.15   Burden of showing compliance on developer
   
156.16   Concurrency monitoring system
Levels of Service
   
156.30   Level of service for capital facilities
Vested Rights
   
156.40   Vested rights available
   
156.41   Requests to be filed with city manager; information required
   
156.42   Hearing officer to conduct administrative hearing.
   
156.43   Elimination of administrative hearing
   
156.44   Hearing officer and City Commission to issue proposed order
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 156.01 ESTABLISHMENT; ACTIVITY AND PERMIT APPROVAL.
   (A)   The City Commission hereby approves and adopts the Concurrency
Management System in accord with the Local Government Comprehensive Planning
and Land Development Regulation Act.
   (B)   No development activity or permits may be approved unless it is found
that the development is consistent with the City/County Comprehensive Plan and
that the provision of certain public facilities will be available at prescribed
levels of service concurrent with the impact of the development on those
facilities.
(Ord. 936, passed 10-17-90)
§ 156.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTION PLAN. A program of transportation improvements designed at a minimum
to accommodate the net traffic  impact of development to the extent that the
regional road network lacks available capacity to provide for the net traffic
impact of development.
   ADMINISTRATIVE RULES DOCUMENT. A publication containing rules, guidelines,
procedures, and methodologies reviewed, revised, adopted and amended by the
Broward County Planning Council and the Board of County Commissioners for the
purpose of providing assistance and guidance to local governmental entities and
providing direction to city staff in implementing the Broward County Land Use
Plan.
   AMENDMENT. Any change to an adopted comprehensive plan exception,
correction, update and  modification of the capital improvements element
concerning costs, revenue, services, acceptance of facilities or facility
construction dates consistent with the plan as provided in F.S. § 163.3177(3)
(b), and corrections, updates or modifications of current costs in other
elements, as provided in F.S. § 163.3187(2).
   BROWARD COUNTY LAND USE PLAN. The future land use plan element for all of
Broward County adopted by the Broward County Commission in conformance with the
requirements of the Broward County Charter and the Local Government
Comprehensive, Planning and Land Development Regulation Act.
   BROWARD COUNTY TRAFFICWAYS PLAN. The plan promulgated by the Broward County
Planning Council pursuant to F.S. Chapter 59-1154, as amended, and the Broward
County Charter, which depicts a network of trafficways for Broward County (also
known as the Broward County Planning Council Trafficways Plan).
   BUILDING PERMIT.  
   (A)   Any permit for the erection or construction of a new building required
by the Broward County Amendments to the Florida Building Code, as amended from
time to time.
   (B)   Any permit for an addition to an existing building which would create
one or more additional dwelling units, or involve a change in the occupancy of
a building as described in the Broward County Amendments to the Florida
Building Code, as amended from time to time.
   (C)   Any permit which would be required for the nonresidential operations
included in the Broward County Amendments to the Florida Building Code, as
amended from time to time.
   CAPITAL BUDGET. The portion of each local government’s budget which reflects
capital improvements scheduled for a fiscal year.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. Physical assets constructed or purchased to provide,
improve or replace a public facility and which are large scale and high in
cost. The cost of a capital improvement is generally nonrecurring and may
require multi-year financing. For the purpose of this rule, physical assets
which have been identified as existing or projected needs in the individual
comprehensive plan  elements shall be considered capital improvements.
   CERTIFIED LAND USE PLAN. A local land use plan which has been certified by
the Broward County Planning Council as being in substantial conformity with the
Broward County Planning Council as being in substantial conformity with the
Broward County Land Use Plan and which has been adopted by a unit of local
government in conformance with the requirements of the Local Government
Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act.
   COMPACT DEFERRAL AREA. The geographic area which is a two mile band having a
center line which is coincident with the center line of the congested link,
extending parallel to the congested link for a distance of one-half mile beyond
each end point of the congested link.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A plan that meets the requirements of F.S. §§ 163.3177
and 163.3178,
   CONCURRENCE. Public facilities and services needed to support development
shall be available at the same time or coincidental with the impacts of such
development.
   CONCURRENCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. The provisions in the local government
comprehensive plan including implementation regulations, encompassing the
restrictions, methods, resources, timing and solutions intended to be
compatible with and further compliance with the statutory requirement to
provide public facilities and services needed to support development concurrent
with the impacts of such development.
   CONSISTENT. Compatible with and furthers. COMPATIBLE WITH means not in
conflict with. FURTHER means to take action in the direction of realizing the
goals and policies. As applied to the local plan, a local plan shall be
consistent with the state plan and the regional plan.
   DEVELOPER. Any person, including governmental agency, undertaking any
development.
   DEVELOPMENT.  
   (A)   The carrying out of any building activity or mining operation, the
making of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure of
land, or the dividing of land into two or more parcels.
   (B)   The following activities or uses shall be taken for the purposes of
this chapter to involve DEVELOPMENT, as defined in this section:
      (1)   A reconstruction, alteration of the size, or material change in the
external appearance of a structure on land.
      (2)   A change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in
the number of dwelling units in a structure or on land or a materia increase in
the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices, or dwelling
units in a structure or on land.
      (3)   Alteration of a shore or bank of a seacoast, river, stream, lake,
pond, or canal, including any “coastal construction” as defined in F.S. §
161.021.
      (4)   Commencement of drilling, except to obtain soil samples, mining, or
excavation on a parcel of land.
      (5)   Demolition of a structure.
      (6)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
      (7)   Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a parcel of
land.
      (8)   Installation of utilities.
   (C)   The following operations or uses shall not be taken for the purpose of
this chapter to involve DEVELOPMENT as defined herein:
      (1)   Work by a highway or road agency or railroad company of the
maintenance or improvement of a road or railroad tract, if the work is carried
out on land within the boundaries of the right-of-way.
      (2)   Work by any utility and other persons engaged in the distribution
or transmission of gas or water, for the purpose of inspecting, repairing,
renewing, or constructing on established rights-of-way any sewers, mains,
pipes, cables, utility tunnels, powerlines, towers, poles, tracks, or the like.
      (3)   Work for the maintenance, renewal, improvement, or alteration of
any structures if the work affects only the interior or the color of the
structure or the decoration of the exterior of the structure.
      (4)   The use of any structure or land devoted to dwelling uses or any
purpose customarily incidental to enjoyment of the dwelling.
      (5)   The use of any land for the purpose of growing plants, crops,
trees, and other agricultural or forestry products; raising livestock; or for
other agricultural purposes.
      (6)   A change in use of land or structure from a use within a class
specified in an ordinance or rule to another use in the same class.
      (7)   A change in the ownership or form of ownership of any parcel or
structure.
      (8)   The creation or termination of rights of access, riparian rights,
easements, covenants concerning development of land, or other rights of land.
   (D)   DEVELOPMENT, as designated in an ordinance, rule, or development rule
includes all other development customarily associated with it unless otherwise
specified. When appropriate to the context, DEVELOPMENT refers to the act of
developing to the result of development. Reference to any specific operation is
not intended to mean that the operation or activity, when part of other
operations or activities, is not development. Reference to particular
operations is not intended to limit the generality of division (A).
   DEVELOPMENT ORDER. Any order granting, denying, or granting with conditions
an application for a development permit.
   DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Includes any building permit, zoning permit, plat
approval, or rezoning, certification, variance, or other action having the
effect of permitting development.
   DRAINAGE FACILITIES. A system of man- made structures designed to collect,
convey, hold, divert or discharge stormwater, and includes stormwater sewers,
canals, detention structures, and retention structures.
   IMPROVEMENTS. May include, but are not limited to, street pavements, curbs
and gutters, sidewalks, alley pavements, walkway pavements,  water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers or drains, street names, signs, landscaping,
permanent reference monuments, permanent control points, or any other
improvement required by a governing body.
   INFRASTRUCTURE. Those man-made structures which serve the common needs of
the population, such as: sewage disposal systems; potable water systems;
potable water wells serving a system; solid waste disposal sites or retention
areas; stormwater systems; utilities; piers; docks; wharves; breakwaters;
bulkheads; seawalls; bulwarks; revetments; causeways; marines; navigation
channels; bridges; and roadways.
   LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE. The various types of regulations for the development
of land within the jurisdiction of a unit of local government when combined
into a single document.
   LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION. Ordinances enacted by governing bodies for the
regulation of any aspect of development and includes any local government
zoning, rezoning, subdivision, building construction, or sign regulations or
any other regulations controlling the development of land.
   LAND USE. The development that has occurred on the land, the development
that is proposed by a developer on the land, or the use that is permitted or
permissible on the land under an adopted comprehensive plan or element or
portion thereof, land development regulations, or a land development code, as
the context may indicate.
   LEVEL OF SERVICE. An indicator of the extent or degree of service provided
by, or proposed to be provided by a facility based on and regulated to the
operational characteristics of the facility. Level of service shall indicate
the capacity per unit of demand for each public facility.
   LOCAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Any or all local comprehensive plans or element or
portions thereof prepared, adopted, or amended pursuant to the Local Government
Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act.
   NEIGHBORHOOD PARK. A park which serves the population of a neighborhood and
is generally accessible by bicycle or pedestrian ways.
   PARK. A community, or regional park.
   PLANNING ACT. The Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land
Development Regulation Act, F.S. §§ 163.3161 et seq.
   PLAT. A map or delineated representation of the subdivision of lands, being
a complete exact representation of the subdivision and other information in
compliance with the requirement of all applicable sections of this chapter and
of any local ordinances, and may include the terms “replat”, “amended plat”, or
“revised plat”.
   POTABLE WATER FACILITIES. A system of structures designed to collect, treat,
or distribute potable water, and includes water wells, treatment plants,
reservoirs, and distribution mains.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building which is occupied by, or devoted to, a
principal use or an addition to an existing principal building which is larger
than the original existing building.
   PRINCIPAL USE. The primary use of a parcel of land as distinguished from
secondary or accessory uses. There may be more than one principal or main use
on a parcel of land.
   PRIVATE RECREATION SITES. Sites owned by private, commercial or non-profit
entities available to the public for purposes of recreational use.
   PUBLIC FACILITIES. Major capital improvements, including, but not limited
to, transportation, sanitary, solid waste, drainage, potable water,
educational, parks and recreational, and health systems and facilities.
   PUBLIC RECREATION SITES. Sites owned or leased on a long-term basis by a
federal, state, regional or local government agency for purposes of
recreational use.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Includes any public or private utility, such as, but not
limited to, storm drainage, sanitary sewers, electric power, water service, gas
service, or telephone line, whether underground or overhead.
   RECERTIFICATION. A local land use plan which has previously been certified
by the Broward County Planning Council, but because of amendments,
decertification, or amendment to the  Broward County Land Use Plan, is no
longer in conformity, and must be recertified by the Broward County Planning
Council as being in substantial conformity with the Broward County Land Use
Plan.
   RECREATIONAL FACILITY. A component of a recreation site used by the public
such as a trail, court, athletic field or swimming pool.
   REGIONAL ROADWAY NETWORK. The roads contained within the Broward County
Metropolitan Planning Organization’s adopted Year 2010 Highway Network, except
for those roads functionally classified as city collector roads.
   RESIDENT POPULATION. Inhabitants counted in the same manner utilized by the
United States Bureau of the Census, in the category of total population.
Resident population does not include seasonal population.
   SANITARY SEWER FACILITIES. Structures or systems designed for the
collection, transmission, treatment, or disposal of sewage and includes trunk
mains, interceptors, treatment plants and disposal systems.
   SEASONAL POPULATION. Part-time inhabitants who utilize, or may be expected
to utilize, public facilities or services, but are not residents. Seasonal
population shall include tourists, migrant farmworkers, and other short-term
and long-term visitors.
   SERVICES. The program and employees determined necessary by local government
to provide adequate operation and maintenance of public facilities and
infrastructure as well as those educational, health care, social and other
programs necessary to support the programs, public facilities, and
infrastructure set out in the local plan or required by local, state, or
federal law.
   SOLID WASTE. Sludge from a waste treatment works, water supply treatment
plant, or air pollution control facility or garbage, rubbish, refuse, or other
discarded material, including solid, liquified, semisolid, or contained gaseous
material resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, agricultural,
or governmental operations.
   SOLID WASTE FACILITIES. Structures or systems designed for the collection,
processing or disposal of solid wastes, including hazardous wastes, and
includes transfer stations, processing plants,  recycling plants, and disposal
systems.
   STATE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The goals and policies contained within the state
comprehensive plan, F.S. §§ 187.201.
   STATE LAND PLANNING AGENCY. The Department of Community Affairs may be
referred to in this part as “DCA”.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, installed or portable, the use of which
requires a location on a parcel of land. It includes a movable structure while
it is located on land which can be used for housing, business, commercial,
agricultural, or office purposes either temporarily or permanently. STRUCTURE
also includes fences, billboards, swimming pools, poles, pipelines,
transmission lines, tracks, and advertising signs.
   SUBDIVISION. The platting of real property into two or more lots, parcels,
tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units, or any other division of land; and
includes establishment of new streets and alleys, additions, and
resubdivisions; and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of
subdividing or to the lands or area subdivided.
   SUBSTANTIAL CONFORMITY. Refers to the Broward County Charter requirement
contained in Article VI, Section 6.05 D & E that local governmental future land
use plans shall be materially and pertinently compatible with and further the
Broward County Land Use Plan in order to be certified or recertified.
   VESTED RIGHTS. Rights which have so completely and definitely accrued to or
settled in a person, which it is right and equitable that government should
recognize and protect, as being lawful in themselves, and settled according to
then current law.
(Ord. 936, passed 10-17-90; Am. Ord. 1715, passed 5-2-12)
CONCURRENCY REQUIREMENTS
§ 156.10 DEVELOPMENT SUBJECT TO ADEQUACY DETERMINATION.
   (A)   For plats, replats, site plans, or building permits where the property
is unplatted or was platted, with plat approval received by the Broward County
Commission before March 20, 1979, all development of previously vacant land
shall be subject to adequacy determination.
   (B)   For plats, replats, site plans or building permits where the property
is unplatted or was platted with plat approval received before March 20, 1979,
all development of previously improved lands shall be subject to an adequacy
determination for the additional capacity that equals the difference between
the capacity to be generated or consumed by the proposed development and the
capacity generated or consumed by the existing development. The existing
development shall be construed to include previous development demolished no
earlier than 18 months previous to the date the application is submitted.
   (C)   For a replat, an amendment to a note on a plat, or a requirement to
place a note on a plat, where property was platted after March 20, 1979, an
adequacy determination shall be required for those additional capacities that
equal the difference between the previous plat and the replat; or the previous
note and the proposed amendment to the note; or the development approved by the
County Commission at the time of plat approval and the proposed note to be
placed on the plat.
   (D)   All plats, replats, plat note amendments, findings of adequacy or site
plans with a residential component shall be subject to the public school
concurrency requirements as set forth in Section 5-182(m) of the Broward County
Land Development Code, as amended from time to time. The burden shall be on the
applicant to ensure compliance with this section, and the applicant shall
provide the necessary documentation from Broward County demonstrating
satisfaction of these requirements.
(Ord. 936, passed 10-17-90; Am. Ord. 1603, passed 3-5-08)
§ 156.11 DEVELOPMENT EXEMPT FROM ADEQUACY DETERMINATION.
   (A)   The proposed development is one single family or duplex dwelling on a
lot, or parcel of record, prior to March 1, 1989.
   (B)   The proposed development is a government facility which the City
Commission finds is essential to the health or safety of persons residing in or
using previously approved or existing development.
(Ord. 936, passed 10-17-90)
§ 156.12 MAINTAINING LEVEL OF SERVICE STANDARDS.
   (A)   No development activity may be approved unless prescribed levels of
service outlined in §
156.14 are available concurrent with the impacts of the development.
   (B)   The prescribed levels of service may be degraded during construction
of new facilities in a specific area if upon completion of the new facilities
the prescribed levels of service will be met.
(Ord. 936, passed 10-17-90)
§ 156.13 MEASUREMENT OF CAPACITIES.
   (A)   Water and wastewater. Measurement of water and wastewater facilities
will be based on design capacities and service flows. Usage and discharge will
be based on adopted level of service standards. These levels may be amended
when substantiated by engineering studies which are reviewed and approved by
the City Engineer and/or amendment to the Pembroke Pines Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Roadways. The initial measurement of highway capacities is the Florida
DOT Table of Generalized Daily Level-of-Service Maximum Volumes, made available
to local government for use from January 1989 through December 1990. Future
capacities standards will be issued by FDOT as necessary. The measurement of
capacity may also be determined through substantiation in the form of
engineering studies or other data. Traffic analysis techniques must be
technically sound and justifiable as determined by the City Engineer.
Alterations to capacity on the State Highway Network shall require the
opportunity for FDOT review. Any developments that are determined to be within
or create a compact deferral area may be reviewed with input by the Broward
County Office of Planning and any other affected agencies to determine if an
Action Plan can resolve the capacity deficiencies.
   (C)   Drainage. Measurement of drainage facilities will be based on the
South Florida Water Management District and the South Broward Drainage District
basin design standards. Variations may exist for specific parcels but the
overall effect of the area drainage system must meet established water
management practices and criteria.
   (D)   Solid waste. Measurement of solid waste capacity shall be based on the
generation rates outlined in this section and the capacity of the landfill.
   (E)   Recreation. Measurement shall be based on net acreage of land that
qualifies as fulfilling the public recreation lands requirement as follows:
      (1)   Compliance with §
154.35 of this code;
      (2)   Fifty percent of lakes and golf courses; or
      (3)   Private recreational facilities.
(Ord. 936, passed 10-17-90)
§ 156.14 DETERMINATION OF AVAILABLE CAPACITY.
   The available capacity of a facility shall be determined in the following
manner:
   (A)   A computation of existing and proposed facilities by adding together
as follows:
      (1)   The total design capacity of existing facilities operating at the
required level of service; and
      (2)   The total design capacity of new facilities that will come
available concurrent with the impact of the development. The capacity of new
facilities may be counted only if one or more of the following is demonstrated:
         (a)   The necessary facilities are in place at the time a development
permit is issued, or a development permit is issued subject to the condition
that the necessary facilities will be in place when the impacts of development
occur.
         (b)   Construction of the new facilities is under way at the time of
application and will be complete prior to Certificate of Occupancy.
         (c)   The new facilities are the subject of a binding executed
contract for the construction of the facilities to be constructed within a
period of time as stipulated in the contract or the provision of services at
the time the development permit is issued.
         (d)   The new facilities have been included in the city/county/state
capital improvement program annual budget.
         (e)   The new facilities are guaranteed at a specific time in an
enforceable development agreement. An enforceable development agreement may
include, but is not limited to, development agreements pursuant to F.S. §
163.3220, or an agreement or development order pursuant to F.S. Chapter 380.
Such facilities must be consistent with the Capital Improvements Element of the
City/County Comprehensive Plan and approved by the City/County Engineer.
         (f)   The developer has contributed funds to the city/county necessary
to provide new facilities consistent with the Capital Improvements Element of
the City/County Comprehensive Plan. Commitment that the facilities will be
built must be evidenced by an appropriate budget amendment and appropriation by
the city/county or other governmental entity.
         (g)   Specific to transportation.
            1.   The proposed development does not place any trips on an over
capacity roadway link.
            2.   There is an approved action plan to accommodate the traffic
impact of the development.
            3.   Satisfaction of Broward County concurrency standards. The
burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate compliance with the standards
detailed in this section. If applicable, the development application shall be
reviewed to ensure that the proposed development satisfies the Broward County
Concurrency Standards for the Regional Road Network as outlined in § 5-182(a)
of the Broward County Land Development Code, as amended from time to time. The
applicant shall provide the necessary documentation from Broward County
demonstrating satisfaction of these requirements. The applicant may choose to
satisfy the transportation concurrency requirements by making a proportionate
share contribution to an eligible transportation project located within the
Southwest Concurrency District, pursuant to the requirements set forth in § 5-
182(a)(5)(b)(4) of the Broward County Land Development Code, as amended from
time to time, and § 163.3280, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time.
            4.   The options available for and methodology for determining the
amount of proportionate share mitigation, and the procedures for the city to
implement such proportionate share mitigation on the city’s roadway network,
shall be as specified in § 5-182(a)(5)(b)(4) of the Broward County Land
Development Code, as amended from time to time.
         (h)   The development is authorized by an approved Development of
Regional Impact (DRI) Development Order.
         (i)   The proposed development is found to have vested rights with
regard to any affected roadway segments or infrastructure capacity
reservations.
         (j)   This determination may not be satisfied by the transfer of
committed capacity from a previously approved plat or DRI to another parcel of
land not included within the previous plat or DRI.
   (B)   Subtracting from division (A) the sum of:
      (1)   The design demand for the service created by existing development,
if applicable; and
      (2)   The new design demand for the service (by phase or otherwise) that
will be created concurrent with the impacts of the proposed development and by
the anticipated completion of other presently approved developments.
   (C)   Infrastructure construction. If infrastructure construction is
necessary to meet adopted levels of service, the developer must complete
construction and issue performance bonds to insure completion of work or risk
forfeiture of favorable concurrency status. If a developer in the area wishes
to complete off site infrastructure construction that may or may not be part of
other effective developers agreements, he may do so in accordance with a new
developers agreement that may entail reimbursable clauses for off site work and
facility oversizing to meet area needs. The original developer will be
contacted concerning the potential of work being deleted from his developers
agreement. It shall be determined by the city that modifying the original
developers agreement is in the best interests of the city. The original
developer must pay reasonable infrastructure costs to new developers under the
terms of the original or modified developers agreement.
(Ord. 936, passed 10-17-90; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 1-17-07)
§ 156.15 BURDEN OF SHOWING COMPLIANCE ON DEVELOPER.
   The burden of showing compliance with the levels of service requirements
shall be upon the developer. Applications for development approval shall
provide sufficient and verifiable information showing compliance with these
standards. The City Planning Department shall supply concurrency management
forms along with a schedule of fees to be completed and submitted by the
developer.
(Ord. 936, passed 10-17-90)
§ 156.16 CONCURRENCY MONITORING SYSTEM.
   (A)   Responsibility. The City Planner shall be responsible for monitoring
development activity to ensure the development is consistent with the city
Comprehensive Plan. A concurrency monitoring system is instituted to verify
that public facilities and services will be available at adopted levels of
service concurrent with the impacts of the development on those prescribed
facility or service standards.
   (B)   Certificate of concurrency. Applications for development permits shall
be chronologically logged to determine rights to available capacity. Compliance
will be calculated and capacity reserved with the issuance of a certificate of
concurrency.
   (C)   Certificate of concurrency procedures. The general parameters for the
issuance of a certificate of concurrency are as follows:
      (1)   For petitions controlled by §
156.10(A) and (B), if the property is unplatted, then concurrency would be
established through platting the property. If the property is platted, then
concurrency determination would be reviewed through amendment to the plat to be
approved by both the City Commission and the Broward County Commission. The
amendment will stipulate the intensity of development.
      (2)   For petitions controlled by §
156.10(C), concurrency certificates will be issued through an amendment to the
note on the plat and will be approved by the City Commission and the Broward
County Commission. The amendment will stipulate the intensity of development.
   (D)   Intergovernmental coordination. The City Planning Department shall
coordinate concurrency activities within and outside the city. The City
Planning Department, Public Works Department, Fire Department and Police
Department shall act as liaisons depending on the specific level of service
standard with the South Florida Regional Planning Council, Broward County and/
or any other municipality or governmental entity to review technical issues of
development approval.
(Ord. 936, passed 10-17-90)
LEVELS OF SERVICE
§ 156.30 LEVEL OF SERVICE FOR CAPITAL FACILITIES.
   The city shall maintain the following levels of service for capital
facilities:
Facility Type Level of Service Standard
Facility Type   Level of Service Standard
Transportation  “D”
Sanitary Sewer  85 gallons/capita/day
                1,000 gallons/acres/day
Solid Waste     5 pounds/capita/day
Drainage:
                Residential streets not greater than 50 feet wide rights-of-way to have crown
                elevations no lower than the elevation for the respective area depicted on the
Road Protection Broward County “Flood Criteria Map” which represents the 10 year three day storm as
                published by Broward County. Rights-of-way greater than 50 feet wide to have an
                ultimate edge of pavement no lower than the elevation for the respective area
                depicted on the “Flood Criteria Map.”
Buildings       The minimum lowest floor elevation shall be the highest of the following:
                   (A)   Minimum floor elevation as set forth in the South Florida Water Management
                Districts’ Surface Water Management Permit.
                   (B)   The elevation shown on the 100 year Floor Elevation Map, which represents
                the 100 year three day storm Latest Revision, prepared by Broward County
                Transportation Department.
                   (C)   Twelve inches above the highest point of the paved roadway/drive-lane
                nearest to the building.
Off-Site        Not to exceed the inflow limit of SFWMD primary receiving canal or the local
Discharge       conveyance system, whichever is less.
                Design frequency minimum to be three year rainfall intensity of the State Department
                of Transportation Zone 10, rainfall chart as shown on the exhibit attached to
                Ordinance 936. The duration utilized to determine the rainfall amount is the time of
                concentration. The time of concentration shall be determined by the time for runoff
Storm Sewers    to flow over land to the storm drainage structure and the time in the pipe. The time
                of overland flow is dependent on the slope of the ground and the nature of the ground
                cover, for example, whether the surface is paved, rocky or grassed. Standard
                engineering tables are utilized to determine the time of concentration based on the
                above factors.
Flood Plain     Calculated flood elevations based the ten-year and one hundred-year return frequency
Routing         rainfall of the three-day duration shall not exceed the corresponding elevations of
                the Broward County “Flood Criteria Map” and the 100 year Floor Elevation Map.
Antecedent      The higher elevation of either the control elevation or the elevation depicted on the
Water           Broward County “Average Water Levels Map.”
                   (A)   Retention and/or detention in the overall system, including swales, lakes,
On-Site Storage canals, green-ways, and the like, shall be provided for one of the three following
                criteria or equivalent combinations thereof:
                      (1)   Wet detention volume shall be provided for the first inch of runoff from
                the developed project, or the total runoff of 2.5 inches times the percentage of
                imperviousness, whichever is greater.
                      (2)   Dry detention volume shall be provided equal to 75% of the above amounts
                computed for wet detention.
                      (3)   Retention volume shall be provided equal to 50% of the above amounts
                computed for wet detention.
                   (B)   Commercial or industrial zoned projects shall provide at least one half inch
                of dry detention or retention pre- treatment as part of the required retention/
                detention, unless reasonable assurances can be offered that hazardous materials will
                not enter the project’s surface water management system.
                   (C)   Systems with inlets in greased areas will be credited with up to 0.2 inches
                of the contributing areas. Full credit will be based on a ratio of 10:1 impervious
                area runoff to pervious area with proportional credit granted for greater ratios.
Best Management Prior to discharge to surface or ground water, BMPs will be used to reduce pollutant
                discharge.
Water           82 gallons/capita/day
                1,000/gallons/acre/day
Recreation/Open 10 acres/1,000 population
Space
                If a proposed development includes all or any part of lands identified as
                environmentally sensitive on the Floods Plains/Wetlands Map of the city Comprehensive
                Plan; is designated a local area of particular concern; or an Urban Wilderness site
Environmentally as designated by the Broward County Commission, an environmental impact assessment
Sensitive Lands shall be required. The environmental impact assessment shall be prepared by the
                petitioner and subject to review and approval by the city consistent with the
                requirements of Sec. 5-198(i)(1), Broward County Land Development Code adopted
                September 25, 1989.
Potable Water   An application for a development permit shall be reviewed to determine if any impact
Wellfield       as it regards wellfield protection will occur. Review shall be pursuant to the
Protection      Broward County Environmental Quality Control Board Code of Regulations and any other
                standards which may be adopted by the Broward County Commission or the city.
 
(Ord. 936, passed 10-17-90)
VESTED RIGHTS
§ 156.40 VESTED RIGHTS AVAILABLE.
   Any property owner or developer may seek a vested rights determination
regarding a specific parcel for which additional intensity or density is
sought.
(Ord. 936, passed 10-17-90)
§ 156.41 REQUESTS TO BE FILED WITH CITY MANAGER; INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Requests for vested rights determination shall be filed with the City
Manager. The developer shall be required to state the parcel for which the
vested rights determination is sought, the basis for the vested rights claim,
and shall provide a copy of the agreement or other document which the developer
asserts gives rise to a vested rights determination.
   (B)   After the developer has filed for a vested rights determination it
shall be forwarded to the City Attorney for review.
(Ord. 936, passed 10-17-90)
§ 156.42 HEARING OFFICER TO CONDUCT ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   (A)   A hearing officer shall be appointed to conduct an administrative
hearing regarding the vested rights determination. The procedures for
conducting hearings shall be approved by a resolution of the City Commission
and incorporated in the Administrative Code. The hearing shall be set for no
later than 60 days from the date of filing unless an extension of time is
requested or agreed to by the applicant.
   (B)   The City Attorney shall represent the city in the administrative
hearing. The hearing officer shall determine whether vested rights have been
created pursuant to statute or established case law and shall determine whether
any time limitation is applicable to such vested rights.
(Ord. 936, passed 10-17-90)
§ 156.43 ELIMINATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   If the City Attorney, any time before the hearing, reviews the application
and finds that the application has provided clear evidence that vested rights
claimed by the developer exist, the City Attorney and the applicant may
stipulate to the existence of vested rights and the time during which such
rights may be exercised. Such stipulation shall eliminate the need for
determination by the hearing officer.
(Ord. 936, passed 10-17-90)
§ 156.44 HEARING OFFICER AND CITY COMMISSION TO ISSUE PROPOSED ORDER.
   (A)   The hearing officer shall, within 45 days of the hearing, issue a
proposed order which shall include findings of fact and conclusions of law with
respect to the claim of vested rights.
   (B)   The City Commission shall within 30 days of receipt of the proposed
order issue its determination which shall be in the form of resolution.
(Ord. 936, passed 10-17-90)
CHAPTER 157: LOCAL HOUSING ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Section
   
157.01   Definitions
   
157.02   Findings; legislative intent
   
157.03   Establishment of Local Housing Assistance Program
   
157.04   Effect on Joint Local Housing Assistance Program
   
157.05   Establishment of Affordable Housing Assistance Trust Fund
   
157.06   Expansion of existing Citizens Advisory Committee
   
157.07   Implementation of the Affordable Housing Incentive Plan approved by
the City Commission
§ 157.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in the State
Housing Initiatives Partnership Act (“Act”), and Chapter 9I-37, Florida
Administrative Code, as they may be amended from time to time, are adopted
herein by reference.
(Ord. 1119, passed 4-19-95; Am. Ord. 1232, passed 10-8-97)
§ 157.02 FINDINGS; LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (A)   Findings.
      (1)   The State Housing Initiatives Partner- ship Act (“Act”) provides
for the establishment of local housing assistance programs;
      (2)   The city wishes to provide for the housing needs of its citizens,
and to promote the efficient location, design, and provision of affordable
housing;
      (3)   The city desires to establish a local housing assistance program;
and
      (4)   Ordinance 1119, passed 4-19-95, establishing the Local Housing
Assistance Program of the city remains in effect until the monies allocated
under the 1997-1998 Fiscal Year Program are expended in accordance with such
ordinance.
   (B)   Legislative intent. The purpose of this chapter is to implement the
Act, including, without limitation, the following:
      (1)   To increase the availability of affordable housing by combining
local resources and cost saving measures, as applicable, and by using private
and public resources to reduce the cost of housing;
      (2)   To promote more compact urban development, and to assist in
achieving the growth management goals contained in the adopted local
comprehensive plan by allowing more efficient use of land so as to provide
housing units that are more affordable;
      (3)   To establish a strong sense of community through increased social
and economic integration;
      (4)   To build the organizational and technical capacity of community-
based organizations so as to optimize the role of community-based organizations
in the production of affordable housing;
      (5)   To promote innovative design of eligible housing, and its
supporting infrastructure, to provide for cost savings in the provisions of
such housing;
      (6)   To promote expedited permit processing systems for affordable
housing; and
      (7)   To promote review procedure for plan provisions that impact
affordable housing.
(Ord. 1119, passed 4-19-95; Am. Ord. 1232, passed 10-8-97)
§ 157.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF LOCAL HOUSING ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
   (A)   There is created and established a Local Housing Assistance Program
(“Program”) by the city, to be implemented and administrated by the city.
   (B)   The city shall implement the Program, within the city, consistently
with the requirements of the Act. The strategies of the Program will be
outlined in the city’s State Housing Initiatives Partnership Housing Assistance
Plan.
(Ord. 1119, passed 4-19-95; Am. Ord. 1232, passed 10-8-97)
§ 157.04 EFFECT ON JOINT LOCAL HOUSING ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
   The Local Housing Assistance Program for the city, as established by
Ordinance 1119, passed 4-19-95, shall remain in effect until the monies
allocated under the 1997-1998 Fiscal Program Year are expended in accordance
with the terms of such ordinance.
(Ord. 1119, passed 4-19-95; Am. Ord. 1232, passed 10-8-97)
§ 157.05 ESTABLISHMENT OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING ASSISTANCE TRUST FUND.
   (A)   Pursuant to the requirements of the Act, the city agrees to provide
for the continuance of the existing affordable housing trust fund (“Fund”)
within the official and fiscal accounting records of the city. All monies
deposited in the fund shall be subject to the requirements of the Act and the
city ordinance establishing the fund.
   (B)   The city shall cause the Fund to be audited and shall report the
results of such audit as required by the Act.
(Ord. 1119, passed 4-19-95; Am. Ord. 1232, passed 10-8-97)
§ 157.06 EXPANSION OF EXISTING CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   The Citizens Advisory Committee currently in existence in the city shall be
expanded to act in the role of the Affordable Housing Advisory Committee, as
required by the Act. Composition of the existing Committee shall be nine
members serving one year terms. Members of the Committee shall be appointed by
Commission pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1119, passed 4-19-95; Am. Ord. 1232, passed 10-8-97; Am. Ord. 1258,
passed 4-15-98)
§ 157.07 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVE PLAN APPROVED BY
THE CITY COMMISSION.
   The Affordable Housing Assistance Incentive Plan (“Incentive Plan”) for the
city, as approved by the City Commission, shall remain in effect and shall act
as Incentive Strategies for the city’s Program, in accordance with the
requirements of the Act. Incentive Strategies shall be incorporated into the
Local Housing Assistance Program pursuant to the requirements of the Act.
(Ord. 1119, passed 4-19-95; Am. Ord. 1232, passed 10-8-97; Am. Ord. 1258,
passed 4-15-98)
CHAPTER 158: AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM
Section
   
158.01   Purpose
   
158.02   Definitions
   
158.03   Affordable Housing Trust Fund
   
158.04   Commission of independent affordable housing study
   
158.05   City center project affordable housing initiative
   
158.06   Monitoring and review
Cross-reference:
   Affordable Housing Advisory Committee, see §§ 32.400 through 32.409
§ 158.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to implement a tiered ordinance to
establish guidelines and criteria for a housing assistance program(s) to
provide a variety of housing options ranging from homeownership to rental for
families earning 150% of the median income of the city or less.
   (B)   The first tier of this ordinance shall establish an affordable housing
trust fund to receive funds from voluntary contributions as well as state and
federal aid, and may direct the City Manager, by resolution, to commission an
outside, independent study to examine the city's affordable housing needs and
conditions. The second tier of this ordinance may thereafter incorporate the
findings of this study.
(Ord. 1575, passed 3-21-07)
§ 158.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them as set forth below, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND. Trust Fund established by the city for the
purpose of collecting the required fees and disbursing funds for affordable
housing programs in accordance with the criteria set forth herein.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT. Housing built with funding from federal, state,
local or private resources and designated for affordable housing for moderate,
low and very low income households.
   CITY. The City of Pembroke Pines, Florida.
   ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLD. A household that qualifies for participation in an
affordable housing program as designated in this chapter.
   HOUSEHOLD. One person living alone or two or more persons sharing residency
whose income is considered for the affordable housing program.
   OWNER. The person or persons who hold title to the property as indicated in
the Broward County Public Records and is the mortgagor.
   SHARED APPRECIATION. Percentage of the amount of the appreciation in the
value of the affordable housing unit to be shared by the city and owner at the
time of resale of the affordable housing unit.
(Ord. 1575, passed 3-21-07)
§ 158.03 AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND.
   The city shall establish an Affordable Housing Trust Fund for the purpose of
collecting any and all funds related to the city’s affordable housing programs
pursuant to this chapter. Such funds shall include, but not be limited to,
voluntary contributions and state and federal assistance, including Community
Development Block Grant (CDBG) funding, State Housing Initiative Partnership
(SHIP) and the Home Investment Partnership Program (HOME), and shared
appreciation dollars collected at the closing of sales of designated
properties.
   (A)   The funds collected for deposit in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund
may be utilized for the following affordable housing programs:
      (1)   Down payment assistance to eligible households;
      (2)   Acquisition and construction of affordable housing units;
      (3)   Enhancement of county, state and federal affordable housing
programs; and
      (4)   Rehabilitation of existing affordable housing units.
   (B)   The City Commission may from time to time by resolution authorize
additional programs which may be funded through the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund.
   (C)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall provide the required
supervision for the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and shall oversee the
account. A financial status report on the Affordable Housing Trust Account
shall be provided to the City Commission on or before October 1 of each
calendar year.
(Ord. 1575, passed 3-21-07)
§ 158.04 COMMISSION OF INDEPENDENT AFFORDABLE HOUSING STUDY.
   The City Commission recognizes the future need for additional analysis of
the city's affordable housing needs, and may authorize the City Manager, or his
or her designee, by resolution, to commission an independent study of the
city’s affordable housing needs and conditions. This affordable housing study
shall examine the following issues, among other things: affordable rental
options, initial purchases, future and subsequent sales of affordable housing
units, qualifications of eligible households, priority for available units, and
the demand for affordable housing. The findings of this study may be
incorporated into the city's Code of Ordinances as the second tier of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1575, passed 3-21-07)
§ 158.05 CITY CENTER PROJECT AFFORDABLE HOUSING INITIATIVE.
   (A)   At least 250 units in the city’s City Center project have been
previously designated as affordable or workforce housing units on the City
Center Plat, and shall retain such designation in perpetuity, but subject
nonetheless to the guidelines established herein and in a future master
declaration of covenants and restrictions to be filed and recorded by the city
or its successor. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, the City
Center affordable housing shall mean housing for which monthly rents or monthly
mortgage payments (including taxes and insurance) do not exceed 30% of an
amount representing 120% of the median incomes adjusted for family size for all
households within the city; provided however, that the definition of affordable
housing for City Center shall also include workforce housing or any similar
concept if adopted and defined as part of the Broward County Land Use Plan.
   (B)   These units, if and when designated and constructed shall only be sold
or rented to qualified buyers or tenants as defined herein, pursuant to the
city's Code of Ordinances and Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time.
This restriction shall be included in future deeds of conveyance for each of
the affordable housing units referenced in this division or in a master
declaration of restrictive covenants.
(Ord. 1575, passed 3-21-07)
§ 158.06 MONITORING AND REVIEW.
   (A)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall monitor the
implementation of this chapter. On or before October 1 of each calendar, the
City Manager shall present a status report to the City Commission on the
implementation of this chapter.
   (B)   One year after the adoption of this chapter, the City Commission shall
review its implementation and effectiveness.
(Ord. 1575, passed 3-21-07)
CHAPTER 159: SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Section
   
159.01   Safe Neighborhood Improvement Districts
§ 159.01 SAFE NEIGHBORHOOD IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The City Commission hereby finds and declares that among the many
causes of deterioration in the business and residential neighborhoods of the
state are the following: proliferation of crime, automobile traffic flow
strangled by outmoded street patterns, unsuitable topography, faulty lot
layouts, fragmentation of land uses and parking areas necessitating frequent
automobile movement, lack of separation of pedestrian areas from automobile
traffic, lack of separation of vehicle traffic lanes and railroad traffic, and
excessive noise levels from automobile traffic.
   (B)   The City Commission further finds and declares that safe neighborhoods
are the product of planning and implementation of appropriate environmental
design concepts, comprehensive crime prevention programs, land use
recommendations, and beautification techniques.
   (C)   The City Commission further finds and declares that the provisions of
this part and the powers granted to local governments, property owners'
associations, special dependent districts, and community redevelopment
neighborhood improvement districts are desirable to guide and accomplish the
coordinated, balanced, and harmonious development of safe neighborhoods; to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of these areas and their
inhabitants, visitors, property owners, and workers; to establish, maintain,
and preserve property values and preserve and foster the development of
attractive neighborhood and business environments: to prevent overcrowding and
congestion: to improve or redirect automobile traffic and provide pedestrian
safety; to reduce crime rates and the opportunities for the commission of
crime; and to provide improvements in neighborhoods so they are defensible
against crime.
   (D)   It is the intent of the City Commission to authorize the creation of
Safe Neighborhood Improvement Districts as provided in F.S. §§ 163.501 through
163.526, also known as the Safe Neighborhood Improvement Act (the "Act"), to
assist the City in implementing plans that employ crime prevention through
community policing innovations, environmental design, environmental security,
and defensible space techniques to establish safe neighborhoods. The
Legislature, therefore, declares that the development, redevelopment,
preservation, and revitalization of neighborhoods in this state, and all the
purposes of this part, are public purposes for which public money may be
borrowed, expended, loaned, and granted.
(Ord. 1988, passed 5-4-22)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
II.   LAND USE PLAN CHANGES
      
III.   DEVELOPMENT ORDERS
TABLE I: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date     Description
No.   Passed
650   4-20-83  Rezoning approximately 4.94 acres, which are portions of tracts 6 and 7 in the
               Chambers Land Company Subdivision, from A-1 and B-3 to M-3.
               Rezoning approximately 4.1 acres, which are located at the intersection of
672   11-16-83 Washington Street and the Florida Power and Light Company Easement, from A-1 to
               R-1A.
679   1-18-84  Rezoning approximately 1.63 acres, located north of Johnson Street and West of
               Hiatus Road, from R-4 to PO-1.
717   11-7-84  Rezoning a 2.1-acre parcel of property located west of Douglas Road and 300 feet
               south of N.W. 21st Street, from B-2 to R-4.
725   2-20-85  Rezoning a 4.756-acre parcel of property located west of Hiatus Road and
               approximately 785 feet north of Pines Boulevard, from R-4 to PO-2.
726   2-20-85  Rezoning a 42.891-acre parcel of property approximately 300 feet south of
               Johnson Street approximately 1,026 feet east of Flamingo Road, from R-4 to B-3.
               Rezoning a 4.965-acre parcel of property located approximately 900 feet north of
727   2-20-85  Pines Boulevard and approximately 750 feet west of Hiatus Road, from R-4 to PO-
               2.
729   3-20-85  Rezoning the south 570 feet of the north 630 feet of the southwest quarter of
               Section 15, Township 51 south, Range 42 east, from A-1 to B-3.
732   5-1-85   Rezoning a 30-acre parcel of land located at the southeast corner of Douglas
               Road and Pines Boulevard, from B-3 and R-6 to B-2.
739   5-15-85  Rezoning a 9.9-acre portion of a parcel of land located at the southwest
               intersection of Johnson Street and Palm Avenue, from TH-12 to PO-2.
               Rezoning the approximately 135-acre portion of the parcel of property located at
746   6-19-85  the northeast intersection of Hiatus Road and Washington Street, from A-1 to R-
               4.
               Rezoning the approximately 99.82-acre portion of the property located south of
747   6-19-85  Pines Boulevard and approximately 1300 feet east of Hiatus Road, from A-1 to PO-
               2.
               Rezoning the approximately 52.09-acre portion of the parcel of property located
748   6-19-85  at the northwest intersection of Palm Avenue and Washington Street, from A-1 to
               M1-B.
               Rezoning the approximately 19.12-acre portion of the parcel of property located
749   6-19-85  at the southeast intersection of Hiatus Road and Pines Boulevard, from A-1 to B-
               2
768   12-4-85  Amending Ord. 739 to include the modification of the entrance to Palm Avenue in
               the legal description of the land rezoned by that ordinance.
               Rezoning the approximately 30 acre parcel of property located at the northeast
773   2-5-86   intersection of Taft Street and N.W. 97th Avenue between Bayberry Homes and
               Rainbow Homes from TH-12 to R-3, subject to specified conditions.
787   4-30-86  Rezoning a 3.5 acre parcel of property located near the southeast intersection
               of Pines Boulevard and West Flamingo Drive from B-3 to PO-2.
               Rezoning that parcel of property located north of Pembroke Road and east of the
790   5-7-86   Florida Power and Light Company easement, known as tracts 0-3 and 0-4 within the
               plat of Pembroke Lakes South.
794   6-18-86  Rezoning an approximately 57.428 acre parcel of land located north of Pembroke
               Road and west of Hollybrook Condominiums from A-1 to RS-7.
               Rezoning the 11.5 acre parcel of property located south of Pines Boulevard and
800   8-6-86   approximately 1,580 feet west of University Drive from R-6 Hotel and B-3 General
               Business District to R-6 Hotel District.
               Rezoning approximately 1,473 acres of land bordered on the north by Sheridan
818   1-7-87   Street, on the south by Pines Boulevard, on the east by Flamingo Road, and on
               the west by Interstate 75, from A-1 Limited Agriculture to PUD Planned Unit
               Development.
               Rezoning approximately 1,200 acres of land bordered on the north by Sheridan
               Street, on the south by Pembroke Road, on the east by 172nd Avenue, and on the
819   1-7-87   west by 184th Avenue, from A-1 Limited Agriculture, A-5 Agricultural-Excavation,
               A-6 Agricultural- Disposal, and A-7 Agricultural-Restricted to A-5 Agricultural-
               Excavation.
               Rezoning an approximately 29-acre parcel of land located west of Hollybrook
836   5-20-87  Condominiums, east of existing Tanglewood Single-Family Development, and north
               of Washington Street from R-4 Apartment District and TH-12 Townhouse District to
               R-1B One-Family Dwelling District.
               Rezoning an approximately 2.3-acre parcel of land located at the northwest
840   8-5-87   intersection of Southwest 14th Street and Southwest 121st Avenue from A-
               1 Limited Agricultural to R-3 Low Density Multiple.
               Zoning an approximately 1,500-acre parcel of land as a residential PUD District.
844   9-15-87  Zoning an approximately 320-acre parcel of land as a corporate and industrial
               PUD District.
               Rezoning an approximately 105.1-acre parcel of land located at the northeast
846   9-15-87  intersection of Pines Boulevard and Dykes Road from A-1 Limited Agricultural to
               B-3 General Business.
               Rezoning an approximately 157-acre parcel of land located at the northeast
847   9-15-87  intersection of Pines Boulevard and Northwest 208th Avenue from A-1 Limited
               Agricultural to PUD Planned Unit Development.
               Rezoning an approximately 16-acre parcel of land located west of Palm Avenue and
851   11-4-87  approximately 500 feet south of Johnson Street east of Kipris Park from TH-12
               Townhouse District to PUD Planned Unit Development.
               Rezoning an approximately 505-acre parcel of land located west of I-75 between
855   1-20-88  Pines Boulevard and Pembroke Road from A-1 Agricultural and S-1 Recreational to
               PUD Planned Unit Development.
               Rezoning an approximately 95-acre parcel of land bounded on the west by a canal
856   1-20-88  and Southwest 196th Avenue, on the east by a theoretical Southeast 184th Avenue,
               and on the south by Pembroke Road, from A-1 Agricultural to A-5 Agricultural-
               Excavation.
               Rezoning approximately 3.5 acre parcels of property located south of Sheridan
857   2-17-88  Street and bisected by 200th Avenue, from Agricultural (A-1) District to General
               Business (B-3) District.
               Rezoning the approximate 160 acre parcel of property located west of Palm Avenue
865   4-20-88  and north of Pembroke Road and between Washington Street and Pembroke Road, from
               Limited Agricultural (A-1) District to Planned Unit Development (PUD).
               Rezoning the approximate ten acre parcel of property known as "Parcel A of
               Solomon Office Park" located immediately south of the Pembroke Pines Hospital
867   6-1-88   and located at the southeast intersection of University Drive and Pasadena
               Boulevard, from Limited Agricultural (A-1) District to General Business (B-3)
               District, conditioned upon the execution of a declaration of restrictions on the
               subject property.
               Rezoning that parcel of property located at the southwest corner of Taft Street
877   11-16-88 and University Drive from Commercial Business (B-2) District to General Business
               (B-3) District, subject to certain restrictions.
               Rezoning that parcel of property located at the northeast intersection of
878   12-21-88 Pembroke Road and Northwest 208th Avenue from Limited Agricultural District (A-
               1) to Agricultural Disposal District (A-6).
882   2-1-89   Rezoning that 1.3 acre parcel of land located at the northeast corner of Johnson
               Street and N.W. 119th Avenue from PUD Commercial to PUD Residential.
               Rezoning a 6.47 acre parcel of land which is located south of Pines Boulevard
920   4-11-90  and approximately 856.84 feet west of University Drive from B-3, General
               Business District, to C-1, Commercial District.
               Rezoning approximately a 50.6 acre parcel of land located south of Stirling
933   10-3-90  Road, and east of U.S. 27 from M-1, Light Industrial District, to M-3, General
               Industrial District.
               Rezoning 40.04 acres of the 120 acre parcel of land located north of Stirling
934   10-3-90  Road and east of U.S. 27 from A-1, Limited Agricultural District, to M-3,
               General Industrial District; and 80.14 acres of the parcel is rezoned from A-1,
               Limited Agricultural District, to M-4, Limited Heavy Industrial District.
               Rezoning that 78.83 parcel tract of land located at the southeast corner of
951   5-1-91   184th Street and Pines Boulevard from A-1 Agricultural District to PUD Planned
               Unit Development District.
               Rezoning that 9.2 acre tract of land located at the southwest corner of Pines
952   5-1-91   Boulevard and SW 196th Avenue from B-3 General Business District and T-1C Mobile
               Home Park District to B-3 General Business District.
               Rezoning that 24.54 acre parcel of land located at the southeast corner of Pines
953   5-1-91   Boulevard and U.S. 27 from A-1 Agricultural District to M-1B Planned Industrial
               District.
               Rezoning that 3.82 acre parcel of land located at the southeast corner of Pines
957   6-5-91   Boulevard and Southwest 202nd Avenue from B-3 General Business District to B-
               2 Community Business District.
               Rezoning that 4.09 acre parcel of land located at the southeast corner of
959   9-4-91   Sheridan Street and U.S. 27 from PUD Planned Unit Development District to B-
               3 General Business District.
               Rezoning two parcels of property located north of Pines Boulevard between
970   10-2-91  Southwest 172nd Avenue and Southwest 184th Avenue from PUD Planned Unit
               Development-Commercial to PUD Planned Unit Development-Residential.
               Rezoning the 15.8 acre parcel located south of Sheridan Street and west of Dykes
               Road from A-1 Limited Agricultural District to R-4 Multi-Family Residential
               district; the 153.29 acre parcel bordered by Sheridan Street on the north, Pines
1011  10-21-92 Boulevard on the south and the Sportatorium on the west from A-1 and B-3 General
               Business District to RS-7 Single-Family; and the 417.47 acre parcel bordered by
               Dykes Road on the east, Pines Boulevard on the south and the Sportatorium on the
               west from A-1 and B-3 to R-1B One-Family Dwelling District.
               Rezoning approximately 20 acres of land, located east of U.S. 27 between Taft
               and Sheridan Streets, from A-1 Limited Agricultural District to M-1 Limited
1026  3-3-93   Industrial District with the stipulation that manufacturing from these
               previously prepared materials are prohibited on the property: bone, cork,
               feathers, fur, felt, and horn.
               Rezoning approximately 206.3 acres of land located just south of Pines Boulevard
1034  6-2-93   between SW 196 Avenue and SW 184 Avenue, from A-1 Limited Agricultural District
               to R-1C One Family Dwelling District.
               Rezoning land located south of Pines Boulevard between SW 172 Avenue and SW 184
1036  6-16-93  Avenue, to conform to the Silver Lakes Planned Union Development Zoning District
               Master Plan with the Silver Lakes Development Order.
               Rezoning land located at the southeast intersection of Pines Boulevard and SW
1042  8-4-93   208 Avenue, from A-1 Limited Agricultural and B-3 General Business Districts to
               RS-7 Single Family (Zero Lot Line) District.
               Rezoning approximately 2.3 acres of land located near the southwest corner of
1044  8-4-93   Johnson Street and University Drive, from R-3 Low Density Multiple district to
               B-2A Planned Business Center District.
               Rezoning approximately 517 acres located on the west side of I-75, north of
1045  8-4-93   Pines Boulevard and east of Dykes Road, from A- 1 Limited Agricultural District
               to Planned Unit Development (PUD) District.
               Rezoning approximately 426 acres of land located at the northeast corner of
1053  10-20-93 Pines Boulevard and SW 172 Avenue, from B-3 General Business District, A-
               1 Agricultural District, and A-4 Agricultural-Amusement District to PUD Planned
               Unit Development District.
1054  11-3-93  Rezoning approximately .9 acres of land located at 1601 North Flamingo Road,
               from R-4 Multi-Family Apartment District to PO-1 Professional Office District.
               Rezoning approximately 108 acres of land located south of Pines Boulevard
1064  2-16-94  between S.W. 184th Avenue and 196th Avenue (Twin Acres), from R1-C One-Family
               Dwelling District to RS-7 Zero Lot Line District.
               Rezoning approximately 20 acres of land located on the northwest corner of
1071  5-4-94   Flamingo Road and Pembroke Road, from B-3 General Business District to R-
               4 Multi- Family Residential District.
               Rezoning approximately 29.4 acres of land located at the southeast corner of
1073  5-4-94   Pines Boulevard and Flamingo Road, from M1-B Planned Industrial to B-3 General
               Business District.
               Rezoning approximately 6 acres of land located at the northeast corner of
1074  5-4-94   Washington Street and Flamingo Road, from R-4 Apartment District to B-3 General
               Business District.
               Rezoning approximately 68.49 acres of land located on the south side of Pines
1078  5-18-94  Boulevard between S.W. 196th Avenue and 208th Avenue, from T1-C Mobile Home
               District to RS-7 Single Family (Zero Lot Line) District subject to owner's
               commitment that no lot shall be less than 60' x 100'.
               Rezoning approximately 25.9 acres of land located on the northeast corner of
               Taft Street and Palm Avenue, from A-1 Limited Agricultural District to RS-
1079  5-18-94  7 Single Family (Zero Lot Line) District subject to the owner's commitment to
               preserve the existing bird rookery, to cooperate with the Audubon Society, and
               to erect a fence around the homes.
               Rezoning approximately 22 acres of land located on the southwest corner of Dykes
1081  5-18-94  Road and Pines Boulevard, from A-1 Limited Agricultural and B-3 General Business
               District to B-3 General Business District.
               Rezoning approximately 8,370 square feet of land located at 6845 Pembroke Road
1083  6-15-94  from R-3 Low Density Multi-Family Residential District to B-1 Neighborhood
               Business District (Professional Office Use Only) provided that the owner records
               restrictive covenants limiting the use to professional office use only.
               Rezoning two parcels of approximately 38.36 acres of land located on the south
1097  9-21-94  side of Pines Boulevard between Hiatus Road and Palm Avenue, from PO-
               2 Professional Office District to B-3 General Business District.
               Rezoning approximately 320 acres of land known as Big Sky, located on the south
1102  10-2-94  side of Sheridan Street between N.W. 196th Avenue and N.W. 184th Avenue, from A-
               1 Agricultural and A-5 Agricultural Excavation Zoning Districts to PUD (Planned
               Unit Development).
               Rezoning approximately 90 acres of land located in the N.W. Quadrant of the
1103  12-7-94  Pembroke Falls Residential Development, lying east of N.W. 172 Avenue and north
               of Pines Boulevard, from A-1 Limited Agricultural Zoning District to PUD
               (Planned Unit Development) Zoning District.
               Rezoning approximately 487 acres of land located south of Pines Boulevard
1104  12-7-94  between N.W. 160th and 172nd Avenues, from A-1 Limited Agricultural Zoning
               District to PUD (Planned Unit Development) Zoning District.
               Rezoning approximately 13.5 acres of land located at the northeast corner of
1112  2-1-95   Hiatus Road and Pembroke Road, from B-3 General Business Zoning District to R-
               4 Multi-Family Residential Zoning District.
               Rezoning approximately 163 acres of land located at the southeast intersection
1113  2-1-95   of Pines Boulevard and Flamingo Road (A/K/A Nasher PUD), from R-4 Multi-Family
               Residential Zoning District and M1-B Light Industrial Zoning District to PUD
               (Planned Unit Development) Zoning District.
               Rezoning approximately 132 acres of land (Chambers Property) located at the
1117  3-20-95  southeast corner of Pines Boulevard and U.S. 27, from M-1B Planned Industrial,
               B-3 General Business and A-1 Limited Agricultural, to RS-7 Single-Family
               Residential.
               Rezoning approximately 10 acres of land located on the southwest corner of Pines
1122  5-17-95  Boulevard and S.W. 172nd Avenue, as more particularly described in Attachment A
               to Ordinance 1122, from A-5 Agricultural Excavation District to B-2 Community
               Business District.
               Rezoning approximately 320 acres of land located on south of Pines Boulevard,
               north of Pembroke Road between S.W. 184th and S.W. 196th Avenues, as more
1125  6-21-95  particularly described in Attachment A to Ordinance 1125, from A-5 Agricultural
               Excavation District to R-1C One Family District and RS-7 Single Family (Zero Lot
               Line) District.
               Rezoning approximately 9 acres of land located at 7960 Johnson Street, Pembroke
1126  8-2-95   Pines, Florida, as more particularly described in Attachment A to Ordinance
               1126, from A-1 Limited Agricultural Utility District to A-3 Agricultural Utility
               District.
               Rezoning certain lands constituting the Chapel Trail “Planned Unit Development
1129  8-2-95   (PUD) District,” as more particularly described in Attachments A, B and C to
               Ordinance 1129.
               Rezoning approximately 33 acres of Towngate North located at the southeast
               corner of Sheridan Street and Dykes Road, as more particularly described in
1145  12-6-95  Attachment A to Ordinance 1145, from A-1 Limited Agricultural District to PUD
               District in accordance with the revised design development standards dated March
               6, 1995.
               Rezoning approximately 4.247 acres of land located on the south side of Pines
               Boulevard, approximately 450 feet east of N.W. 202nd Avenue and commonly known
1152  3-6-96   as the “Pines Country Club,” as more particularly described in Attachment A to
               Ordinance 1152, from B-3 General Business District to A-2 Limited Agricultural
               District.
               Rezoning approximately 9.993 acres of land located on the Nasher PUD at the
               southwest corner of Southwest 114th Avenue and Pines Boulevard, from PUD
1153  4-9-96   Residential to PUD Commercial; and to rezone approximately 6 acres of land
               located at the northeast corner of Washington Street and Flamingo Road, from B-
               3 General Business to PUD Residential.
               Rezoning approximately 63 acres of land located on the west side of Northwest
1161  5-15-96  208th Avenue between Pines Boulevard and Johnson Street, known as Chapel Trail
               II, from PUD Residential to PUD Residential (townhomes).
               Rezoning approximately 6.521 acres of land located on the southeast corner of
1164  6-5-96   Pines Boulevard and Douglas Road, known as the Maroone Property, from B-2 to B-
               3.
               Rezoning approximately 92.5 acres of land located on the north side of Pembroke
1184  9-18-96  Road between 184th and Southwest 196th Avenues, known as the Levitt Homes/Vulcan
               property, from R1-C One Family Dwelling District to RS-7 Single Family Dwelling
               District.
               Rezoning approximately 123.31 acres of land located on the west side of I-75
1208  3-19-97  between Pembroke Road and Pines Boulevard, known as the Siemens Group, Inc.,
               property, from A-1 Limited Agricultural District to R-4 Apartment District.
               Rezoning approximately 154 acres of land located on the northeast corner of
1209  3-5-97   Pembroke Road and S.W. 172nd Avenue, known as the Rozzo property, from A-
               5 Agricultural Excavation District to R-1C One-Family Dwelling District.
               Rezoning approximately 10 acres of land located on the west side of N.W. 196th
1212  4-16-97  Avenue, north of N.W. 10th Street, known as the Chapel Estates, from A-1 Limited
               Agricultural District to R-1A -Family Dwelling District.
               Rezoning approximately 0.97 acre parcel of land located on the south side of
1213  5-7-97   Pines Boulevard and west side of S.W. 114th Avenue within the Nasher PUD, from
               an 80-foot wide right-of-way parcel to an open space parcel.
               Rezoning approximately 22 acres of land located north of Pines Boulevard and
1215  6-18-97  east of Dykes Road, known as the Towngate South property, from B-3 General
               Business District to PUD.
               Rezoning approximately 22.64 acres of land located on the southwest corner of
1221  8-6-97   Pines Boulevard and S.W. 172nd Avenue, known as the L.W. Rozzo property, from A-
               5 Agricultural Excavation District to C-1 Commercial District.
               Rezoning approximately 5.53 acres of land located on the southwest corner of
1222  8-6-97   Pines Boulevard and S.X. 172nd Avenue, known as the L.W. Rozzo property, from A-
               5 Agricultural Excavation District to B-2 Community Business District.
               Rezoning approximately 3,000 square feet of land located at the southwest corner
1238  12-10-97 of S.W. 66th Avenue, at 6610 Pembroke Road, from B-2 Community Business District
               to B-3 General Business District.
               Rezoning approximately 2.25 acres of land located on the south side of Sheridan
1239  12-10-97 Street, west of 136th Avenue, within the Pembroke Falls PUD, from PUD
               Residential to PUD Office.
               Rezoning approximately 23.538 acres of land located on the northeast corner of
1242  12-17-97 Pines Boulevard and Douglas Road from B-2 Community Business District to B-
               3 General Business District.
               Rezoning approximately 2.293 acres of land located west of S.W. 136th Avenue
1247  1-7-98   between the Century Village and American Equity Sites from R-4 Apartment to B-
               3 General Business District.
               Rezoning approximately 1,563 acres of land located between Pines Boulevard and
1252  1-7-98   Sheridan Street, and between Flamingo Road and I-75, and modifying the Pembroke
               Falls PUD design guidelines and review procedures.
               Rezoning approximately 258 acres of land known as Big Sky North, located on the
               northeast corner of Sheridan Street and Southwest 196th< Avenue; rezoning
1264  6-3-98   approximately 228 acres south of Stirling Road currently land use designated as
               Irregular Residential, 10 acres designated Commercial, and 30 acres north of
               Stirling Road designated Agricultural all to be rezoned to PUD.
               Rezoning approximately 260.46 acres of land, known as Country Pines, located on
1271  6-17-98  the northeast corner of Taft Street and University Drive, from Low 5 (L-5)
               Residential to PUD (Planned Unit Development).
               Rezoning an approximate 9.6 acre parcel of real property located on the
1273  8-5-98   southwest corner of Sheridan Street and 208th< Avenue, from A-1 Limited
               Agricultural to M-2 Medium Industrial.
               Rezoning an approximate 2 acre parcel of real property located on the northeast
1294  1-6-99   corner of Flamingo Road, from R-4 Apartment District to PO-2 Professional Office
               District.
               Rezoning approximately 3.8166 acres of land, located on the northeast corner of
1305  6-2-99   Palm Avenue and Johnson Street, from Community Business District (B-2) to Low
               Density Multiple Residential District (R-3).
               Rezoning approximately 17.0138 acres of land located on the northeast corner of
1307  8-4-99   Taft Street and U.S. 27, from Limited Agricultural (A-1) and Light Industrial to
               Medium Industrial (M-2).
               Rezoning the approximate 5 acre parcel of land located on the northwest corner
1319  11-17-99 of Taft Street and Northwest 209th Avenue, from Light Industrial (M-1) to Medium
               Industrial (M-2)
               Rezoning the approximate 9.71 acre parcel of land located on the northeast
1337  4-5-00   corner of Stirling Road and Northwest 208th Avenue, from Light Agricultural (A-
               1) to Limited Heavy Industrial (M-4).
1338  5-3-00   Rezoning an approximate 2.5 acre parcel located on the northeast corner of Taft
               Street and U.S. 27 from Limited Agricultural (A-1) to Medium Industrial (M-2).
               Rezoning an approximate 6.32 acre parcel generally located east of 8330 Johnson
               Street from Planned Business Center (B-2A) and General Business (B-3) to Low
1354  10-4-00  Density Multiple (R-3); further approving the application for 17 special reserve
               units on a portion of the site in order to accommodate the development of a 97
               unit special residential facility for the elderly.
               Rezoning an approximate 12 acre parcel located on the south side of Sheridan
1366  1-17-01  Street between US 27 and Northwest 182nd Avenue to add a new PUD Zone M-2 and
               associated standards for the industrial land use designated along Sheridan
               Street only.
               Rezoning approximately 1.1 acres of real property known as the Pine Lake
1377  8-1-01   Commercial Center, located south of Pines Boulevard and east of Hiatus Road,
               from General Business (B-3) to Commercial Business (C-1).
               Rezoning approximately 26.6 acres of real property located at the northeast
1387  9-20-01  corner of Pines Boulevard and Hiatus Road from Limited Agricultural (A-1) to
               Community Business (B-2).
1408  5-1-02   Rezoning an approximate .9 acre parcel of land located at 1102 North University
               Drive from Community Business (B-2) to General Business (B-3).
               Rezoning approximately 9.082 acres of real property located on the northeast
1417  9-4-02   corner of Pembroke Road and Douglas Road from Limited Agricultural (A-1) to
               Commercial (C-1).
               Rezoning approximately 4.24 acres of real property, generally located on the
1435  12-18-02 south side of Pines Boulevard approximately one-half mile west of Southwest 196
               Avenue, from General Agricultural (A-2) to Community Business (B-2).
               Rezoning approximately 123 acres of real property, generally located on the west
1470  11-19-03 side of Interstate 75 between Pines Boulevard and Pembroke Road from Apartment
               (R-4) to Planned Unit Development (PUD).
               Rezoning approximately 150 acres of real property, generally located on the
1472  12-17-03 northwest corner of University Drive and Pembroke Road from Limited Agricultural
               (A-1) to Community Facility (CF).
               Rezoning approximately 9.93 acres of real property, generally located on the
1473  12-17-03 northwest corner of Hiatus Road and Pembroke Road from Apartment (R-4) to Hotel
               (R-6).
               Rezoning approximately 1.48 acres of real property, generally located on the
1514  5-18-05  south side of Pembroke Road and east of Southwest 70th Avenue from Community
               Business (B-2) to General Business (B-3).
               Rezoning approximately 146 acres of real property, generally located on the west
1519  8-3-05   side of Palm Avenue between Pines Boulevard and Washington Street from Planned
               Industrial (M-1B), General Business (B-3), Professional Office (PO-2) and
               Limited Agricultural (A-1) to Mixed Use Development (MXD).
               Rezoning approximately 26.6 acres of real property located at the northeast
1524  9-7-05   corner of Pines Boulevard and Hiatus Road from Community Business (B-2) to
               General Business (B-3).
               Rezoning approximately 41.6 acres of real property, generally east of I-75
1529  10-19-05 between Pines Boulevard and Pembroke Road from Limited Agricultural (A-1) to
               Apartment (R- 4).
               Rezoning approximately 40-acre parcel generally located east of I-75 between
1531  3-1-06   Pines Boulevard and Pembroke Road from Limited Agricultural (A-1) to Planned
               Community Development (PCD).
               Adopting the 75 Pines Land Use Plan Map Amendment for two approximately 16-acre
               parcels located on the south side of Pines Boulevard, east of I-75, by swapping
               the designated land uses of each parcel such that the northern parcel is re-
1532  12-21-05 designated from Office Park (O) to Commercial (C) for the purpose of developing
               151,000 square feet of retail, and the southern parcel is re- designated from
               Commercial (C) to Office Park (O) for the purpose of developing 151,000 square
               feet of office use.
               Adopting a land use plan amendment for approximately 60 acres located on the
1533  12-21-05 south side of Pines Boulevard, west of SW 196th Avenue by re-designating the
               land use from Agriculture to Recreation and Open Space for the purpose of
               ensuring the continued use of the property for public recreation purposes.
               Rezoning real property generally located on the northwest corner of Hiatus Road
1536  2-15-06  and Pembroke Road to reallocate the 103 reserve units from the 10-acre clubhouse
               parcel as previously authorized by Ordinance 1473 on December 17, 2003 to the
               123-acre golf course parcel.
1537  2-15-06  Rezoning approximately 10 acres generally located in the northwest corner of
               Hiatus Road and Pembroke Road from Hotel (R-6) to Community Business (B-2).
               Rezoning approximately 40 acres generally located east of I-75 between Pines
1539  3-1-06   Boulevard and Pembroke Road from Limited Agricultural (A-1) to Planned Community
               Development (PCD).
               Rezoning approximately 10 acres located on the south side of Sheridan Street
1541  5-3-06   between US 27 and SW 196th Avenue from General Business (B-3) to Limited
               Agricultural (A-1).
               Rezoning approximately 60 acres generally located south of Pines Boulevard and
1542  5-3-06   west of SW 196th Avenue from Mobile Home Park (T-1C) and Limited Agricultural
               (A-1) to Community Facility (CF).
               Rezoning the Raintree Property generally located at the northwest corner of
1545  6-21-06  Hiatus Road and Pembroke Road from Apartment District (R-4) to One Family
               Dwelling (R-1C).
               Rezoning 6.252 acres generally located south of Pines Boulevard and west of
1563  11-22-06 Southwest 145 Avenue from Limited Agricultural (A-1) to Community Business (B-
               2).
1571  2-7-07   Amending previously-adopted Ordinance No. 1539 creating the Shops at Pembroke
               Gardens PCD.
               Revising the design guidelines adopted pursuant to Ordinance No. 1519 for the
1575A 4-4-07   City Center property located on the west side of Palm Avenue between Pines
               Boulevard and Washington Street.
               Rezoning the approximate 40 acre property known as Sheridan Village, generally
1578  5-2-07   located south of Sheridan Street and east of 172 Avenue from Limited
               Agricultural (A-1) to Townhouse (TH-12).
               Rezoning the approximate 17.317 acre parcel of property generally located east
1584  6-6-07   of I-75 between Pines Boulevard and Pembroke Road from Limited Agricultural (A-
               1) to Community Commercial (B-2).
               Rezoning the approximate 4.5-acre property known as Pines Tropical Plaza,
1596  11-6-07  generally located south of Pines Boulevard and west of Southwest 186 Avenue from
               General Business (B-3) to Commercial (C-1).
               Rezoning the approximate 4.66-acre property generally located on the southwest
1597  11-6-07  corner of Sheridan Street and Northwest 196 Avenue from Limited Agricultural (A-
               1) to Community Business (B-2).
               Rezoning the approximate .9-acre parcel generally located on the east side of I-
1623  11-19-08 75, between Pines Boulevard and Pembroke Road, from Limited Agricultural (A-1)
               to Planned Commercial Development (PCD).
               Rezoning the approximate 36-acre parcel generally located on the east side of I-
1626  12-17-08 75, between Pines Boulevard and Pembroke Road, from Limited Agricultural (A-1)
               and Community Business (B-2) to Planned Commercial Development (PCD).
               Rezoning the approximate 10-acre property generally located on the south side of
1633  3-4-09   Sheridan Street between N.W. 208th Avenue and N.W. 196th Avenue from Limited
               Agricultural (A-1) to Medium Industrial (M-2).
               Rezoning of the Raintree Property, generally located at the northwest corner of
1651  9-16-09  Hiatus Road and Pembroke Road from One Family Dwelling (R-1C) to Limited
               Agricultural (A-1).
               Rezoning the approximately 7.6 acre parcel generally located on the north side
1661  5-5-10   of Pembroke Road and east of I-75, from Limited Agricultural (A-1) to Community
               Business (B-2).
               Rezoning the approximately 4 acre parcel known as “Pembroke Tower” generally
1686  3-16-11  located east of University Drive and north of Pasadena Boulevard, from Limited
               Agricultural (A-1) to Apartment (R-4).
               Rezoning the approximately 7.453 acre parcel generally located south of Pines
1688  5-4-11   Boulevard and west of Southwest 145th Avenue, from Limited Agricultural (A-1) to
               Community Business (B-2).
               Rezoning approximately 33 acre parcel generally located on the northwest corner
1714  4-18-12  of Pembroke Road and Hiatus Road from One Family Dwelling (R-1C) to Single
               Family (RS-7).
               Rezoning approximately 4 acre parcel generally located south of Sheridan Street
1726  6-20-12  and east of 172 Avenue from Townhouse District (TH-12) to Community Business (B-
               2).
1727  6-20-12  Rezoning approximately 33 acre parcel generally located south of Sheridan Street
               and east of 172 Avenue from Townhouse District (TH-12) to Apartment (R-4).
               Rezoning approximately 2.3 acre parcel generally located north of Pembroke Road
1732  9-5-12   and west of Southwest 145 Avenue from Limited Agricultural (A-1) to Community
               Business (B-2).
               Amending the Mixed-Use Development for the design guidelines for the property
1762  10-16-13 generally located on the west side of Palm Avenue between Pines Boulevard and
               Washington Street; modifying the uses permitted at City Center.
               Rezoning approximately 11 acre parcel generally located north of Pembroke Road
1768  2-5-14   and west of Hiatus Road from Limited Agricultural (A-1) to Townhouse District
               (TH-12).
               Rezoning approximately 49 acre parcel of the Raintree Property, generally
1771  3-5-14   located north of Pembroke Road and West of Hiatus Road from One Family Dwelling
               (R-1C) to Apartment (R-4).
               Rezoning the approximate 6-acre parcel of real property generally located north
1800  11-5-14  of SW 14th Street and east of South Flamingo Road, from Limited Agricultural (A-
               1) to Community Business (B-2).
               Rezoning the approximate 10.5-acre parcel of the University/Pasadena property,
1809  2-4-15   generally located south of Pasadena Boulevard and east of University Drive, from
               General Business District (B-3) to Apartment (R-4).
               Rezoning the approximate 8-acre parcel of land generally located south of SW 5th
1810  2-4-15   Street and west of SW 145th Avenue, from Community Business (B-2) to Planned
               Development Small Lot (PD- SL).
               Rezoning the approximate 121-acre parcel of land known as the "Raintree
1820  8-5-15   Property", generally located north of Pembroke Road and west of Hiatus Road,
               from Apartment (R-4), Single Family (RS-7) and Townhouse (TH-12) to Planned Unit
               Development (PUD).
               Rezoning the approximate 2.5-acre parcel of land generally located south of
1823  9-2-15   Pines Boulevard and west of 186th Avenue, from General Business (B-3) to
               Commercial (C-1).
               Rezoning the approximate 146-acre parcel of the Pembroke Pines City Center
1831  11-12-15 Property generally located west of Palm Avenue, between Pines Boulevard and
               Washington Street, from Mixed Use District (MXD) to Mixed Use District (MXD).
               Rezoning the approximate 7-acre parcel of the Centra Falls II Property generally
1832  11-12-15 located west of Flamingo Road, south of Sheridan Street and north of Taft
               Street, from Planned Unit Development (PUD)-Community Commercial to Planned Unit
               Development (PUD)-Multi-Family Urban Residential.
               Rezoning the approximate 5.22-acre parcel of land known as the "Manley Self
1834  11-12-15 Storage Property" generally located south of Pines Boulevard and west of
               Southwest 186th Avenue, from General Business (B-3) to Commercial (C-1).
               Rezoning the approximate 4 acre parcel generally located south of Sheridan
1848  6-15-16  Street and east of 172nd Avenue, from Community Business (B-2) to Commercial (C-
               1).
               Rezoning the approximate 27-acre parcel of real property located south of Pines
1863  11-14-16 Boulevard and east of Dykes Road, from County Planned Unit Development (PUD) to
               Mixed Use Development (MXD).
               Rezoning the approximate 146-acre parcel of the Pembroke Pines City Center
1867  2-1-17   property generally located west of Palm Avenue, between Pines Boulevard and
               Washington Street, from Mixed Use District (MXD) to Mixed Use District (MXD) -
               amendment to design guidelines.
               Re-zoning the approximate 9.9 acre parcel generally located at the northwest
1878  6-21-17  corner of Hiatus Road and Pembroke Road from B-2 (Community Business) to B-3
               (General Business) with amended restrictive covenants.
               Re-zoning the approximate 11-acre parcel of the Chapel Trail Property generally
               north of Pines Boulevard, east of U.S. 27, south of Sheridan Street and west of
1879  6-21-17  SW 184th Street; amending the Chapel Trail PUD to add a new PUD zone entitled
               Townhome-2 (TH-2) and associated standards; re-zoning the property from Planned
               Unit Development (PUD)—Industrial (M-1) to Planned Unit Development (PUD) —
               Townhome-2 (TH-2).
               Re-zoning the approximate 1.9 acre parcel generally located North of Pembroke
1902  6-6-18   Road and west of Southwest 66 Avenue from M-1 (Light Industrial) and B-2
               (Community Business) to PD-SL (Planned Development - Small Lot) with design
               guidelines.
               Re-zoning the approximate 7.17 acre parcel of land generally located south of
1908  9-4-18   Pines Boulevard and west of Southwest 186th Avenue from B-3 (General Business)
               to C-1 (Commercial), subject to the recordation of a declaration of restrictive
               covenants.
               Re-zoning the former City Hall parcel located at the southwest corner of Palm
1917  10-3-18  Avenue and Pines Boulevard from "A-1" (Limited Agricultural District) to "MXD"
               (Mixed Use District).
               Re-zoning the Stellar Pines Townhomes parcel located generally south of Pines
1918  10-3-18  Boulevard between SW 184th Avenue and SW 186th Avenue, from "B-3" (General
               Business)/A-1 (Limited Agricultural District) to "TH-12" (Townhouse District)/A-
               1 (Limited Agricultural District).
               Re-zoning approximately 1.6 acre parcel of land generally located south of Pines
1943  2-19-20  Boulevard and west of SW 64th Way, located at 6460 Pines Boulevard from B-2-A
               (Planned Business Center) to B-3 (General Business).
               Re-zoning approximately 3.98-acre parcel of land generally located south of
1958  2-3-21   Pines Boulevard and east of 202nd Avenue, located at 20170 Pines Boulevard from
               B-2 (Community Business ) to C- 1 (Commercial) for Tract A, and from B-2
               (Community Business) to A-1 (Limited Agricultural) for Tract B.
               Re-zoning approximately 5-acre parcel of land generally located south of Pines
1961  3-17-21  Boulevard and east of Southwest 172 Avenue from A-1 (Limited Agricultural) to
               PUD (Planned Unit Development).
               Amending the Pembroke Shores PUD to add a new PUD Zone entitled PUDZONE SF-5
1962  3-17-21  (Townhome) and assigning the PUDZONE SF-5 (Townhome) designation to an
               approximately 23.5-acre parcel.
               Amending Hospital District standards to amend development criteria for the
               district as a result of hospital campus expansion and updates to the future
1967  6-2-21   short and long term construction program for the approximate 43.5 acres of
               hospital property generally located north of Pines Boulevard, south of Johnson
               Street, and east of Flamingo Road.
               Re-zoning the approximate 6.8-acre parcel of land generally located north of
1968  6-2-21   Pines Boulevard and east of Flamingo Road, from B-3 (General Business) to HD
               (Hospital District).
               Re-zoning an approximate 2-acre parcel of land generally located on the
1983  2-2-22   southeast corner of Pines Boulevard and 72 Avenue, from A (Agricultural) to B-3
               (General Business).
               Re-zoning an approximate 25-acre parcel of land generally located north of
1990  6-15-220 Pembroke Road, between I-75 and Southwest 145 Avenue, from PCD (Planned
               Commercial Development) to MXD (Mixed Use Development).
               Re-zoning an approximate 5.2-acre parcel of land generally located south of
2011  11-1-23  Pines Boulevard and west of Southwest 184 Avenue, from B-3 (General Business) to
               R-TH (Residential Townhouse).
               Re-zoning an approximate 9-acre property located north of Pembroke Road and east
2029  9-18-24  of Douglas Road, from C-1 (Commercial) to C-1 (Commercial) with updated
               restrictive covenants.
               Re-zoning an approximate 9.9-acre parcel generally located at the northwest
2043  4-16-25  corner of Pembroke Road and Hiatus Road, from B-3 (General Business) to C-1
               (Commercial).
               Re-zoning an approximate 1.8-acre parcel generally located south of Pines
2044  4-16-25  Boulevard and west of Southwest 186 Avenue, from B-3 (General Business) to C-1
               (Commercial).
      8-6-     Re-zoning an approximate 40-acre parcel generally located south of Pines
2047  25    Boulevard and west of Southwest 145 Avenue, from PCD (Planned Commercial
               Development) to MXD (Mixed Use Development).
              
 
TABLE II: LAND USE PLAN CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
            Changing a 72.05-acre parcel of land located south of Pine Boulevard and east
741  6-5-85 of Douglas Road from a commercial district to a low- medium density residential
            district with a maximum of 12 dwelling units per acre.
            Changing a 1,450-acre parcel of land located east of N.W. 208th Avenue from an
742  6-5-85 agricultural district to a low density residential district with l.93 dwelling
            units per acre.
            Changing a 391.691-acre parcel of land located east of U.S. 27, west of 208th
743  6-5-85 Avenue, north of Pines Boulevard and south of Sheridan Street, from an
            agricultural district to an industrial district.
            Changing a 14.5-acre parcel of land located south of the southwest intersection
750  8-7-85 of Pines (Hollywood) Boulevard and 136th Avenue from a residential district of
            5 dwelling units per acre to a commercial district.
            Changing a 724-acre parcel of land located at the southwest intersection of
751  8-7-85 Pines (Hollywood) Boulevard and Flamingo Road from a residential district of 5
            dwelling units per acre to a residential district of 9.66 dwelling units per
            acre.
            Changing a 4.48-acre parcel of land located south of the southeast intersection
752  8-7-85 of Pines (Hollywood) Boulevard and Palm Avenue from a commercial district to a
            low-medium residential district with a maximum of 10 dwelling units per acre.
757  10-2-  Establishing the following uses in a 320-acre parcel known as the Ansin Tract:
     85
          (1)One hundred eleven acres of residential land from five dwelling units per
            acre to nine dwelling units per acre.
          (2)Nineteen acres for commercial purposes.
          (3)One hundred seventy acres for industrial/office purposes.
          (4)Twenty acres for community facilities.
            Providing for the amendment of the 1980 Land Use Plan to create the land use
            classification of "office park," and for its insertion in the text of the plan.
784  3-5-86 Also providing for the qualifications necessary for land to be eligible for the
            office park classification, and for the permitted uses to be allowed in the
            office park classification.
799  8-6-86 Adopting amendments for uses for an area east of Flamingo Road, west of Hiatus
            Road, north of Pines Boulevard, and south of Johnson Street.
            Amending the Land Use Plan map for a 1,528-acre parcel of property bordered on
            the north by Sheridan Street, on the south by Pines Boulevard, on the west by
817  1-7-87 Interstate 75, and on the east by Flamingo Road to redesignate the property to
            include an office park and industrial, residential, commercial, and community
            facilities.
830  4-1-87 Adopting amendments for the following uses:
          (1) Adding a 735-acre parcel of land, commonly referred to as the Jensen Tract,
            to Flexibility Zone 118.
          (2) Adding a 555-acre parcel of land, commonly referred to as the Lyons Company
            Parcel, to Flexibility Zone 120.
          (3) Adding a 445-acre parcel of property, commonly referred to as the Weiss
            Parcel, to Flexibility Zone 119.
          (4) Adding a 1830-acre parcel of property, commonly referred to as Chapel
            Trail, to Flexibility Zone 116.
            Amending a 1421-acre parcel of land bordered on the north by Sheridan Street,
854  12-2-  on the south by Pembroke Road, on the west by Southwest 184th Avenue and on the
     87     east by Southwest 172nd Avenue, to redesignate 1421 acres Agricultural to
            approximately 1237 acres Low Residential and 184 acres Commercial.
947  1-23-  Adopting amendments for the following uses:
     91
            (1) Redesignating approximately five acres of land located at the northeast
          corner of Pembroke Road and the Silver Lakes Spine Road from Low Density
            Residential to Commercial;
            (2) Redesignating approximately 28 acres of land located at the southeast
          corner of Pines Boulevard and 184th Avenue from Low Density Residential to
            Commercial;
            (3) Redesignating approximately 28 acres of land located at the southwest
          corner of Pines Boulevard and the Silver Lakes Spines Road from Commercial to
            Low Density Residential.
966  9-19-  Adopting amendments for the following uses:
     91
            (1) Redesignating approximately 12 acres of land located on the west side of
          Southwest 172nd Avenue and north of Pines Boulevard from Commercial to Low (3)
            Residential;
            (2) Redesignating approximately 20 acres of land located on the east side of
          Southwest 184th Avenue and north of Pines Boulevard from Commercial to Low (3)
            Residential.
983  1-8-92 Amending the Land Use Plan as follows:
          (1) A 30 acre parcel located west of Dykes Road and north of Pines Boulevard
            from Industrial to Low-3 Residential;
            (2) An 11 acre commercial parcel on the southeast corner of Pines Boulevard and
          S.W. 172nd Avenue and a 22 acre commercial parcel on the southwest corner of
            Pines Boulevard and Dykes Road;
          (3) A text amendment providing for additional goals and objectives in response
            to Broward County certification requirements.
            Amending the conditions of the rezoning of 1499.46 acres of property bounded on
1001 8-19-  the north by Sheridan Street, on the east by SW 172 Avenue, on the south by
     92     Pembroke Road, and on the west by SW 184 Avenue to Planned Unit Development
            (PUD) District.
1004 9-2-92 Amending the Land Use Plan as follows:
          (1) Redesignating approximately 22 acres of land located on the east side of
            U.S. 27 and south of Sheridan Street; and
          (2) Providing for transmittal to the Broward County Planing Council and the
            Department of Community Affairs.
1005 9-2-92 Amending the Land Use Plan as follows:
            (1) Redesignating approximately 420 acres of land located on the east side of
          Southwest 172nd Avenue and north of Pines Boulevard from Commercial Recreation
            to Low (3) Residential;
            (2) Redesignating approximately 18 acres of land located on the east side of
          Southwest 172nd Avenue and north of Pines Boulevard from Commercial Recreation
            to Commercial; and
          (3) Providing for transmittal to the Broward County Planning Council and the
            Department of Community Affairs.
1010 9-16-  Amending the Land Use Plan as follows:
     92
          (1) Redesignating approximately 26 acres of land located at the northwest
            corner of Northwest 196th Avenue and Johnson Street; and
          (2) Providing for transmittal to the Broward County Planning Council and the
            Department of Community Affairs.
     2-17-  Amending the land use plan by rezoning approximately 207 acres of land, Twin
1020 93     Acres Plat, located east of SW 196 Avenue, south of Pines Boulevard, and west
            of SW 184 Avenue, from Agricultural to Low (2) Residential.
1021 2-17-  Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 12 acres of land from
     93     Recreation and Open Space to Community Facility (Senior Center).
     2-17-  Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 160 acres of land,
1022 93     located on the southwest corner of Pines Boulevard and SW 208 Avenue, from
            Agricultural to Low (2) Residential.
     2-17-  Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 74 acres of land,
1023 93     located on the southwest corner of Pines Boulevard and SW 208 Avenue, from
            agricultural to employment center.
            Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 17.5 acres of land
1025 2-17-  from Office Park to Commercial and approximately 7.47 acres from commercial to
     93     Office Park all located within the proposed plat of Hollywood and Douglas Plat
            located on the northeast corner of Douglas Road and Pines Boulevard.
     11-17- Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 68 acres of land
1055 93     (Pembroke Springs) located on the south side of Pines Boulevard, west of SW 196
            Avenue and east of US 27, from Agricultural to Low (2) Residential.
     11-17- Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 147 acres of land
1056 93     (Towngate), located on the south side of Sheridan Street between SW 160 Avenue
            (Dykes Road) and I- 75 as follows:
          (1) Redesignating 33 acres from Office to Industrial;
          (2) Redesignating 29 acres from Office to Low (3) Residential;
          (3) Redesignating nine acres from Industrial to Low Residential;
          (4) Redesignating nine acres from Industrial to Low (3) Residential;
          (5) Redesignating 86 acres from Industrial to Low Residential.
     11-17- Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 310 acres of land
1057 93     (Big Sky), located on the south side of Sheridan Street between SW 196 Avenue
            and Bonaventure Boulevard, from Agricultural to Low (2) Residential.
            Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 320 acres of land
1087 9-8-94 located on the north side of Pembroke Road between S.W. 196 Avenue and
            Bonaventure Boulevard, from Agricultural to Low (2) Residential.
1088 9-8-94 Amending the land use plan by redesignating 132 acres of land located at the
            southeast corner of Pines Boulevard and U.S. 27, as follows:
          (1) Redesignating 60 acres from Commercial to Low (2) Residential, and
          (2) Redesignating 72 acres from Employment Center to Low (2) Residential.
            Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 20 acres of land
1089 9-8-94 located on the northwest corner of Pembroke Road and Flamingo Road, from
            Commercial within an Irregular (9.67) Residential to Residential within an
            Irregular (9.67) Residential.
            Amending the land use plan by incorporating the existing uses from the Broward
1090 9-8-94 County Land Use Plan for approximately 800 acres of land recently annexed into
            the city located north of Sheridan Street, south of Griffin Road between U.S.
            27 and Bonaventure Boulevard.
            Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 1,600 acres of land
1093 9-8-94 bounded on the north by Sheridan Street, on the south by Pines Boulevard,
            between I-75 and Flamingo Road, as follows:
            (1) Redesignating from: 971.4 acres of Special Low (4.467) Residential, 86.1
          acres of Commercial, 297.7 acres of Industrial, 210.4 acres of Office Park, 14
            acres of Parks and Recreation, and 20 acres of Community Facilities;
            (2) Redesignating to: 1412.8 acres of Irregular Residential (3.1 dwelling units
          per acre), 104.1 acres of Commercial, 33.9 acres of Employment Center, and 48.8
            acres of Community Facilities.
            Amending the land use plan by redesignating two parcels totalling approximately
1107 12-21- 19 acres of land, the first parcel located at the northeast intersection of
     94     Pembroke Road and Hiatus Road, and the second parcel located on Pembroke Road
            east of the first parcel, as follows:
          (1) Redesignating from: 14 acres of Commercial within Irregular (5.2)
            Residential and 5 acres within Irregular (5.2) Residential,
          (2) Redesignating to: 14 acres of Irregular (5.2) Residential and 5 acres of
            Commercial within Irregular (5.2) Residential.
            Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 206 acres of land
1108 12-21- located at the southeast intersection of Pines Boulevard and Flamingo Road,
     94     from Industrial (131 acres) and Low Medium (75 acres) to Community Facilities
            (13 acres) and Irregular (6.0) Residential (193 acres).
     4-19-  Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 9 acres of land
1120 95     located at 7960 Johnson Street, Pembroke Pines, Florida, from community
            facilities to utilities.
1124 6-21-  Adopting amendments for additional improvements for project access prior to
     95     completion of Pines Boulevard widening.
            Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 429 acres of land
1128 8-2-95 located at the northeast corner of U.S. Highway 27 and Pines Boulevard, as more
            particularly described in Attachments A, B, C, D, and E to Ordinance 1128.
            Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 83 acres of land
1146 12-6-  located at the southeast corner of Sheridan Street and Dykes Road, as more
     95     particularly described in Attachment A to Ordinance 1146, commonly known as
            Towngate North parcels A and B.
1149 2-7-96 Amending the Pembroke Shores Design Guidelines review procedures dated December
            7, 1994, approved and adopted in Ordinance No. 1104.
     12-4-  Adopting the Rozzo property land use plan amendment changing the land use from
1192 96     Low (3) Residential to Commercial for the approximate 28 acres parcel located
            south of Pines Boulevard on the west side of S.W. 172 Avenue.
     12-4-  Adopting the Towngate South land use plan amendment changing the land use from
1193 96     Commercial to Low Residential (3 DU/AC) for parcel A, and changing the land use
            from Low Residential (5 DU/AC) to Low Residential (3 DU/AC) for parcel B.
            Adopting the Big Sky North land use plan amendment, changing the land use from
1194 12-4-  agricultural to Irregular Residential (2 DU/AC) with 10 acres of commercial for
     96     the 236 acres parcel of property located between Sheridan Street and Stirling
            Road, and between southwest 190th and southwest 196th Avenues.
            Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately eight acres of land
1214 5-7-97 located on the north side of Pembroke Road east of I-75, south of Pines
            Boulevard, on the west side of Century Village, from community facilities to
            utility.
            Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 7.5 acres of land
1229 9-3-97 located at the northwest corner of Pines Boulevard and 86th Avenue, known as
            Koons property, from office park to commercial.
            Amending the land use plan by redesignating approximately 9.56 acres of land
1244 1-7-98 located 1800 feet east of U.S. 27 on Sheridan Street, known as Sheridan Street
            Commerce Center, from residential to industrial.
            Modifying the Pembroke Falls PUD design guidelines and review procedures
1255 4-1-98 previously adopted by the City Commission on 1-7-98, specifically modifying the
            sign provisions within the employment center of the Pembroke Falls PUD.
1276 8-19-  Amending the future land use element, conservation element and recreation and
     98     open space element of the city's comprehensive land use plan.
     8-19-  Amending the land use plan by redesignating the Hiatus Plaza Land Use from Low-
1277 98     Medium Residential to Commercial for the approximate 30 acre parcel of property
            generally located on the northeast corner of Pines Boulevard and Hiatus Road.
1287 10-7-  Providing for modification of the development design standards for the Silver
     98     Lakes Unit Development (PUD).
            Modifying the Chapel Trail Associates PUD guidelines for an approximate six
1341 6-21-  acre parcel located on the south side of Johnson Street between northwest 184th
     00     Avenue and northwest 186th Avenue by reducing the width of the landscaped strip
            along Johnson Street from 35 feet to 25 feet.
            Modifying the Walnut Creek PUD design standards, adopted pursuant to Ordinance
1348 9-6-00 1271, as amended by Ordinance 1336, in order to split parcel “G” into two
            parcels and to reallocate units within four parcels of Walnut Creek Community
            Development District.
            Providing certain text amendments to the intergovernmental coordination element
1362 12-20- of the city's comprehensive plan; providing miscellaneous amendments to the
     00     future land use, conservation, capital improvements, housing and transportation
            elements.
1379 9-5-01 Changing certain land use designations from Estate Residential (County and
            City) to Conservation (City).
     12-19- Providing certain text amendments to the Future Land Use, infrastructure,
1392 01     conservation and intergovernmental coordination elements of the city’s
            Comprehensive Plan.
1393 1-16-  Amending the land use plan by redesignating the approximate four acre parcel
     02     located at 20198 Pines Boulevard from Agricultural to Employment Center.
     12-18- Amending the land use plan to change the land use from Agricultural to
1434 02     Employment Center-Low for the approximately four-acre parcel located at 20198
            Pines Boulevard, otherwise known as 200 East.
            Adopting a small scale land use plan amendment changing the land use from Low 5
1467 11-19- Residential (unincorporated Broward County) to Low 5 Residential (city) for the
     03     approximate two acre parcel located on the north side of Taft Street, west of
            72nd Avenue.
            Modifying the Pembroke Falls PUD Master Plan and Design Guidelines previously
1475 12-17- adopted by the City Commission on 1-7-98, specifically modifying the criteria
     03     applicable to the PUD Community Commercial Zoning for the 4.5 acre site located
            south of Sheridan Street.
            Adopting a small scale land use plan amendment changing the land use from
1489 8-4-04 Estate to Conservation for approximately 8 acres located on the south side of
            Sheridan Street between US 27 and Southwest 196th Avenue.
            Amending the Land Use Plan by redesignating approximately 43 acres of land,
1490 8-4-03 located on the south side of Griffin Road, between US 27 and 196th Avenue from
            Agricultural to Estate.
     11-15- Adopting a small scale Land Use Plan amendment changing the land use from
1499 04     Agriculture to Employment Center-Low for the approximately 6 acre parcel
            located at the south side of Pines Boulevard, east of Southwest 196th Avenue.
     1-19-  Adopting a small scale Land Use Plan amendment changing the land use from
1507 05     Community Facilities to Commercial for the approximately 2.33 acre parcel
            located just south of Johnson Street, west of University Drive.
            Adopting a Land Use Plan amendment changing the land use from employment center
1510 3-16-  to local activity center for the approximate 149 acre parcel located on the
     05     south side of Pines Boulevard, west of Palm Avenue and north of Washington
            Street.
            Amending Meadow Pines PUD Design Guidelines for the approximate 123 acre parcel
1534 1-4-06 located on the west side of Interstate 75 between Pines Boulevard and Pembroke
            Road.
1549 6-29-  Adopting second amendment to the Grand Palms Guidelines.
     06
            Adopting the City Center Land Use Plan amendment to change the land use plan
1550 8-2-06 for the approximate 146-acre parcel located on the south side of Pines
            Boulevard, west of Palm Avenue and north of Washington Street.
            Adopting a small scale Land Use Plan amendment for the approximate 4.5-acre
1551 8-2-06 parcel located on the west side of 186th Avenue on the south side of Pines
            Boulevard, known as Pines Tropical Plaza.
1552 8-2-06 Adopting a Land Use Plan amendment for the south side of Pines Boulevard, west
            of SW 155th Avenue and the Homeland Security site.
     12-20- Adopting a Land Use Plan amendment for the 10-plus-acre parcel located west of
1564 06     186th Avenue and east of the St. Edward Church property on the south side of
            Pines Boulevard, known as Sunbelt Properties.
1565 12-20- Adopting a Land Use Plan map amendment for an approximate 40-acre parcel
     06     located south of Sheridan Street and east of 172nd Avenue.
1566 12-20- Adopting a Land Use Plan amendment for an approximate 20-acre parcel generally
     06     located west of 186th Avenue on the south side of Pines Boulevard.
     1-17-  Adopting a small-scale Land Use Plan amendment for the approximate 4.7-acre
1568 07     parcel of property located east of I-75 between Pines Boulevard and Pembroke
            Road.
     11-6-  Adopting a small scale Land Use Plan amendment for the approximate 4.5-acre
1595 07     parcel known as Pines Tropical Plaza, generally located on the south side of
            Pines Boulevard west of Southwest 186 Avenue.
     12-19- Adopting a Land Use Plan amendment amending the land use on an approximate
1599 07     26.58-acre parcel of property generally located on the east side of Douglas
            Road between Pines Boulevard and Washington Street.
1602 2-6-08 Adopting city’s Public School Facility Element as part of the city’s
            Comprehensive Land Use Plan to provide for public school concurrency.
            Adopting a Land Use Plan amendment amending the land use on an approximate
1628 1-7-09 10.01-acre parcel of property generally located on the south side of Sheridan
            Street, west of 196th Avenue.
            Transmitting the proposed Laguna Isles Clubhouse annexation Land Use Plan
1629 1-7-09 amendment amending the land use on an approximate 30-acre parcel of property
            generally located on the north side of Sheridan Street, east of 196th Avenue
            and the entrance to the Laguna Isles Development.
            Transmitting the proposed Pines 145th Avenue Nursery small scale Land Use Plan
1630 1-7-09 amendment for the approximate 9.6-acre parcel of property generally located on
            the south side of Pines Boulevard and west side of S.W. 145th Avenue.
1637 5-6-09 Adopting a small scale Land Use Plan amendment for two parcels of real property
            generally located on the west side of S.W. 145th Avenue.
1638 5-6-09 Adopting a small scale Land Use Plan amendment for the nine acre parcel of real
            property generally located on the south side of Sheridan Street east of US 27.
     5-20-  Amending the Declaration of Restrictive Covenants for the approximate 20 acre
1641 09     property generally located west of 186th Avenue (Estancia Entrance) on the
            south side of Pines Boulevard.
1654 11-17- Approving the text change of Pembroke Falls PUD Master Plan and Design
     09     Guidelines regarding hotel signage.
1655 12-9-  Approving the text amendment of the PCD Guidelines for the Shops at Pembroke
     09     Gardens, specifically amending Section 3 of the Development Standards.
            Adopting the proposed Land Use Plan Amendment amending the land use on an
     9-21-  approximately 4 acre parcel of property generally located east of University
1677 10     Drive and north of Pasadena Boulevard, from Commercial to High (25-50)
            Residential, for the purpose of permitting a maximum of 200 units on the
            property.
     10-20- Modifying the Chapel Trail Planned Unit Development (PUD) Guidelines for
1681 10     townhomes within PUDZONE SF to allow for a minimum requirement of 16 feet rear-
            to-rear and rear-to-side separation between accessory roofed screen enclosures.
            Amending the Nasher Planned Unit Development (PUD) Guidelines for townhomes to
1696 9-7-11 revise the setback requirements for decks and patios providing for decks and
            patios to extend up to 16 feet from the rear of the unit and providing for a
            side setback for interior building units and corner building units.
            Amending Pembroke Isles (a/k/a Lakes of Western Pines) PUD Guidelines for
1741 11-7-  townhomes located within Pembroke Isles (The Landings and The Palms) relating
     12     to screen enclosures and patios to accommodate certain existing conditions that
            are not compliant with the Guidelines.
            Adopting the proposed City Center Land Use Plan Amendment amending the land
            plan for the approximately 146-acre parcel of property located on the south
1759 10-2-  side of Pines Boulevard, west of Palm Avenue and north of Washington Street,
     13     changing the land use from Local Activity Center to Local Activity Center
            (“LAC”), for the purpose of developing a mix of retail, office, hotel, park
            uses and residential that includes an affordable housing component.
            Providing for a map amendment changing the land use plan for the approximate
            566-acre parcel of real property located east of Flamingo Road between Pines
1795 10-15- Boulevard and Pembroke Road from Irregular Residential (5.2 du/ac) to Irregular
     14     Residential (5.52 du/ac) for the purpose of developing an additional 207
            dwelling units limited to townhomes and single-family units on the portion of
            the property delineated in the contract for purchase.
            Providing land use plan amendment to city’s land use on an approximate 10.5-
     11-5-  acre parcel generally located on the southeast corner of University Drive and
1798 14     Pasadena Boulevard, from Office Park to Medium-High (25 du/ac) Residential for
            the purpose of permitting a maximum of 232 multi-family dwelling units on the
            property.
            Changing the land use plan for the approximate 8- acre parcel of real property
1804 12-17- located on the west side of SW 145th Avenue, south of Pines Boulevard at SW 5th
     14     Street, from Commercial to Irregular Residential (35 du/ac) for the purpose of
            developing 280 dwelling units.
            Adopting the proposed land use plan amendment on an approximate 12.15-acre
1816 5-6-15 parcel of real property located west of Flamingo Road between Taft and Sheridan
            Streets from Commercial to Irregular Residential (7.3 du/ac) for the purpose of
            developing an additional 89 dwelling units.
            Approving the text change of Pembroke Falls PUD Master Plan and Design
            Guidelines for the creation of new housing type with development standards and
1818 5-6-15 amending the map within the PUD Guidelines to show residential use replacing
            the community commercial use for the site located on the west side of Flamingo
            Road, south of Sheridan Street, north of Taft Street, containing 12.5 gross
            acres more or less.
            Adopting the proposed small scale Pembroke Falls (Centra Falls II) land use
            plan amendment for the approximate 7-acre parcel of real property located west
1821 9-2-15 of Flamingo Road and north of Taft Street, from Commercial to Irregular
            Residential (8.9 du/ac) for the purpose of developing an additional 61 multi-
            family dwelling units.
            Adopting the proposed SFDC land use plan amendment changing the land use plan
            for the approximate 66-acre parcel of real property located east of US 27, on
1837 1-6-16 the north side of Sheridan Street; amending the SFDC land use plan from
            Community Facilities (unincorporated county land use plan) to Community
            Facilities (City of Pembroke Pines land use plan) and adding the subject
            amendment site to the city’s future land use plan map.
            Modifying the planned commercial district for The Shops at Pembroke Gardens;
1843 3-16-  providing for a text change to the design guidelines in the PCD for the
     16     approximately 40-acre site generally located south of Pines Boulevard and west
            of S.W. 145th Avenue.
            Adopting the proposed City Center local activity center land use plan
1847 6-15-  amendment; providing for text amendment changing the land use plan for the
     16     approximate 146-acre parcel of real property located west of Palm Avenue south
            of Pines Boulevard and north of Washington Street.
            Adopting the proposed SFDC land use plan amendment; changing the land use plan
     10-5-  for the approximate 66-acre parcel of real property located east of US 27, on
1855 16     the north side of Sheridan Street, amending the SFDC land use plan from
            community facilities to industrial; approving a special exception from the FAR
            requirements of the future land use adoption element.
            Adopting the proposed small scale land use plan amendment amending the city’s
            land use on an approximate 7.5 acre parcel of property generally located south
1873 6-7-17 side of Pines Boulevard, west of SW 184th Avenue, just east of the entrance
            into Estancia, from commercial to irregular residential for the purpose of
            developing a maximum of 59 dwelling units.
            Adopting the proposed land use plan amendment amending the city’s land use on
            an approximate 558.2-acre property generally located between Pines Boulevard
            and Pembroke Road, east of SW 172nd Avenue; amending the city’s local land use
1875 6-21-  plan map from irregular residential 2.16 dwelling units per acre to irregular
     17     residential 2.24 dwelling units per acre with 4.2 acres of commercial for the
            purpose of developing an additional 125 residential dwelling units and 40,000
            sq. ft. of commercial use on approximate 30 acres known as the United States
            Postal Service property.
            Adopting the proposed land use plan amendment amending the city’s land use on
     6-21-  an approximate 1,916-acre parcel of property generally located east of US 27,
1876 17     west of NW 184th Avenue, between Sheridan Street and Pines Boulevard, from
            industrial and irregular residential (1.95 du/ac) to irregular residential (2.0
            du/ac) for the purpose of developing a maximum of 132 dwelling units.
            Adopting the proposed city center map and text land use plan amendment;
            providing for map and text amendment changing the land use plan for the
            approximate 165-acre parcel of real property located west of Palm Avenue south
            of Pines Boulevard and north of Washington Street; amending the map and text of
            the land use plan city and county city center local activity center designation
            by changing the 146-acre city center local activity center (LAC) to regional
     9-19-  activity center (RAC); amending the map and text of the land use plan city and
1885 17     county city center local activity center designation changing the 18 acres of
            city hall property currently designated employment center to regional activity
            center, resulting in a 165 gross acre regional activity center consisting of
            2,215 dwelling units, consisting of: 701 mid-rise and/or high rise dwelling
            units, 275 townhouse dwelling units and 1,239 multi-family dwelling units,
            80,000 square feet of industrial, 358,000 square feet of commercial, and
            120,000 square feet of office, with office and commercial uses being
            convertible with certain limitations.
            Modifying the Pines Village Market MXD District Design Guidelines for the
            approximate 27-acre parcel of the Pines Village Market property generally
1953 12-2-  located south of Pines Boulevard and east of Dykes Road; by amending the design
     20     guidelines to allow the development of up to 165 townhomes and modifying
            setback, walkway, parking, garage use, and fencing requirements; authorizing
            the use of up to 40 flexibility units.
     1-13-  Amending the future land use, infrastructure, and conservation elements of the
1955 21     city’s comprehensive plan by specifically amending the 10-year Water Supply
            Facilities Work Plan (WSFWP).
            Amending the future land use, infrastructure, and conservation elements of the
1957 2-3-21 city's comprehensive plan by specifically amending the 10-year Water Supply
            Facilities Work Plan (WSFWP).
            Amending the city's land use on an approximately 558-acre parcel of property
     2-17-  generally located on the southeast corner of SW 172 Avenue and Pines Boulevard
1959 21     from 509 acres of Irregular Residential plus 49 acres of Commercial to 527.6
            acres of Irregular Residential plus 30.6 acres of Commercial for the purpose of
            developing a maximum of 211 townhome units.
            Amending the city's land use on an approximate 5 acre property generally
            located on the southeast corner of Pines Boulevard and 72nd Avenue, known as
1982 2-2-22 Trinity Lutheran Church; amending the city's local land use plan map from
            community facilities to commercial for the purpose of developing a gas station
            and convenience store on the northern approximate 2.74 gross acres of the
            overall 5 acre property.
            Amending the city's land use on an approximate 7.6-acre property generally
1985 3-2-22 located north of Pembroke Road and west of SW 145th Avenue; amending the city's
            local land use plan map from Office Park to Irregular Residential (46.1 du/ac)
            for the purpose of developing 350 multi-family units.
     6-15-  Creating the Edison Pembroke Mixed Use Development District design guidelines
1991 22     for the approximate 25-acre parcel of land generally located north of Pembroke
            Road, between I-75 and Southwest 145 Avenue.
            Modifying the Pembroke Pointe Planned Commercial Development (PCD) previously
1992 6-15-  adopted pursuant to Ordinance 1584; providing for text amendments to the design
     22     guidelines in which the PCD will be reduced from an approximately 35-acre site
            to an approximately 10-acre site.
            Modifying the Pembroke Pines City Center Mixed Use Development (MXD) design
            guidelines for the approximate 162-acre parcel of land generally located west
2003 3-15-  of Palm Avenue, between Pines Boulevard and Washington Street. to make
     23     amendments creating a medical district, permitting an additional 150 units 80%
            of which are age restricted, removing certain uses, and conforming the
            guidelines to the revised Land Development Code.
     4-17-  Creating the Edison Pembroke Mixed Use Development (MXD) District design
2018 24     guidelines for the approximate 25 acre parcel of land generally located north
            of Pembroke Road, between I-75 and Southwest 145 Avenue.
            Creating the Pembroke Gardens Mixed Use Development (MXD) District design
2048 8-6-25 guidelines for the approximate 40- acre parcel of land generally located south
            of Pines Boulevard and west of Southwest 145 Avenue.
           
 
TABLE III: DEVELOPMENT ORDERS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
            Granting a development order for Pembroke Meadows, a development of regional
816  1-7-87 impact; approving with conditions the application for development approval for
            Pembroke Meadows; providing for phasing; providing for commencement and
            completion date; providing for the mitigation of impacts.
     9-15-  Providing for the development order for the Chapel Trail, a development of
843  87     regional impact to be located on property located in all or part of Sections
            10,11, 12, 13, 14 and 15, inclusive, Township 51 South, Range 39 East.
     9-15-  Providing for the development order for the Pembroke Pines Regional Shopping
845  87     Center, a development of regional impact to be located on property located in
            Section 16, Township 51 South, Range 40 East.
985  3-4-92 Finding the proposed changes to Pembroke Pines Regional Shopping Center, a
            development of regional impact, as non- substantial deviation.
            Amending Ordinance No. 816, a development order for the Pembroke Meadows
997  6-17-  Development of Regional Impact; determining that the changes to the development
     92     order do not constitute a substantial deviation; amending the land use table and
            master development plan and reconfiguring land uses.
1009 9-16-  Finding the proposed change to the Chapel Trail Development of Regional Impact as
     92     a non-substantial deviation.
1051 1-5-94 Finding the proposed change to the Pembroke Lakes Regional Center, a development
            of regional impact as a non- substantial deviation.
            Amending Ordinance Nos. 816 and 997 which approved and amended a development
1092 9-8-94 order for the Pembroke Meadows Development of Regional Impact; finding the
            proposed changes to the previously approved development order do not constitute a
            substantial deviation.
            Amending Ordinance Nos. 816, 997, and 1092 which approved and amended a
1123 6-21-  development order for the Pembroke Meadows Development of Regional Impact;
     95     finding that the proposed changes to the previously approved development order do
            not constitute a substantial deviation.
1130 8-2-95 Finding the proposed change to the Chapel Trail Development of Regional Impact to
            be a nonsubstantial deviation.
1137 10-18- Approving certain modifications to the Master Development Plan for the city.
     95
            Amending Ordinance Nos. 816, 997, 1092 and 1123 which approved and amended a
            development order for the Pembroke Meadows Development of Regional Impact;
     10-18- finding that the proposed changes to the previously approved Development Order do
1139 95     not constitute a substantial deviation; amending the Development Order to be
            consistent with the proposed Master Development Plan map as it relates to the
            commercial parcel at the southwest corner of Sheridan Street and N.W. 148th
            Avenue.
            Amending Ordinance Nos. 816, 997, 1092, 1123, and 1139 which approved and amended
            a development order for the Pembroke Meadows Development of Regional Impact;
1166 6-5-96 finding that the proposed changes to the previously approved development order do
            not constitute a substantial deviation; amending development order to reflect a
            single phase development plan; amending the timing of certain transportation
            improvements.
            Amending the development order for the Pembroke Pines Regional Shopping Center
            Development of Regional Impact, as originally approved as Ordinance No. 845 and
1172 8-7-96 previously amended by Ordinance No. 985; determining that the changes approved by
            this amendment to this development order do not constitute a substantial
            deviation; amending the ownership information and Master Development Plan.
1177 9-4-96 Approving certain modifications to the Master Development Plan for Pembroke Falls
            as amended by Ordinance No. 1137.
            Amending the development order for the Pembroke Pines Regional Shopping Center
     12-4-  Development of Regional Impact, as originally approved by Ordinance No. 845 and
1195 96     previously amended by Ordinance No. 985 and Ordinance No. 1172; determining that
            the changes approved by this amendment to this development order do not
            constitute a substantial deviation.
            Amending Ordinance Nos. 816, 997, 1092, 1123, 1139 and 1166 which approved and
            amended a development order for the Pembroke Meadows Development of Regional
1205 1-15-  Impact; finding that the proposed changes to the previously approved development
     97     order do not constitute a substantial deviation; amending the Pembroke Meadows
            development order to reflect increases and decreases in the intensity of
            previously approved uses and add a new use (amusement).
            Amending the development order for the Pembroke Pines Regional Shopping Center
     12-17- Development of Regional Impact, as originally approved by Ordinance No. 845 and
1241 97     previously amended by Ordinance No. 985, Ordinance No. 1172, and Ordinance No.
            1195; determining that the changes approved by this amendment to this development
            order do not constitute a substantial deviation.
            Amending the development order for the Pembroke Pines Regional Shopping Center
     5-20-  Development of Regional Impact, as originally approved by Ordinance No. 845 and
1260 98     previously amended by Ordinance No. 985, Ordinance No. 1172, Ordinance No. 1195,
            and Ordinance No. 1241; determining that the changes approved by this amendment
            to this development order do not constitute a substantial deviation.
            Amending Ordinance Nos. 816, 997, 1092, 1123, 1139, 1166 and 1205 which approved
            and amended a development order for the Pembroke Meadows Development of Regional
     12-16- Impact; amending the Pembroke Meadows Development Order to reflect increases and
1293 98     decreases in the intensity of previously approved uses and add new uses (private
            day care/preschool and elementary school); finding that the proposed changes to
            the previously approved develop-ment order do not constitute a substantial
            deviation.
            Amending Ordinance Nos. 816, 997, 1092, 1123, 1139, 1166, 1205, and 1311 which
            approved a development order for the Pembroke Meadows Development of Regional
1363 12-20- Impact; amending the Pembroke Meadows Development Order to amend the uses and
     00     restrictions on uses within a portion of Tract “C,” to allow for the conversion
            of up to 56,149 square feet of retail use for office or hotel use, at an
            established square footage equivalency rate.
            Amending Ordinance No. 845 which approved a development order for the Pembroke
            Pines Regional Shopping Center Development of Regional Impact (DRI); amending the
1381 9-5-01 Pembroke Pines Regional Shopping Center DRI for Parcel B only to change the owner
            of record from Nissan Motor Corporation, USA, to Chrysler Realty Corporation and
            to provide for an extension of the buildout date.
            Amending Ordinance No. 816, as amended by Ordinances Nos. 997, 1092, 1123, 1139,
     11-7-  1166, 1205, 1311, and 1363 which approved a development order for the Pembroke
1389 01     Meadows Development of Regional Impact; amending the Pembroke Meadows Development
            Order to amend the uses and restrictions on uses within the Employment Center
            Parcel and the conversion of up to 23 limited service hotel rooms to office use.
            Amending Ordinance No. 843, as amended by Ordinances Nos. 943, 1009, 1130, and
            1332, which approved a development order for the Chapel Trail Development of
1418 9-4-02 Regional Impact (DRI), amending the Chapel Trail DRI to provide for an increase
            in the permitted square footage of from 102,500 to 224,200 for the approved
            community facility use.
            Amending Ordinance No. 843, as amended by Ordinances Nos. 943, 1009, 1130, 1332,
     10-15- and 1418, which approved a development order for the Chapel Trail Development of
1462 03     Regional Impact (DRI), amending the Chapel Trail (DRI) to provide for an
            extension for the buildout and downzoning date from November 20, 2002 to November
            30, 2004.
            Amending Ordinance No. 816, as amended by Ordinances Nos. 997, 1092, 1123, 1139,
     11-19- 1166, 1205, 1311, 1363, and 1389, which approved a development order for the
1468 03     Meadow Development for the Regional Impact to providing for the amendment to the
            Employment Center Land Use acreage by 4.5 acres and to increase the Community
            Commercial Land Use acreage by 4.5 acres
            Amending Ordinance No. 816, as amended by Ordinances Nos. 997, 1092, 1123, 1139,
     12-17- 1166, 1205, 1293, 1311, 1363, 1339, and 1431, which approved a development order
1474 03     for the Meadow Development for the Pembroke Meadow Development of Regional Impact
            for the amendment to the Pembroke Meadows development order to shift the self-
            storage use from the employment center to a certain portion of Tract "C".
            Amending Ordinance No. 845, which approved a development order for the Pembroke
1484 5-19-  Pines regional shopping center development of regional impact (DRI); amending the
     04     Pembroke Pines regional shopping center DRI to remove parcel B and its approved
            square footage from the DRI master development plan.
     1-19-  Amending Ord. 789 which approved a development order for the Pembroke Lakes
1508 05     Regional Center Development of Regional Impact to extend the buildout and
            downzoning dates from June 1, 2001 to June 1, 2008.
            Amending Ord. 843 which approved a development order for the Chapel Trail
1517 6-8-05 Development of Regional Impact to extend the buildout and downzoning date from
            November 30, 2004 to December 31, 2009.
            Amending Ord. 816, which approved a development order for the Pembroke Meadows
1588 9-5-07 Development of Regional Impact to extend the buildout and downzoning dates for
            two years from December 31, 2006 to December 31, 2008.
1649 8-4-09 Amending a development order for the Chapel Trail Development of regional impact
            (DRI); amending the Chapel Trail DRI to increase commercial footage.
     10-5-  Amending a development order for the Pembroke Meadows Development of regional
1703 11     impact (DRI) to allow middle school and high school uses at the existing
            facility.
            Amending a development order for the Pembroke Meadows Development of regional
            impact (DRI) to provide for a simultaneous increase in residential use by 89
1817 5-6-15 dwelling units, and a decrease in commercial square feet from 630,656 to 563,914,
            on the approximate 12.15-acre parcel of property generally located north of the
            ice arena within the Flamingo Falls portion of the Pembroke Falls PUD.
            Amending Ord. 816, which approved a development order for the Pembroke Meadows
            Development of Regional Impact, to provide for a simultaneous increase in
1822 9-2-15 residential use by 61 dwelling units, and a decrease in commercial square feet
            from 563,914 to 488,773, on the approximate 7-acre parcel of property generally
            located within the Flamingo Falls portion of the Pembroke Falls PUD on the west
            of Flamingo Road and north of Taft Street.
1830 11-12- Amending the DRI to extend the buildout and downzoning dates for the DRI from
     15     June 1, 2016, until June 1, 2021.
            Amending the DRI to reduce the permitted retail commercial to 1,794,300 square
1846 5-4-16 feet, reduce the permitted residential development to 80 residential units and
            adding 1,050 seat movie theater, generally located between Pines Boulevard and
            Johnson Street, and Flamingo Road and Hiatus Road.
     4-15-  Amending the DRI for Pembroke Meadows to provide for an increase in commercial
1944 20     square feet from 558,417 to 588,417 on the approximately 13 acre parcel of
            property generally located at 14800 Sheridan Street.
            Amending the DRI for Pembroke Lakes Regional Center to delete a portion of Parcel
            B from the DRI acreage, decreasing commercial development intensity from
1966 6-2-21 1,794,300 to 1,733,718 square feet on the approximately 208 acre parcel of
            property generally located between Flamingo and Hiatus Roads and between Johnson
            Street and Pines Boulevard.
           
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
REFERENCES TO FLORIDA STATUTES
REFERENCES TO 1969 CODE
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
REFERENCES TO FLORIDA STATUTES
F.S. SECTION CODE SECTION
F.S. SECTION             CODE SECTION
1.01                     10.04,
                         53.01(C)
1.02                     10.04
Ch. 48                   91.15
Ch. 50                   30.30(E)(2)(b)
Ch. 86                   70.21
100.361                  Charter,
                         3.11
106.07                   33.02
                         32.010,
Ch. 112                  33.14,
                         34.45,
                         34.56
Ch. 112, Part VII        34.56
112.048                  38.002
112.061                  34.172
112.532(1)(a) - (i), (2) 32.091
                         Charter,
116.041                  3.12,
                         3.13
                         31.11,
                         32.009,
                         32.125,
                         32.142,
Ch. 119                  32.162,
                         32.170,
                         34.07,
                         35.19,
                         155.658
119.07(1)                112.62,
                         121.32
Ch. 121                  34.63
161.021                  156.02
161.055                  152.037
161.141                  152.037
                         32.050,
                         32.054,
                         32.056,
                         32.057,
                         32.058,
Ch. 162                  32.059,
                         32.061,
                         32.062,
                         32.064,
                         115.29,
                         121.29,
                         155.313
162.01 et seq.           32.050
162.03                   32.064
162.05                   32.052
162.06(4)                32.058
162.08                   32.055
162.09                   134.05
162.09(1)                32.057
162.21                   32.064
162.21, Part II          32.063
162.23                   32.064
Ch. 163                  155.203
Ch. 163, Pt. II          155.101
163.501 - 163.526        159.01
163.3161 et seq.         32.082
163.3164 et seq.         155.303
163.3164                 155.203
163.3164(12)             32.082
                         32.080,
163.3174                 32.161,
                         155.303
163.3280                 156.14
165.19                   150.40
Ch. 166                  152.001,
                         155.101
166.021                  34.25, 39.01
166.031                  Charter,
                         8.05
166.033                  155.301,
                         155.306
166.041                  30.30
166.0415                 121.29
166.251                  33.42
166.261                  35.01
170.10                   94.34
                         34.36,
                         34.38,
                         34.39,
Ch. 175                  34.41,
                         34.42,
                         34.52,
                         34.56
175.071                  34.56
175.195(1)               34.48
175.231                  34.46
175.351                  34.52
175.351(6)               34.52
180.01 et seq.           Ch. 50
                         Charter,
180.24                   4.12,
                         35.18
                         34.36,
                         34.38,
                         34.39,
Ch. 185                  34.41,
                         34.42,
                         34.52,
                         34.56
185.06                   34.56
185.34                   34.46
185.35                   34.52
185.35(6)                34.52
185.185(1)               34.48
Ch. 190                  155.203
196.075                  33.85
196.075(1)               33.85
197.3632                 101.12
197.3632(3)(a)           101.12
197.3632(4)(b)           101.12
197.3635                 101.12
Ch. 200                  Charter,
                         5.04
Ch. 202                  121.10,
                         121.45
                         112.16,
202.195                  121.12,
                         121.32
205.042                  Ch. 115
205.043                  115.21,
                         115.24
205.162                  115.10
205.171                  115.10
Ch. 215                  34.56
                         30.21,
                         92.04,
Ch. 252                  92.12,
                         92.13,
                         92.14
252.31 et seq.           Ch. 92
252.32                   Ch. 92
252.363                  155.308
252.38                   92.11,
                         92.14
252.38(6)(e)             92.14
255.05                   35.19
255.20                   35.18
255.2575                 155.6121
255.27                   134.04
Ch. 286                  32.142,
                         35.19
286.001                  30.21
Ch. 287                  112.09,
                         112.46
287.055                  35.33,
                         35.39
287.087                  35.30
287.133                  112.09,
                         112.46
                         70.01,
Ch. 316                  72.03,
                         113.09
316.003                  71.01
316.003(74)              74.01
316.003(91)              73.07
316.006                  72.01
316.007                  72.01
                         Ch. 70,
                         70.02,
316.008                  Ch. 71,
                         Ch. 72,
                         134.03
316.008(5)               93.99(C)
                         73.01,
316.0083                 73.03,
                         73.07
316.074(1)               73.03
316.075(1)(c)1.          73.03
316.130                  71.03
316.130(5)               113.09
316.193                  70.20
316.1932                 70.18
316.1933                 70.18
316.1934                 70.18,
                         70.20
316.1955                 72.05,
                         72.05
316.1956                 72.05
316.1958                 72.03
316.1967                 70.02,
                         72.06
316.1967(6)              72.05
316.2065                 71.03
Ch. 318                  70.01
Ch. 320                  72.01
320.01                   152.083
320.081                  155.423
320.0848                 72.03
320.0848(1)(d)           72.03
320.8249                 152.110
Ch. 333                  121.45
337.401                  121.02,
                         121.45
337.401(6)               121.03
337.401(7)               121.45
337.402                  121.12
337.403                  121.12
337.404                  121.12
365.172                  121.03
366.02                   152.032
366.94                   155.614
Ch. 373                  50.35,
                         50.36
373.036                  152.037
373.62                   50.35
380.04                   155.203
381.0065                 152.037
381.00771                155.507
381.986(11)              155.516
Ch. 386                  134.04
Ch. 395                  155.203
395.002                  155.698
400.01                   122.03
Ch. 402                  115.15
402.302                  125.02,
                         155.509
402.310                  115.15 
Ch. 403                  94.52
403.413                  94.53
403.7046                 112.61,
                         112.62
413.08                   97.14
413.08(l)(d)             97.14
420.9076                 32.163
420.9076(4)              32.164
420.9076(6)              32.166
429.01                   122.03
429.02                   122.03
435.04                   34.07
435.07                   34.07
435.07(4)                34.07
471.003                  112.16 
Ch. 440                  34.91
440.102                  34.89
Ch. 471                  150.21
Ch. 480                  Ch. 117,
                         133.20
Ch. 481                  150.21
Ch. 500                  Ch. 114,
                         131.01
509.102                  155.203,
                         155.518
Ch. 518                  34.56
Ch. 526                  155.696
526.111                  155.696
526.121                  155.696
533.79                   155.696
553.73                   32.066
553.73(5)                152.060
553.73(10)(k)            152.032
553.74(4)(a) and (b)     150.13
553.79                   32.066,
                         150.21
553.80                   32.066
Ch. 556                  112.16 
559.955                  120.02
561.342                  110.01
562.14                   110.02
569.002                  134.10
569.315                  155.512
Ch. 588                  Ch. 91
604.50                   152.032
604.71                   155.662
616.091                  111.10
633.065 et seq.          Ch. 93
633.121                  Ch. 93
655.962                  116.03
715.05                   90.02
Ch. 717                  90.13
                         32.170,
Ch. 718                  150.04,
                         150.73
718.203                  150.02
Ch. 720                  32.170,
                         150.04
767.01                   91.13
767.11                   91.15
767.12                   91.15
768.28                   121.25,
                         121.26
775.082                  32.066
775.083                  32.066
775.21                   134.61
790.001                  97.01
Ch. 791                  120.08,
                         134.06
791.01                   97.01
791.01(4)                120.08
791.02                   120.08
794.011                  134.62
800.04                   134.62
806.14                   132.01
812.08(1)(c)             112.62
812.014                  132.02
823.12                   134.04
823.13                   133.21
823.15                   Ch. 91
827.071                  134.62
Ch. 828                  91.17
828.02                   91.15
831.01                   10.15
843.01                   130.02
843.02                   130.02
Ch. 847                  155.696
847.011                  133.21
847.012                  133.22
847.0125                 133.23
847.013                  133.25
847.0145                 134.62
856.021                  134.07
870.041 et seq.          Ch. 92
871.01                   30.20
877.03                   134.02
877.111                  133.02
                         70.15,
Ch. 893                  70.16,
                         133.03
893.02                   34.90
                         70.15,
893.03                   70.16,
                         120.09
893.147(1)(b)            133.01
943.0435(a)              134.61
943.085 - 943.255        32.066
943.10                   91.15
                         
 
REFERENCES TO 1969 CODE
1969 CODE SECTION 1984 CODE SECTION
1969 CODE SECTION 1984 CODE SECTION
1-1               10.04,
                  53.01(C)
                  10.04,
1-2               10.05,
                  10.10 
1-3               10.03
1-4               10.11
1-5               10.06
1-6               10.15
1-7               10.12
                  10.98,
1-8               10.99,
                  90.99(A)
2-1               10.16
2-2               33.01
2-3               33.02
2-4               33.03
2-5               33.04
2-6               33.10 -
                  33.13
2-23              30.10
2-24              30.11
2-26              30.01
2-27              30.12
2-28              30.13
2-29              30.14
                  30.15,
2-30              30.16,
                  30.18,
                  30.19
2-31              30.41
2-32              30.17
2-33              30.20
2-46              30.31
2-52              30.40
2-53              30.42
2-54              30.43
2-55              30.44
2-56              30.45
2-57              30.46
2-58              30.50
2-59              30.51
2-68              90.10
2-69              90.11
2-70              90.12
2-71              90.13
2-73              90.01
2-74              90.99(A)
2-83              33.20
2-84              33.21
2-85              33.99
2-86              33.22
3-11              110.01
3-13              110.02
3-14              110.02
3-15.1            110.99
3-30              110.99
4-1               91.01,
                  91.99
4-11              91.11
4-12              91.10
4-14              91.13
4-15              91.14
4-16              91.15,
                  91.99
4-17              91.16
5-1               34.01
5-6               31.04
5-7               34.02
5-8               34.03
5-23              32.034
5-24              32.035
5-25              32.030
5-41              34.11
5-42              34.12
5-43              34.13
5-44              34.14
5-45              34.15
5-46              34.10
5-47              34.16
5-100             32.076
5-101             32.077
5-102             32.078
5-111             31.10
5-112             31.10
5-113             31.10
5-114             31.10
5-125             32.020
5-126             32.021
5-127             32.022
5-139             33.30
5-150             34.35
5-151             34.37
5-152             34.36
5-153             34.38
5-154             34.39
5-155             34.42
5-156             34.43
5-157             34.44
5-158             34.46
5-159             34.47
5-160             34.50
5-161             34.52
5-162             34.53
5-163             34.51
5-164             34.54
5-165             34.55
5-166             34.56
5-167             34.56
5-168             34.62
5-169             34.35
5-170             34.57
5-171             34.59
5-172             34.56
5-173             34.58
5-175             34.47
5-176             34.50
5-177             34.40
5-178             34.40
5-179             34.49
5-180             34.60
5-181             34.41
5-182             34.59
5-183             34.63
5-184             34.61
5-185             34.75
5-186             34.77
5-187             34.76
5-188             34.78
5-189             34.79
5-190             34.80
5-191             34.83
5-192             34.84
5-193             34.85
5-194             34.81
5-195             34.82
5-197             32.071
5-198             32.072
5-199             33.070
5-200             32.073(A)
5-201             32.073(B)
6-2               150.30
6-3               150.31
6-4               150.32
6-11              150.10
6-12              150.11
6-13              150.13
6-14              150.22
6-14.1            150.23
6-15              150.24
6-19              150.20
6-20              150.20
6-21              150.20
6-22              150.18
6-24              150.12
6-25              150.19
6-29              150.40
6-30              150.41
6-33              150.44
6-44              150.50
6-45              150.56
6-46              150.56
6-48              150.51
6-49              150.55
6-49.1            150.54
6-51              150.65
6-52              133.25
6-53              150.70
6-54              150.71
6-55              150.72
6-56              150.73
6-57              150.80
6-58              150.81
6-59              150.82
6-60              150.83
6-61              150.84
7-1               92.01
7-2               92.10
7-3               92.13
7-4               92.11
7-5               92.12
7-6               92.14
7-7               92.02
7-8               92.03
7-9               92.15
7-10              92.16
7-11              92.04
7-12              92.99
7A-1              151.01
7A-2              151.04
7A-3              151.02
7A-4              151.05
8-16              93.10
8-17              93.11
8-18              93.11
8-19              93.14
8-20              93.12
8-21              93.13
8-22              93.15
8-23              93.99
8A-11             114.01
8A-32             114.25
8A-33             114.26
8A-34             114.27
8A-35             114.28
8A-36             114.29
8A-37             114.30
9-1               94.01
9-31              94.30
9-32              94.31
9-33              94.32
9-34              94.33
9-35              94.34
9-36              94.35
9-47              94.45
9-48              94.46
9-49              94.47
9-50              94.48
9-51              94.48
9-54              94.48
9-55              94.48
9-57              94.50
9-58              94.48
9-59              94.48
9-60              94.51
9-61              94.53
10-1              95.01
10-2              95.02
10-3              95.02
10-4              95.99
10-16             95.10
10-17             95.10
10-18             95.11
11-1              115.01
11-2              115.02
11-3              115.03
11-4              115.10
11-5              115.36
11-6              115.11
11-7              115.21,
                  115.37
11-8              115.10
11-9              115.10
11-10             115.04
11-11             115.12
11-12             115.13
11-13             115.14
11-14             115.15
11-15             115.15
11-16             115.15
11-17             115.16
11-18             115.17
11-19             115.18
11-20             115.26
11-21             115.27
11-22             115.20
11-23             120.01
11-24             115.38
11-25             115.22
11-26             115.23
11-27             115.24
11-28             115.24
11-29             115.25
11-30             115.04
11-31             115.46
11-32             115.25
11-33             119.19
11-34             115.45
11-35             115.45
11-36             115.47
11-38             115.99,
                  120.99
11-39             115.35
11-40             115.28
11-41             120.02
11-42             120.03
11-43             120.04
11-44             120.05
12-1              130.01
12-2              90.02
12-3              132.01
12-5              134.06
12-6              134.01
12-9              130.02
12-10             130.03
12-11             133.01
12-11.1           133.01
12-12             133.21
12-13             133.22
12-13.1           133.23,
                  133.99
12-14             133.24
12-15             133.20
12-16             132.02
12-17             51.01
12-18             72.02
12-19             131.01
12-19.1           134.03
12-19.2           134.04
12-19.4           120.06
12-19.5           32.091
12-19.6           51.02
12-19.7           132.04
12-19.8           134.05,
                  134.99
12-19.9           132.03
12-39             133.02
12-40             133.02
12-41             133.02
12-42             133.02
12-43             133.02
12-44             133.02
12-97             133.03
12-98             133.03
12-98.1           133.03
12-99             133.03
12-112            113.01
12-113            113.02
12-114            113.03
12-115            113.04
12-116            113.05
12-117            113.07
12-118            113.06
12-119            113.08
12-130            117.01
12-131            117.02
12-132            117.03
12-133            117.99
12-144            134.35
12-145            134.36
12-146            134.37
12-147            134.37
12-148            134.38
12-149            134.39
12-152            134.07
13-1              52.10
13-2              52.01
13-3              120.07
13-26             52.20
13-27             52.21
13-28             52.22
13-29             52.23
13-30             52.24
13-31             52.26
13-32             52.25
13-34             52.28
13-35             52.99
14-1              154.01
14-2              154.02
14-3              154.10
14-4              154.10
14-5              154.18,
                  154.20
14-6              154.11
14-7              154.12
14-8              154.18,
                  154.19
14-9              154.20
14-10             154.12
14-11             154.20
14-12             154.13
14-13             154.14
14-14             154.15
14-15             154.15
14-16             154.16
14-16.1           154.17
14-17             154.37
14-18             154.30
14-19             154.32
14-20             154.33
14-21             154.34
14-21.1           154.36
14-22             154.31
14-23             154.36
14-24             154.36
14-25             154.46
14-26             154.45
14-27             154.38
14-28             154.99
14-29             154.47
14-30             154.47
14-31             154.48
14-32             154.47
14-33             154.49,
                  154.99
15-1              53.01
16-1              71.01
16-2              71.02
16-2.2            71.02
16-3              70.99
16-9              70.01
16-10             70.02
17-1              119.01
17-2              119.01
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
ORD. NO. DATE CODE SECTION
ORD. NO.       DATE             CODE SECTION
9              2-22-60          30.31
17             5-17-60          10.16
20             7-19-60          130.01
23             7-24-60          132.01
25             7-25-60          130.02
27             7-24-60          134.01,
                                134.02
28             7-24-60          90.10 -
                                90.13
                                150.51,
33             3-2-61           150.55 -
                                150.57
                                91.10,
                                91.11,
37             5-4-61           91.13 -
                                91.15,
                                91.99
39             8-17-61          Ch. 95
40             11-16-61         34.10 -
                                34.16
                                150.10,
46             11-2-61          150.11,
                                150.22,
                                150.24
48             12-7-61          70.99,
                                71.01
52             3-5-62           30.11
55             4-16-62          Ch. 119
60             9-4-62           110.01,
                                110.02
                                52.20,
                                52.21,
61             10-1-62          52.23 -
                                52.28,
                                52.99
62             10-1-63          52.22
                                154.01 -
69             11-5-62          154.34,
                                154.37
                                154.14 -
                                154.16,
73             3-1-62           154.38,
                                154.45,
                                154.99
                                30.40,
76             1-21-63          30.42 -
                                30.46
89             4-15-63          33.01 -
                                33.03
95             7-15-63          71.01
96             7-15-63          150.50
114            3-1-65           154.36
                                94.45 -
116            6-7-65           94.51,
                                94.53
                                150.40 -
121            8-16-65          150.42,
                                150.44
                                154.02,
127            11-15-65         154.12,
                                154.15,
                                154.30
131            12-20-65         110.02
117            6-7-67           94.10
156            3-6-67           52.21
                                30.01,
                                30.02,
                                30.13,
162            5-1-67           30.14,
                                30.17,
                                30.20,
                                30.41
164            6-19-67          71.01
                                94.01,
166            9-5-67           94.30 -
                                94.35
168            9-5-67           90.02
                                115.01 -
                                115.38,
171            11-13-67         115.45 -
                                115.99,
                                120.01
172            12-21-67         Ch. 92
175            2-5-68           133.02
184            8-19-68          150.11
189            9-9-68           130.03
196            1-2-69           120.01
210            8-18-69          150.20
221            2-16-70          133.03
223            3-16-70          154.47,
                                154.48
228            6-1-70           71.01
231            7-6-70           154.17
234            9-21-70          133.01
240            11-2-70          133.21
242            12-7-70          33.02,
                                33.04
                                133.22,
243            12-21-70         133.25,
                                150.65
249            2-16-71          32.076 -
                                32.078
251            4-5-71           71.02
254            4-19-71          Ch. 113
258            6-7-71           133.20,
                                133.24
259            6-7-71           132.02
262            8-4-71           51.01
263            8-16-71          52.24
268            11-15-71         150.18
272            2-22-72          70.99,
                                71.01
281            5-15-72          71.01
292            8-21-72          31.10
296            10-16-72         154.31
297            10-16-72         33.10 -
                                33.13
299            10-30-72         131.01
302            12-18-72         154.17
314            2-20-73          133.01
329            6-4-73           91.99
342            11-5-73          134.03
349            11-19-73         110.02
350            1-7-74           150.30
351            1-7-74           134.04
356            3-11-74          Ch. 96
364            5-30-74          154.36
371            8-19-74          120.02
374            9-16-74          51.02
375            9-26-74          120.03
376            9-26-74          120.04
380            11-4-74          32.020 -
                                32.022
382            12-2-74          120.06
383            12-2-74          Ch. 117
386            2-3-75           150.20
393            3-17-75          31.04
395            3-17-75          114.25 -
                                114.30
397            7-8-75           71.01
398            7-8-75           70.01
402            7-21-75          33.20,
                                33.21
407            8-16-76          52.10
410            12-15-75         120.05
412            1-19-76          33.22
414            2-23-76          33.10 -
                                33.13
418            4-5-76           154.49,
                                154.99
419            4-5-76           114.01
434            9-27-76          53.01
438            12-13-76         32.034 -
                                32.035
                                32.031 -
449            8-15-76          32.037,
                                90.02
440            2-7-77           53.01
442            4-25-77          32.091
444            5-16-77          70.02
445            5-16-77          133.23,
                                133.99
453            9-19-77          154.18,
                                154.19
454            9-19-77          33.10 -
                                33.13
455            9-19-77          154.32
                                154.11,
458            11-21-77         154.18 -
                                154.20
460            12-5-77          33.10 -
                                33.13
                                150.12,
461            1-16-78          150.19,
                                150.20
462            2-21-78          154.36
                                52.20 -
466            5-15-78          52.28,
                                52.99
480            12-18-78         52.26
482            12-18-78         33.21
484            1-8-79           51.01
489            1-22-79          154.02,
                                154.36
490            1-29-79          150.50
491            1-29-79          130.01
                                52.01,
495            1-29-79          94.30,
                                132.04
497            2-25-79          154.36
500            2-26-79          154.32
                                93.10 -
503            3-19-79          93.15,
                                93.99
504            4-16-79          134.35 -
                                134.39
509            6-25-79          150.54
512            6-25-79          134.05,
                                134.99
515            8-6-79           33.30
                                30.12,
                                30.15,
520            9-17-79          30.16,
                                30.18,
                                30.19
522            9-17-79          120.07
526            9-29-79          53.01
530            2-25-80          133.03
532            5-5-80           154.36
533            5-19-80          150.31
537            7-14-80          150.70 -
                                150.73
538            7-14-80          132.03
542            8-18-80          150.18
549            11-15-80         30.50,
                                30.51
553            12-11-80         90.01
554            12-11-80         52.10
                                34.35 -
557            2-19-81          34.44,
                                34.46 -
                                34.63
                                30.15,
562            3-18-81          30.16,
                                30.18,
                                30.19
565            5-6-81           34.01
                                34.75 -
572            8-19-81          34.80,
                                34.83 -
                                34.85
                                30.15,
573            8-19-81          30.16,
                                30.18,
                                30.19
                                151.01,
576            9-16-81          151.02,
                                151.04,
                                151.05
578            9-16-81          150.80 -
                                150.84
585            1-7-82           154.18,
                                154.19
                                30.15,
586            1-7-82           30.16,
                                30.18,
                                30.19
591            3-3-82           150.32
596            5-5-82           30.01
597            5-5-82           134.22
600            6-2-82           32.070 -
                                32.073
603            7-7-82           72.01
612            8-4-82           91.99
613            8-4-82           134.07
617            8-18-82          34.02
618            8-18-82          34.81,
                                34.82
626            10-6-82          150.19,
                                150.20
627            10-6-82          10.16
630            10-20-82         72.01
631            10-6-82          150.31
634            11-3-82          115.03,
                                115.12
640            12-15-82         150.23
641            12-15-82         Ch. 50
644            12-15-82         32.020
648            3-16-83          150.90
                                91.10,
649            4-6-83           91.11,
                                91.13 -
                                91.16
650            4-20-83          T.S.O. I
658            6-1-83           52.11
661            6-15-83          112.90,
                                112.91
668            10-5-83          32.050 -
                                32.062
669            10-5-83          151.03
672            11-16-83         T.S.O. I
674            12-14-83         110.02
678            1-4-83           112.91
679            1-18-84          T.S.O. I
680            2-15-84          110.02
683            2-15-84          150.21
689            4-4-84           34.84
690            4-18-84          150.31
696            6-20-84          30.15,
                                30.16
698            7-11-84          71.04
699            7-18-84          Ch. 36
700            7-18-84          32.092
701            7-18-84          71.03
703            8-1-84           33.05
704            8-1-84           53.01
705            8-1-84           35.01
712            10-3-84          30.18
714            10-3-84          Ch. 118
717            11-7-84          T.S.O. I
718            11-7-84          90.01
721            2-6-85           Adopting Ordinance
725            2-20-85          T.S.O. I
726            2-20-85          T.S.O. I
727            2-20-85          T.S.O. I
729            3-20-85          T.S.O. I
731            3-27-85          134.05
732            5-1-85           T.S.O. I
735            5-1-85           93.25 -
                                93.27
737            5-1-85           33.40,
                                33.41
738            5-15-85          Ch. 99
739            5-15-85          T.S.O. I
741            6-5-85           T.S.O. II
742            6-5-85           T.S.O. II
743            6-5-85           T.S.O. II
746            6-19-85          T.S.O. I
747            6-19-85          T.S.O. I
748            6-19-85          T.S.O. I
749            6-19-85          T.S.O. I
750            8-7-85           T.S.O. II
751            8-7-85           T.S.O. II
752            8-7-85           T.S.O. II
754            9-4-85           93.35 -
                                93.40
757            10-2-85          T.S.O. II
758            10-2-85          91.15
761            11-13-85         154.39
763            11-13-85         150.30
765            12-4-85          52.03 -
                                52.05
766            12-4-85          70.01
768            12-4-85          T.S.O. I
769            1-8-86           154.36
773            2-5-86           T.S.O. I
775            2-5-86           92.02
776            2-5-86           90.01
777            2-5-86           115.10
784            3-5-86           T.S.O. II
786            4-2-86           154.36
787            4-30-86          T.S.O. I
790            5-7-86           T.S.O. I
792            6-4-86           150.90
794            6-18-86          T.S.O. I
799            8-6-86           T.S.O. II
800            8-6-86           T.S.O. I
805            9-3-86           150.83
808            11-5-86          150.30
811            11-5-86          33.06
813            11-5-86          53.01
815            12-17-86         93.99(C)
816            1-7-87           T.S.O. III
817            1-7-87           T.S.O. II
818            1-7-87           T.S.O. I
819            1-7-87           T.S.O. I
821            2-4-87           71.05
                                34.36,
829            3-4-87           34.37,
                                34.46,
                                34.54
830            4-1-87           T.S.O. II
831            4-22-87          115.15
835            5-20-87          150.02,
                                150.03
836            5-20-87          T.S.O. I
840            8-5-87           T.S.O. I
841            8-5-87           132.05
843            9-15-87          T.S.O. III
844            9-15-87          T.S.O. I
845            9-15-87          T.S.O. III
846            9-15-87          T.S.O. I
847            9-15-87          T.S.O. I
851            11-4-87          T.S.O. I
852            11-18-8          91.02
854            12-2-87          T.S.O. II
855            1-20-88          T.S.O. I
856            1-20-88          T.S.O. I
857            2-17-88          T.S.O. I
862            3-16-88          130.04
864            4-20-88          90.01
865            4-20-88          T.S.O. I
867            6-1-88           T.S.O. I
869            9-7-88           30.12
874            10-5-88          94.49
876            11-2-88          32.021
877            11-16-88         T.S.O. I
878            12-21-88         T.S.O. I
880            1-25-89          52.02,
                                52.24
882            2-1-89           T.S.O. I
884            2-1-89           154.36
885            2-15-89          134.38
886            4-5-89           154.31,
                                Ch. 154 Appendix
                                70.15 -
890            5-3-89           70.23,
                                70.99
892            5-17-89          150.30
896            6-21-89          115.39
898            8-16-89          154.48
899            8-16-89          93.20
900            8-16-89          132.06
901            9-6-89           154.32
912            12-6-89          154.35
917            1-17-90          36.05
920            4-11-90          T.S.O. I
921            5-2-90           154.35
922            4-2-90           154.32
923            5-2-90           154.31
926            5-16-90          150.32
927            6-27-90          151.06
929            8-1-90           113.04,
                                113.05
933            10-3-90          T.S.O. I
934            10-3-90          T.S.O. I
935            10-17-90         33.05
936            10-17-90         Ch. 156
                                32.051,
937            11-7-90          32.056 -
                                32.058
939            11-28-90         72.04
941            11-28-90         32.100 -
                                32.103
944            1-2-91           110.02
947            1-23-91          T.S.O. II
948            3-20-91          94.18
951            5-1-91           T.S.O. I
952            5-1-91           T.S.O. I
953            5-1-91           T.S.O. I
956            5-15-91          72.02
957            6-5-91           T.S.O. I
958            6-5-91           150.22
959            9-4-91           T.S.O. I
960            9-4-91           120.05
961            8-1-91           151.06
965            9-19-91          120.08
966            9-19-91          T.S.O. II
                                34.36,
                                34.37,
                                34.43,
967            9-19-91          34.46,
                                34.50,
                                34.53,
                                34.64
970            10-2-91          T.S.O. I
972            11-6-91          154.60 - 154.88
973            11-6-91          52.26
974            10-16-91         30.60
                                112.45 -
975            11-6-91          112.48,
                                112.99
976            11-6-91          94.18
                                52.24,
977            11-20-91         52.26,
                                154.32
979            1-8-92           33.50
                                Charter,
                                1.10,
980            3-10-92          3.05,
                                3.06,
                                3.11
                                Charter,
                                7.01,
981            3-10-92          7.02,
                                7.04,
                                7.05,
                                7.06
982            3-10-92          Charter,
                                4.05
983            1-8-92           T.S.O. II
984            2-19-92          151.06
985            3-4-92           T.S.O. III
987            3-4-92           150.95
989            2-19-92          33.14
990            4-15-92          34.65 -
                                34.70
993            4-15-92          33.30
994            5-6-92           120.08
995            5-20-92          154.15
997            6-17-92          T.S.O. III
1001           8-19-92          T.S.O. II
1002           8-19-92          Repealing 130.04
1003           9-2-92           115.15
1004           9-2-92           T.S.O. II
1005           9-2-92           T.S.O. II
1006           9-2-92           115.29
1009           9-16-92          T.S.O. III
1010           9-16-92          T.S.O. II
1011           10-21-92         T.S.O. I
1012           10-21-92         34.115 -
                                34.117
                                34.39,
1014           11-4-92          34.43,
                                34.50,
                                34.53
1015           11-4-92          34.65,
                                34.66
1016           11-4-92          94.10 -
                                94.17
1017           12-16-92         150.95
1018           12-16-92         154.32,
                                154.35
                                154.13,
1019           12-16-92         154.18,
                                154.37
1020           2-17-93          T.S.O. II
1021           2-17-93          T.S.O. II
1022           2-17-93          T.S.O. II
1023           2-17-93          T.S.O. II
1024           2-17-93          34.65 -
                                34.69
1025           2-17-93          T.S.O. II
1026           3-3-93           T.S.O. I
1028           3-17-93          150.50
1031           5-19-93          70.01
1032           5-19-93          113.04
1034           6-2-93           T.S.O. I
1036           6-16-93          T.S.O. I
1042           8-4-93           T.S.O. I
1044           8-4-93           T.S.O. I
1045           8-4-93           T.S.O. I
1051           1-5-94           T.S.O. III
1053           10-20-93         T.S.O. I
1054           11-3-93          T.S.O. II
1055           11-17-93         T.S.O. II
1056           11-17-93         T.S.O. II
1057           11-17-93         T.S.O. II
1059           1-5-94           154.31
1061           1-5-94           154.32
1062           1-5-94           72.05
                                115.15,
1063           12-19-93         115.23,
                                115.24,
                                115.39
1064           2-16-94          T.S.O. I
1066           3-2-94           120.02
                                34.43,
1067           3-16-94          34.50,
                                34.64
1068           3-16-94          Ch. 99.5
1070           5-4-94           94.02
1071           5-4-94           T.S.O. I
1072           5-4-94           150.03
1073           5-4-94           T.S.O. I
1074           5-4-94           T.S.O. I
1078           5-18-94          T.S.O. I
1079           5-18-94          T.S.O. I
1081           5-18-94          T.S.O. I
1083           6-15-94          T.S.O. I
                                94.50,
1086           8-3-94           94.51,
                                94.52,
                                94.53
1087           9-8-94           T.S.O. II
1088           9-8-94           T.S.O. II
1089           9-8-94           T.S.O. II
1090           9-8-94           T.S.O. II
1091           9-8-94           34.64
1092           9-8-94           T.S.O. III
1093           9-8-94           T.S.O. II
1094           9-8-94           36.10 -
                                36.26
1097           9-21-94          T.S.O. I
1099           11-2-94          33.60 –
                                33.63
1100           11-2-94          34.117
                                32.050,
1101           10-2-94          32.056 -
                                32.058
1102           10-2-94          T.S.O. I
1103           12-7-94          T.S.O. I
1104           12-7-94          T.S.O. I
1107           12-21-94         T.S.O. II
1108           12-21-94         T.S.O. II
1110           1-18-95          35.15,
                                36.12
1111           2-1-95           150.16
1112           2-1-95           T.S.O. I
1113           2-1-95           T.S.O. I
1115           3-20-95          50.11
1117           3-20-95          T.S.O. I
1119           4-19-95          157.01 -
                                157.07
1120           4-19-95          T.S.O. II
1122           5-17-95          T.S.O. I
1123           6-21-95          T.S.O. III
1124           6-21-95          T.S.O. II
1125           6-21-95          T.S.O. I
1126           8-2-95           T.S.O. I
1128           8-2-95           T.S.O. II
1129           8-2-95           T.S.O. I
1130           8-2-95           T.S.O. III
1131           9-6-95           33.30
1132           9-20-95          50.11
1133           9-6-95           34.56
1137           10-18-95         T.S.O. III
1138           10-18-95         150.82
1139           10-18-95         T.S.O. III
1140           10-18-95         150.32
1141           9-6-95           30.15
1142           11-1-95          33.62
1144           12-6-95          34.66 -
                                34.68
1145           12-6-95          T.S.O. I
1146           12-6-95          T.S.O. II
1147           1-3-96           32,035
1149           2-7-96           T.S.O. II
1150           2-21-96          154.32
1152           3-6-96           T.S.O. I
1153           4-9-96           T.S.O. I
1154           5-1-96           90.13
1156           5-1-96           50.08
1158           5-1-96           30.15
1160           5-15-96          112.70 -
                                112.80
1161           5-15-96          T.S.O. I
1164           6-5-96           T.S.O. I 
1166           6-5-96           T.S.O. III
1172           8-7-96           T.S.O. III
1173           8-7-96           32.057
1175           9-4-96           94.13
1176           9-4-96           113.07
1177           9-4-96           T.S.O. III
                                112.70,
                                112.72,
1181           9-4-96           112.74,
                                112.75,
                                112.76,
                                112.79
1184           9-18-96          T.S.O. I
1186           10-2-96          120.02
1187           10-16-96         Repealing 151.10 - 151.22
                                150.90,
                                150.95,
                                151.02,
                                151.03,
1191           11-20-96         151.05,
                                154.17,
                                154.31,
                                154.32,
                                154.34,
                                154.35
1192           12-4-96          T.S.O. II
1193           12-4-96          T.S.O. II
1194           12-4-96          T.S.O. II
1195           12-4-96          T.S.O. III
1198           12-18-96         34.39,
                                34.52
1199           12-18-96         32.051
1200           12-18-96         150.16
1201           1-8-97           10.16,
                                52.10
1203           1-15-97          134.08
1205           1-15-97          T.S.O. III
1207           3-5-97           120.08
1208           3-19-97          T.S.O. I
1209           3-5-97           T.S.O. I
1212           4-16-97          T.S.O. I
1213           5-7-97           T.S.O. I
1214           5-7-97           T.S.O. II
1215           6-18-97          T.S.O. I
1216           6-18-97          33.64
1221           8-6-97           T.S.O. I
1222           8-6-97           T.S.O. I
1223           8-6-97           150.16
1224           9-3-97           32.063 -
                                32.066
1227           9-3-97           33.64
1229           9-3-97           T.S.O. II
1232           10-8-97          157.01 -
                                157.07
1237           12-10-97         35.33
1238           12-10-97         T.S.O. I
1239           12-10-97         T.S.O. I
1240           12-10-97         32.079
[Res. 2524]    12-10-97         33.70 -
                                33.77
1241           12-17-97         T.S.O. III
1242           12-17-97         T.S.O. I
1244           1-7-98           T.S.O. II
1245           1-7-98           91.15
1247           1-7-98           T.S.O. I
1248           1-7-98           34.89 -
                                34.94
1249           1-7-98           34.43,
                                34.52
1252           1-7-98           T.S.O. I
1255           4-1-98           T.S.O. II
                                133.20,
1257           4-15-98          133.22 -
                                133.25
1258           4-15-98          157.06,
                                157.07
1260           5-20-98          T.S.O. III
1264           6-3-98           T.S.O. I
1265           6-17-98          32.155 -
                                32.164
1266           6-17-98          30.18,
                                30.19
                                Charter,
1267           6-17-98          1.10,
                                3.01,
                                3.02
                                Charter,
1268           6-17-98          3.06,
                                3.11
1269           6-17-98          Charter,
                                3.07
1270           6-17-98          Charter,
                                4.07
1271           6-17-98          T.S.O. I
1273           8-5-98           T.S.O. I
1274           8-5-98           32.058
1276           8-19-98          T.S.O. II
1277           8-19-98          T.S.O. II
1278           9-2-98           52.25, Repealing 52.27
1282           9-16-98          34.78,
                                34.80
1283           9-16-98          115.15
1287           10-7-98          T.S.O. II
1289           11-4-98          32.120 -
                                32.127
1291           11-18-98         71.06
1293           12-16-98         T.S.O. III
1294           1-6-99           T.S.O. I
1296           3-3-99           53.01
[Res. 2647]    3-17-99          34.150
1299           4-7-99           Repealing 155.069
                                150.95,
1300           4-7-99           154.32,
                                154.34
1304           5-19-99          113.03,
                                113.07
1305           6-2-99           T.S.O. I
1306           6-2-99           32.113,
                                32.114
1307           8-4-99           T.S.O. I
1314           9-1-99           32.110
1318           11-17-99         34.56
1319           11-17-99         T.S.O. I
                                34.43,
1321           12-15-99         34.44,
                                34.52
1325           1-19-00          34.38
1326           1-19-00          50.01
1328           1-19-00          50.04
1334           2-16-00          33.85
1337           4-5-00           T.S.O. I
1338           5-3-00           T.S.O. I
1341           6-21-00          T.S.O. II
1344           8-2-00           134.50
1345           8-2-00           34.140
1347           9-6-00           Repealing 32.020, 96.25, 96.27, 96.29, 96.30
1348           9-6-00           T.S.O. II
1350           9-6-00           33.64
1353           9-20-00          34.35 -
                                34.53, Repealing 34.45, 34.55 - 34.64
1354           10-4-00          T.S.O. I
1357           11-1-00          133.20
1358           12-20-00         150.16
1359           12-20-00         34.130
1360           12-20-00         34.43,
                                34.52(C)
1361           12-20-00         Repealing 155.079
1362           12-20-00         T.S.O. II
1363           12-20-00         T.S.O. III
1365           1-17-01          115.23,
                                115.24
1366           1-17-01          T.S.O. I
1367           1-17-01          32.130 -
                                32.137
1371           4-4-01           34.66,
                                34.67
1377           8-1-01           T.S.O. I
1378           8-1-01           50.34
1379           8-1-01           T.S.O. II
                                121.01 -
                                121.03,
                                121.10 -
1380           9-5-01           121.12,
                                121.20 -
                                121.27,
                                121.29 -
                                121.33
1381           9-5-01           T.S.O. III
1383           9-5-01           33.64
1384           9-5-01           33.62
1387           9-20-01          T.S.O. I
1388           9-20-01          150.16
1389           11-7-01          T.S.O. III
1391           12-19-01         50.34
1392           12-19-01         T.S.O. II
1393           1-16-02          T.S.O. II
1394           1-16-02          112.58
1395           1-16-02          34.25,
                                34.26
1397           2-20-02          33.42,
                                50.08
                                70.01,
                                70.02,
1398           2-20-02          72.07,
                                72.99,
                                93.16
1399           3-20-02          34.95 -
                                34.105
1400           3-20-02          112.60 -
                                112.66
1401           4-3-02           34.140
1406           5-15-02          112.01 -
                                112.52
1408           5-1-02           T.S.O. I
1409           6-19-02          35.15,
                                35.32
                                94.10,
1411           6-19-02          94.17,
                                115.15,
                                115.22
1412           6-19-02          130.05,
                                134.04
1414           6-19-02          50.54
1415           6-19-02          34.26
1416           9-4-02           72.06
1417           9-4-02           T.S.O. I
1418           9-4-02           T.S.O. III
1420           9-4-02           150.16
1421           11-5-02          Charter,
                                4.04
1423           11-5-02          Charter,
                                3.07
1424           11-5-02          Charter,
                                4.07
1434           12-18-02         T.S.O. II
1435           12-18-02         T.S.O. I
1436           3-5-03           34.160 -
                                34.162
1437           3-5-03           112.61,
                                112.62
1439           4-2-03           32.138 -
                                32.145
1440           5-7-03           72.02
                                34.36,
                                34.38,
                                34.39,
                                34.41 -
                                34.43,
1443           6-18-03          34.48,
                                34.52,
                                34.56,
                                34.61,
                                34.63,
                                34.68
1446           6-18-03          33.62
1449           6-18-03          115.15
1453           8-6-03           150.16
1456           9-17-03          36.05
1458           9-17-03          50.15
1462           10-15-03         T.S.O. III
1463           10-15-03         33.14
1465           10-15-03         113.03,
                                113.07
1467           11-19-03         T.S.O. II
1468           11-19-03         T.S.O. III
1470           11-19-03         T.S.O. I
1472           12-17-03         T.S.O. I
1473           12-17-03         T.S.O. I
1474           12-17-03         T.S.O. III
1475           12-17-03         T.S.O. II
1476           12-17-03         52.20,
                                52.25
                                34.35 -
1480           3-17-04          34.64,
                                34.68
1481           5-5-04           53.01
1482           5-5-04           30.01
1484           5-19-04          T.S.O. III
1486           6-16-04          96.01 -
                                96.09, Repealing prior 96.01 - 96.99
1489           8-4-04           T.S.O. II
1490           8-4-04           T.S.O. II
1493           9-1-04           33.62
1494           9-13-04          32.143
1499           11-15-04         T.S.O. II
1500           11-15-04         32.150 -
                                32.153
1501           12-15-04         T.S.O. II
1503           12-15-04         91.15
1504           12-15-04         90.02
1507           1-19-05          T.S.O. II
1508           1-19-05          T.S.O. III
1509           2-17-05          34.52
1510           3-16-05          T.S.O. II
1514           5-18-05          T.S.O. I
1515           5-18-05          33.64
1517           6-8-05           T.S.O. III
1518           8-3-05           134.60 -
                                134.63
1519           8-3-05           T.S.O. I
1521           8-3-05           34.52
1522           9-7-05           32.123
1524           9-7-05           T.S.O. I
1527           10-19-05         Repealed by Ord. 1866
1529           10-19-05         T.S.O. I
1531           3-1-06           T.S.O. I
1532           12-21-05         T.S.O. I
1533           12-21-05         T.S.O. I
1534           1-4-06           T.S.O. II
1536           2-15-06          T.S.O. I
1537           2-15-06          T.S.O. I
1539           3-1-06           T.S.O. I
1540           4-19-06          154.32
1541           5-3-06           T.S.O. I
1543           5-3-06           T.S.O. I
1544           5-17-06          32.170
1545           6-21-06          T.S.O. I
1549           6-29-06          T.S.O. II
                                Charter,
                                1.06,
                                1.10,
                                3.01 -
                                3.13,
                                4.01 -
                                4.12,
                                5.01 -
1546           11-7-06          5.09,
                                6.01 -
                                6.07,
                                7.01 -
                                7.06,
                                8.01 -
                                8.08,
                                9.01 -
                                9.06
                                Charter,
1547           11-7-06          7.01 -
                                7.06
1548           11-7-06          Charter,
                                8.08
1550           8-2-06           T.S.O. II
1551           8-2-06           T.S.O. II
1552           8-2-06           T.S.O. II
1553           8-2-06           50.15
1554           8-16-06          34.67
1560           11-1-06          33.65
1562           11-1-06          33.67
1563           11-22-06         T.S.O. I
1564           12-20-06         T.S.O. II
1565           12-20-06         T.S.O. II
1566           12-20-06         T.S.O. II
1568           1-17-07          T.S.O. II
1570           1-17-07          156.14
1571           2-7-07           T.S.O. I
                                34.36,
1572           2-21-07          34.43,
                                34.52,
                                34.71
                                134.61,
1574           2-21-07          134.62,
                                134.63
1575           3-21-07          158.01 -
                                158.06
1575A          4-4-07           T.S.O. I
                                31.07,
                                32.114,
                                32.124,
                                94.11,
                                110.02,
                                112.03,
                                112.04,
                                112.07,
                                112.09,
                                112.11,
                                112.31,
                                112.62,
                                112.74,
                                113.03 -
                                113.06,
                                113.08,
1576           4-18-07          115.01,
                                115.03,
                                115.04,
                                115.10 -
                                115.29,
                                115.35,
                                115.37 -
                                115.39,
                                115.45 -
                                115.47,
                                115.99,
                                120.01,
                                120.02,
                                120.08,
                                121.10,
                                121.23,
                                121.25,
                                121.33
1578           5-2-07           T.S.O. I
1580           5-2-07           Repealed by 1698
                                34.36,
1581           5-16-07          34.43,
                                34.52
1582           5-16-07          33.85
1583           6-6-07           100.01,
                                100.02
1584           6-6-07           T.S.O. I
1586           8-1-07           150.04
1588           9-5-07           T.S.O. III
                                134.05,
1590           9-5-07           134.99,
                                150.32
1595           11-6-07          T.S.O. II
1596           11-6-07          T.S.O. I
1597           11-6-07          T.S.O. I
1598           12-3-07          34.170 -
                                34.180
1599           12-19-07         T.S.O. II
1600           1-16-08          32.142
1602           2-6-08           T.S.O. II
1603           3-5-08           156.10
1605           4-16-08          30.15
1606           4-16-08          32.400 - 32.409
1608           6-4-08           91.03
1607           5-21-08          32.064
1610           6-18-08          Repealing 32.055 - 32.059
1612           8-6-08           72.03,
                                72.99
1618           9-17-08          91.15
1620           9-17-08          36.05
1621           10-1-08          92.14
1623           11-19-08         T.S.O. I
1624           11-19-08         32.064
1625           12-3-08          52.50 -
                                52.53
1626           12-17-08         T.S.O. I
1627           12-17-08         72.06
1628           1-7-09           T.S.O. II
1629           1-7-09           T.S.O. II
1630           1-7-09           T.S.O. II
1633           3-4-09           T.S.O. I
1634           3-4-09           32.064
1637           5-6-09           T.S.O. II
1638           5-6-09           T.S.O. II
1640           5-6-09           32.133
1641           5-20-09          T.S.O. II
1644           6-3-09           111.10 -
                                111.14
1647           6-17-09          30.01
                                134.05,
1648           6-17-09          134.051,
                                134.99
1649           8-4-09           T.S.O. III
1650           8-4-09           35.34
1651           9-16-09          T.S.O. I
1654           11-17-09         T.S.O. II
1655           12-9-09          T.S.O. II
1657           3-3-10           120.09
1658           2-17-10          30.15
1659           3-17-10          52.30 -
                                52.39, Repealing prior 52.30 - 52.40
1660           3-17-10          90.01,
                                90.20
1661           5-5-10           T.S.O. I
1662           3-17-10          Charter,
                                4.13
1663           5-5-10           30.32
1665           6-16-10          73.01 -
                                73.05, Repealing prior 73.01 - 73.14, 73.99
1667           8-4-10           91.17
                                34.36,
                                34.39,
1669           8-4-10           34.43,
                                34.50,
                                34.52,
                                34.64
1670           8-4-10           34.67
1677           9-21-10          T.S.O. II
1679           9-21-10          36.06
1681           10-20-10         T.S.O. II
1682           1-25-11          50.33,
                                50.34
1684           3-16-11          35.15 -
                                35.35
1685           3-16-11          10.17
1686           3-16-11          T.S.O. I
1688           5-4-11           T.S.O. I
1691           6-15-11          Repealed by 1698
1693           6-15-11          34.52
1696           9-7-11           T.S.O. II
                                32.001 -
                                32.011,
                                32.020 -
                                32.022,
                                32.030,
                                32.034 -
                                32.035,
                                32.040,
                                32.041,
                                32.050 -
                                32.066,
                                32.070 -
                                32.073,
                                32.075 -
1697           9-7-11           32.082,
                                32.090 -
                                32.094,
                                32.100 -
                                32.103,
                                32.110 -
                                32.117,
                                32.120 - 21.127,
                                32.130 -
                                32.145,
                                32.150 -
                                32.153,
                                32.160 -
                                32.168,
                                32.170; Repealing 155.385
1698           9-7-11           Repealing prior Charter,
                                3.02 Ed. Note,
                              3.05 Ed. Note
1699           9-7-11           33.67
1702           9-20-11          34.172
1703           10-5-11          T.S.O. III
1704           10-5-11          Repealing prior 134.15 - 134.21, 134.23, 134.24
1705           10-5-11          34.52
1706           10-5-11          50.11
1707           10-19-11         35.36
1709           11-16-11         34.45
1711           12-7-11          30.15
1712           12-21-11         30.70 -
                                30.76
1714           4-18-12          T.S.O. I
                                32.071,
                                72.03,
                                120.08,
                                150.02,
                                150.11 -
1715           5-2-12           150.13,
                                150.23,
                                150.72,
                                150.90,
                                150.95,
                                154.32,
                                156.02, Repealing 150.14, 150.15
1716           5-2-12           101.01 -
                                101.12
                                30.12,
1717           5-16-12          30.19,
                                30.20
1718           5-16-12          154.32,
                                154.35
1719           6-6-12           Charter,
                                3.11
1720           6-6-12           Charter,
                                4.14
                                Charter,
1723           6-6-12           1.10,
                                3.02
1724           6-16-12          Charter,
                                4.13
                                Charter,
                                1.01,
                                1.10,
                                3.04,
                                3.07,
                                3.10,
                                3.12,
                                3.13,
1725           6-6-12           4.04,
                                4.06,
                                4.07,
                                4.09,
                                4.10,
                                5.04,
                                5.06,
                                7.02,
                                8.04,
                                8.08, Repealing 5.05, 9.01
1726           6-20-12          T.S.O. I
1727           6-20-12          T.S.O. I
1729           8-1-12           113.01
1730           8-1-12           52.60
1731           9-5-12           134.09
1732           9-5-12           T.S.O. I
1734           9-5-12           113.09
1738           9-19-12          154.35
1741           11-7-12          T.S.O. II
1744           12-19-12         Repealing 155.067, 155.195
1745           2-20-13          31.11
1746           2-20-13          91.15, Repealing 91.12
1749           3-6-13           112.58
                                50.01,
1754           6-19-13          50.02,
                                50.08,
                                50.33
1755           6-19-13          39.01 -
                                39.03
1759           10-2-13          T.S.O. II
                                121.01 -
                                121.03,
                                121.10 -
1760           10-2-13          121.12,
                                121.20 -
                                121.27,
                                121.29 -
                                121.33
1762           10-16-13         T.S.O. I
1763           10-16-13         150.16, Repealing 150.17, Ch. 150 Appendix
1766           12-18-13         32.200
                                34.38,
                                34.50,
1767           1-15-14          34.52,
                                34.63,
                                34.64
1768           2-5-14           T.S.O. I
1769           2-19-14          35.37
1771           3-5-14           T.S.O. I
1772           4-9-14           35.38
1773           4-9-14           Charter
                                3.02
1774           4-9-14           34.52
                                152.001 -
                                152.007,
                                152.008 -
                                152.014,
                                152.020 -
                                152.028,
                                152.030 -
                                152.037,
                                152.040 -
                                152.043,
                                152.050 -
                                152.055,
                                152.060 -
                                152.067,
                                152.070 -
                                152.073,
                                152.080 -
1775           5-7-14           152.083,
                                152.090,
                                152.091,
                                152.093,
                                152.094,
                                152.100 -
                                152.104,
                                152.110 -
                                152.113,
                                152.116,
                                152.117,
                                152.120,
                                152.121,
                                152.130 -
                                152.133,
                                152.140 -
                                152.143, Repealing 152.01 - 152.10, 152.25,
                                152.40 - 152.42, 152.55, 152.56, 152.99
1778           6-3-14           34.04
1779           6-18-14          34.05
1781           6-18-14          33.51, Repealing 33.66
1782           6-18-14          33.52
1783           6-18-14          150.16
1786           9-3-14           32.082
1787           9-3-14           Repealing 155.321
1795           10-15-14         T.S.O. II
1796           11-5-14          34.06,
                                35.31
1797           11-5-14          35.39
1798           11-5-14          T.S.O. II
1800           11-5-14          T.S.O. I
1802           12-3-14          32.034,
                                32.082
1804           12-17-14         T.S.O. II
1805           1-7-15           91.15
                                38.001,
                                38.002,
                                38.005 -
                                38.007,
                                38.015 -
                                38.018,
                                38.025 -
                                38.032,
                                38.040 -
1806           1-7-15           38.042,
                                38.050 -
                                38.053,
                                38.060 -
                                38.063,
                                38.070,
                                38.080 -
                                38.084,
                                38.090 -
                                38.100
1808           2-4-15           Repealing 98.01 - 98.09, 98.15 - 98.18, 98.99
1809           2-4-15           T.S.O. I
1810           2-4-15           T.S.O. I
1811           2-18-15          134.09
1816           5-6-15           T.S.O. II
1817           5-6-15           T.S.O. III
1818           5-6-15           T.S.O. II
                                34.46,
1819           5-6-15           34.51,
                                34.64
1820           8-5-15           T.S.O. I
1821           9-2-15           T.S.O. II
1822           9-2-15           T.S.O. III
1823           9-2-15           T.S.O. I
1824           9-16-15          34.37
1830           11-12-15         T.S.O. III
1831           11-12-15         T.S.O. I
1832           11-12-15         T.S.O. I
1833           11-12-15         122.01 -
                                122.08
1834           11-12-15         T.S.O. I
1835           11-12-15         34.07
1837           1-6-16           T.S.O. II
1840           2-3-16           Repealing 155.082
1843           3-16-16          T.S.O. II
1844           4-6-16           38.002,
                                38.031
1846           5-4-16           T.S.O. III
1847           6-15-16          T.S.O. II
1848           6-15-16          T.S.O. I
1849           8-17-16          50.40
                                50.32,
1852           9-7-16           50.34,
                                50.52
1855           10-5-16          T.S.O. II
1859           10-19-16         52.26
1861           11-2-16          33.85
1862           11-14-16         34.07
1863           11-14-16         T.S.O. I
                                73.01 -
1866           1-11-17          73.04,
                                73.06,
                                73.07
1867           2-1-17           T.S.O. I
1868           2-15-17          130.06
1869           2-15-17          32.100 -
                                32.103
1873           6-7-17           T.S.O. II
1875           6-21-17          T.S.O. II
1876           6-21-17          T.S.O. II
1877           6-21-17          150.32
1878           6-21-17          T.S.O. I
1879           6-21-17          T.S.O. I
1880           6-21-17          34.07
1885           9-19-17          T.S.O. II
1888           10-4-17          50.34,
                                50.54
1889           10-4-17          120.10
1894           2-7-18           38.031
1899           3-7-18           124.01 -
                                124.03
1900           3-21-18          34.52
1902           6-6-18           T.S.O. I
                                121.03,
                                121.10 -
                                121.12,
                                121.21,
1903           8-1-18           121.24,
                                121.27,
                                121.28,
                                121.29,
                                121.45
1906           8-1-18           93.01
1908           9-4-18           T.S.O. I
1910           9-4-18           30.15
                                97.01 -
1911           9-4-18           97.28,
                                97.99
1914           9-17-18          71.05
                                34.37,
1915           9-17-18          34.43,
                                34.52
1916           9-17-18          34.52
1917           10-3-18          T.S.O. I
1918           10-3-18          T.S.O. I
1920           11-19-18         125.01 -
                                125.03
1923           5-15-19          10.16
                                35.01,
1924           5-15-19          35.15 -
                                35.41
1925           6-5-19           74.01 -
                                74.04
1928           6-19-19          32.190 -
                                32.195
1930           8-7-19           70.99,
                                72.06
1933           9-18-19          32.192
1936           11-13-19         130.06
1938           11-13-19         134.04,
                                134.10
1940           2-5-20           72.08
1941           2-19-20          91.04
1942           2-19-20          91.05
1943           2-19-20          T.S.O. I
1944           4-15-20          T.S.O. III
1949           9-16-20          32.161,
                                32.164
1952           11-18-20         30.21
1953           12-2-20          T.S.O. II
1955           1-13-21          T.S.O. II
1956           1-13-21          34.185
1957           2-3-21           T.S.O. II
1958           2-3-21           T.S.O. I
1959           2-17-21          T.S.O. II
                                32.180 -
1960           3-3-21           32.184,
                                97.40 -
                                97.42
1961           3-17-21          T.S.O. I
1962           3-17-21          T.S.O. I
                                32.034,
                                32.082,
                                52.26,
                                154.01,
                                154.02,
                                154.10 -
                                154.20,
                                154.30 -
                                154.39,
                                154.45 -
                                154.49,
                                154.60 -
                                154.87,
                                154.99,
                                Ch. 154, Appendix,
                                155.100 -
                                155.108,
                                155.200 -
                                155.204,
                                155.300 -
                                155.313,
                                155.400 -
                                155.403,
                                155.410 -
                                155.415,
                                155.420 -
                                155.426,
                                155.430 -
                                155.434,
2021-02        3-17-21          155.440 -
                                155.442,
                                155.450 -
                                155.456,
                                155.500 -
                                155.533,
                                155.535 -
                                155.543,
                                155.600 -
                                155.615,
                                155.620 -
                                155.627,
                                155.630 -
                                155.637,
                                155.640 -
                                155.653,
                                155.655 -
                                155.682,
                                155.685 -
                                155.692,
                                155.695 -
                                155.6108,
                                155.6110 -
                                155.6117,
                                155.6120 -
                                155.6123, Repealing 32.023, 32.031, 32.032,
                                32.033, 32.036, 32.037, 32.083, 37.01 - 37.03,
                                37.10 - 37.20, 111.25 - 111.37, 114.10 -
                                114.16, 116.01 - 116.07, 118.15 - 118.20,
                                150.01, 150.52, 150.53, 153.01 - 153.41, 153.99
1964           3-17-21          50.35,
                                50.36
1965           4-7-21           33.02
1966           6-2-21           T.S.O. III
1967           6-2-21           T.S.O. I
1968           6-2-21           T.S.O. I
1969           6-16-21          72.09
                                50.01 -
                                50.15,
1978           11-17-21         50.31 -
                                50.38,
                                50.51 -
                                50.60
1979           12-15-21         30.15
1982           2-2-22           T.S.O. II
1983           2-2-22           T.S.O. I
1985           3-2-22           T.S.O. II
1987           3-16-22          120.02
1988           5-4-22           159.01
                                155.203,
                                155.302,
                                155.311,
                                155.313,
                                155.414,
                                155.422,
                                155.423,
                                155.501,
                                155.544,
                                155.608,
2022-02 (1989) 6-15-22          155.614,
                                155.620,
                                155.633,
                                155.651,
                                155.662,
                                155.664,
                                155.674,
                                155.686,
                                155.698,
                                155.699,
                                155.6107
1990           6-15-22          T.S.O. I
1991           6-15-22          T.S.O. II
1992           6-15-22          T.S.O. II
1994           8-3-22           97.29
1995           8-17-22          72.04
1998           10-19-22         155.306
2000           11-16-22         32.197,
                                32.198
                                152.010,
                                152.064,
2001           12-14-22         152.083,
                                152.092,
                                152.113,
                                152.121, Repealing 152.114, 152.115
2002           12-14-22         32.161
2003           3-15-23          T.S.O. II
2004           4-4-23           32.192
2008           9-20-23          50.40
2009           9-20-23          50.10
2011           11-1-23          T.S.O. I
2013           11-15-23         32.197
2015           12-6-23          33.62
2016           12-6-23          33.64
2018           4-17-24          T.S.O. II
2019           4-17-24          52.24
                                155.203,
                                155.204,
                                155.453,
                                155.501,
                                155.505,
                                155.512,
                                155.518,
                                155.534,
                                155.544,
                                155.550,
                                155.601,
                                155.605,
                                155.608,
2022           6-18-24          155.613,
                                155.614,
                                155.615,
                                155.620,
                                155.621,
                                155.636,
                                155.652,
                                155.655,
                                155.661 -
                                155.665,
                                155.669,
                                155.674,
                                155.699,
                                155.6100
2024           8-7-24           152.010
2025           9-4-24           32.146 -
                                32.149
2029           9-18-24          T.S.O. I
2030           9-18-24          34.56
                                Charter
                                3.09,
                                4.04,
                                4.05,
                                4.07,
2032           11-6-24          4.12,
                                4.13,
                                5.06,
                                6.02 -
                                6.04,
                                8.05,
                                9.02
2035           3-11-25 election Charter
                                4.03
2036           3-11-25 election Charter
                                4.01
2038           3-11-25 election Charter
                                3.11
2043           4-16-25          T.S.O. I
2044           4-16-25          T.S.O. I
2045           5-7-25           70.99,
                                93.99
2047           8-6-25           T.S.O. I
2048           8-6-25           T.S.O. II
                               
 
 
