TOWN OF VAIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code current through:
Ord. 30, Series 2025, passed November 18, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
VAIL TOWN CHARTER
PREFATORY SYNOPSIS
   The Charter Commission of the Town of Vail, Colorado, hereby submits to the
voters of the Town the Home Rule Charter which has been framed in conformity
with Article XX of the Colorado Constitution and the Municipal Home Rule Act of
1971.
   The philosophy of the commission throughout the drafting of this document
has been that the people of Vail will elect a town council composed of men and
women whose intelligence, honesty and integrity will provide the high level of
leadership necessary to ensure Vail’s future as a quality community. This
Charter therefore provides for and encourages citizen involvement and
participation in matters of local government. Further, the Charter reflects a
broad granting of powers which, unless specifically restricted herein, are
intended to be as inclusive as permitted by the state constitution.
   This Charter provides for basic Council-Manager form of government. The
council shall consist of seven members, including a mayor who shall be elected
by the council for a two-year term. A majority of the council (four members)
shall be elected every two years, thereby providing continuity of government
while at the same time ensuring maximum responsiveness to the voters.
   The full legislative power of the municipal government shall be vested in
the council, and the executive responsibilities shall rest with the town
manager, who is appointed by and serves at the pleasure of the council.
   The commission recognizes that the community of Vail is unique in that it
places greater emphasis on aesthetic, environmental, promotional and
recreational concerns than are traditional in most municipal governments. This
Charter is intended to provide the enduring framework within which these
concerns can best be implemented. This Charter is, therefore, fundamentally
founded in the belief that the quality of life of the people of Vail shall
continue and be enhanced through progressive municipal government.
PREAMBLE
   We, the people of the town of Vail, Colorado, under the authority of the
constitution of the state of Colorado and the municipal home rule act of 1971,
and in order to exercise the rights, privileges and responsibilities of self-
government granted to us by the said constitution and act do ordain and
establish this home rule charter for the town of Vail, Colorado.
Town charter approved at election held September 12, 1972.
Town charter amended on the following dates:
      November 19, 1985
      November 21, 1995
      September 16, 1997
      September 20, 2005
      November 6, 2012
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.1 - Name And Boundaries:
   The municipal corporation heretofor existing in Eagle County, the state of
Colorado, and known as the town of Vail, shall remain and continue as a body
politic and corporate under this charter with the same name and boundaries
until changed in a manner authorized by law.
(1972 Charter)
Section 1.2 - Municipal Powers:
   The town shall have all the powers of local self-government and home rule
and all power possible under the constitution and the laws of the state of
Colorado. The town shall and may exercise all municipal powers, functions,
rights and privileges of every nature whatsoever. The enumeration of particular
powers in this charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive of others.
(1972 Charter)
Section 1.3 - Rights And Liabilities:
   By the name of the town of Vail, the municipal corporation shall have
perpetual succession; shall own, possess and hold all property, real and
personal, heretofor owned, possessed and held by said town of Vail and shall
assume and manage and dispose of all trusts in any way connected therewith;
shall succeed to all the rights and liabilities and shall acquire all benefits
and shall assume and pay all bonds, obligations and indebtedness of said town
of Vail; by the name of the town of Vail, may sue and defend, plead and be
impleaded, in all courts and places, and in all matters and proceedings; may
have and use a common seal and alter same at pleasure.
(1972 Charter)
Section 1.4 - Form Of Government:
   The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as council-
manager government. Pursuant to the charter provisions and subject only to
limitations imposed by the state constitution and by this charter, all powers
shall be vested in an elective council which shall enact local legislation,
adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint the town manager who shall
execute the laws and administer the town government. All powers of the town
shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter, or if the manner
be not so prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance or
resolution, or as provided by other applicable law.
(1972 Charter)
ARTICLE II: ELECTIONS
Section 2.1 - Colorado Municipal Election Laws Adopted:
   Town elections shall be governed by the Colorado municipal election laws as
now existing or hereafter amended or modified, except as otherwise provided by
this charter, or by ordinance hereafter enacted.
(1972 Charter)
Section 2.2 - Non-Partisan Elections:
   All special and regular elections shall be non-partisan. No candidate for
any municipal office shall run under any party label.
(1972 Charter)
Section 2.3 - Municipal Elections:
   A regular municipal election shall be held on the first Tuesday in November
beginning on November 2, 1999, and biennially thereafter. The town council will
decide at the time of the election whether to conduct such election with the
Eagle County coordinated elections. Any special municipal election may be
called by resolution or ordinance of the council at least thirty (30) days in
advance of such election. The resolution or ordinance calling a special
municipal election shall set forth the purpose or purposes of such election.
Polling places for all municipal elections which are not conducted exclusively
by mail shall be open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. on election day.
(1972 Charter; Ord. 16(1997) § 1; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 2.4 - Election Precincts:
   The town shall constitute one voting precinct, provided that the council
may, for the convenience of voters, establish additional precincts forty-five
(45) days or more prior to any election, by ordinance. The precincts so
established by ordinance shall remain for subsequent elections until otherwise
provided by ordinance.
(1972 Charter)
Section 2.5 - Election Commission:
(Rep. by Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 2.6 - Recall:
   Any elected officer of the town may be recalled at any time after six (6)
months in office by the electors entitled to vote for a successor of such
incumbent as provided for in article XXI of the state of Colorado constitution.
Consistent with the constitution and this charter, the council may provide by
ordinance for further recall procedures.
(1972 Charter)
ARTICLE III: COUNCIL
Section 3.1 - The Council:
   The legislative affairs of the town shall be vested in a council consisting
of seven (7) councilmembers, all of whom shall be nominated and elected at
large from the town.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 3.2 - Terms Of Office:
   The terms of office for councilmembers shall be four (4) years provided,
however, that no councilmember shall serve for more than eight (8) consecutive
years. In the regular municipal election to be held in 1973, the three (3)
candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected for four-year
terms and the four (4) candidates receiving the fourth, fifth, sixth and
seventh highest number of votes shall serve for two-year terms. In the
municipal election to be held in 1975 and thereafter, the highest number of
votes shall be elected for four-year terms and the candidate receiving the
fourth highest number of votes shall be elected for a two-year term. If a
vacancy exists, those candidates receiving the fifth, sixth, and seventh
highest number of votes, depending upon the number of vacancies to be filled,
shall be elected for two-year terms.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 3.3 - Mayor:
   The mayor shall be elected from the duly elected council by a majority vote
at its first organizational meeting to be held within seven (7) days from the
election, and shall serve at the pleasure of the council for a two-year term.
   The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall exercise such
powers and perform such other duties as are or may be conferred and imposed
upon him/her by this charter or by ordinance or other applicable law. He/she
shall have all of the powers, rights, and privileges of a councilmember
including the right to vote; however, his/her vote shall be registered after
all other votes are cast. He/she shall be recognized as the head of the town
government for all ceremonial and legal purposes and he/she shall execute and
authenticate legal instruments requiring his/her signature as such official. In
the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the council shall choose his/her
successor.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 3.4 - Mayor Pro Tem:
   The mayor pro tem shall be elected by a majority vote of the council at the
first organization meeting to be held within seven (7) days from the election
and shall serve at the pleasure of the council for a two-year term.
   In the absence or disability of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall perform
all duties and have all powers of the mayor. In the event of a vacancy in the
office of mayor pro tem, the council shall choose his/her successor.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 3.5 - Powers Of The Council:
   The council shall be the legislative and governing body of the town and
shall exercise, except as otherwise provided in this charter, all powers
conferred upon or possessed by the town and shall adopt such laws, ordinances,
and resolutions as it shall deem proper.
(1972 Charter)
Section 3.6 - Qualifications:
   Each councilmember when nominated and elected shall be a citizen of the
United States; a registered elector of the town of Vail; and shall have resided
in the town or any territory thereafter annexed for two (2) years immediately
preceding such election. The council shall be the judge of election and
qualifications of its own members.
(1972 Charter)
Section 3.7 - Financial Interest Prohibited:
   No member of the council, during his/her term of office, shall be a salaried
employee of the town, nor shall he/she have any direct or indirect financial
interest in any contract with the town. A “contract” shall for the purposes of
this section include any arrangement or agreement pursuant to which any land,
material, service or other thing of value is to be furnished to the town for a
valuable consideration to be paid by the town or sold or transferred by the
town.
   Ownership by a member of the council or member or his/her family of
securities of a corporation or of any beneficial interest in a partnership or
firm with which a contract is made shall not be deemed to create a financial
interest in such contract unless the aggregate amount of such securities in a
corporation or interest in such partnership or firm so owned by such
councilmember and the members of his/her family shall amount to ten percent of
any class of the securities of such corporation or ten percent ownership in
such partnership or firm.
   This prohibition shall not extend to, nor include, minor incidental
transactions as approved by the council.
   Any violation of this section by persons contracting with the town shall
render the contract voidable by the town manager or the council or any citizen.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 3.8 - Compensation:
   The members of the council shall receive such compensation and the mayor
such additional compensation as the council shall prescribe by ordinance,
provided, however, that they shall neither increase nor decrease the
compensation of any member during his/her term of office. The mayor and
councilmembers may, upon order of the council, be paid their actual and
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 3.9 - Council Vacancies:
   A councilmember shall continue to hold his/her office until his/her
successor is duly qualified. A council seat shall become vacant whenever any
councilmember is recalled, dies, becomes incapacitated, resigns, ceases to be a
resident of the town or is convicted of a felony. If a vacancy occurs with
three hundred sixty-five (365) or more days remaining in the unexpired term of
the council position vacated, a special election shall be called to fill said
term. If a vacancy occurs with three hundred sixty-four (364) days or less
remaining in the full unexpired term of the council position vacated, the
council may choose to call an election or to appoint an individual to fill said
term. If three or more vacancies exist simultaneously, the remaining
councilmembers shall, at the next regular meeting of the council, call a
special election to fill said terms, provided there will not be a regular
municipal election within ninety (90) days and provided that their successors
have not previously been elected.
(1972 Charter)
Section 3.10 - Oath Of Office:
   Before entering upon the duties of his/her office, every councilmember shall
take, subscribe before, and file with the town clerk an oath or affirmation
that he/she will support the constitution of the United States, and
constitution of the state of Colorado, this charter and the ordinances of this
town and will faithfully perform the duties of the office.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
ARTICLE IV: COUNCIL PROCEDURE
Section 4.1 - Regular Meetings:
   The council shall meet regularly at least twice each month at a day and hour
to be fixed by the rules of council. The council shall determine the rules of
procedure governing meetings. The first meeting following each regular
municipal election shall be the organizational meeting of the council as
provided for in
section 3.3 of this charter.
(1972 Charter)
Section 4.2 - Special Meetings:
   Special meetings shall be called by the town clerk on the written request of
the mayor or of any two (2) members of the council, or the town manager, on at
least 48-hours written notice to each member of the council, served personally
or left at his/her usual place of residence and such notice shall be posted in
two (2) public places; a special meeting, however, may be held on shorter
notice if a quorum of the council consents.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 4.3 - Business At Special Meetings:
   No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the council unless
it has been stated in the notice of such meeting. Any ordinance which may be
considered at such meeting must meet the requirements of
section 4.11 of this charter.
(1972 Charter)
Section 4.4 - Quorum Adjournment Of Meeting:
   A majority of the members of the council in office at the time shall be a
quorum for the transaction of business at all council meetings, but in the
absence of a quorum, a lesser number may adjourn any meeting to a later time or
date, and in the absence of all members, the town clerk may adjourn any meeting
for not longer than one week.
(1972 Charter)
Section 4.5 - Meetings To Be Public:
   All regular and special meetings of the council shall be open to the public
and citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard under such rules
and regulations as the council may prescribe.
(1972 Charter)
Section 4.6 - Council Acts:
   The council shall act only by ordinance, resolution or motion. All
legislative enactments shall be in the form of ordinances; all other actions,
except as herein provided, may be in the form of resolutions or motions. A true
copy of every resolution as hereafter adopted shall be numbered and recorded in
the official records of the town.
(1972 Charter)
Section 4.7 - Voting:
   The vote by “yes” and “no” shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances
and resolutions, and entered upon the minutes of the council proceedings. Every
ordinance shall require the affirmative vote of the majority of the entire
council for final passage, except as provided in
section 4.11 of this charter. Resolutions and motions shall require the
affirmative vote of a majority of the members present. No member of the council
shall vote on any question in which he/she has a substantial personal or
financial interest, other than the common public interest, or on any question
concerning his/her own conduct, and in said instances the member shall disclose
this interest to the council. On all other questions, each member who is
present shall vote when his/her name is called. Any member refusing to vote
when not so required by this paragraph, shall be deemed delinquent in his/her
duties and an affirmative vote shall be cast and recorded in his/her name.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 4.8 - Action By Ordinance Required:
   In addition to such acts of the council as are required by other provisions
of this charter to be by ordinance, every act making an appropriation, creating
an indebtedness, authorizing borrowing of money, levying a tax, authorizing the
sale of any real property, establishing any rule or regulation for the
violation of which a penalty is imposed, or placing any burden upon or limiting
the use of private property, shall be by ordinance.
(1972 Charter)
Section 4.9 - Forms Of Ordinance:
   Every ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The enacting
clause of all ordinances shall be: BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE
TOWN OF VAIL, COLORADO. Except as otherwise provided in this article, all
ordinances shall take effect five (5) days after publication following final
passage. Every ordinance introduced shall be deemed to contain a severability
clause, whether stated therein or not.
(1972 Charter)
Section 4.10 - Procedure:
   Except for emergency ordinances, ordinances making general codification of
existing ordinances, and ordinances adopting standard codes with or without
amendment, the following procedure for enactment of ordinances shall be
followed:
   (a)   The ordinance shall be introduced at any regular meeting of the
council by any member thereof.
   (b)   The ordinance shall be read in full, or in cases where copies of the
ordinance are available to the council and are or have been made available to
the public, said ordinance may be read by title only.
   (c)   After the first reading of the ordinance, the same shall be approved
with or without amendment or rejected by a vote of the council.
   (d)   If the ordinance is approved on first reading, it shall be published
once in full unless otherwise provided herein. The council shall set a day,
hour, and place at which council shall hold a public hearing on the ordinance
and notice of said day, hour, and place shall be included in the first
publication.
   (e)   The ordinance shall be introduced at council a second time, at a
meeting not earlier than seven (7) days after first publication, for final
approval, rejection, or other action as may be taken by vote of the council.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided herein, an ordinance, if amended
subsequent to its last publication, shall be published in full after final
passage; but if not amended, it shall be published either by title or in full
as the council may determine.
   (g)   Whenever an ordinance shall be published by reference or by title, the
publication shall contain a summary of the subject matter of said ordinance and
shall contain a notice to the public that copies of the proposed ordinance are
available at the office of the town clerk. The publication of any ordinance by
reference or by title as provided herein must set forth in full any penalty
clause contained in said ordinance.
(1972 Charter)
Section 4.11 - Emergency Ordinances:
   Emergency ordinances for the preservation of public property, health,
welfare, peace, or safety, shall be approved only by the unanimous vote of
councilmembers present or a vote of five (5) councilmembers, whichever is less.
The facts showing such urgency and need shall be specifically stated in the
measure itself. No ordinance making a grant of any special privilege, levying
taxes, or fixing rates charged by any town-owned utility shall be passed as an
emergency measure. An emergency ordinance shall require passage at one (1)
meeting of council. However, neither a public hearing nor a first publication
as provided in
section 4.10 of this charter shall be required. An emergency ordinance shall
take effect upon final passage. One publication shall be required within ten
(10) days after passage, or as soon thereafter as possible.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 4.12 - Codification:
   The council shall cause the ordinances to be codified and thereafter
maintained in current form. Revisions to the codes may be accomplished by
reference as provided in
section 4.13 of this charter.
(1972 Charter)
Section 4.13 - Codes:
   Standard codes, promulgated by the federal government, the state of
Colorado, or by any agency of either of them, or by any municipality within the
state of Colorado, or by recognized trade or professional organizations, or
amendments or revisions thereof, may be adopted with or without amendment by
reference; provided the publication of the ordinance adopting any said code
shall advise that copies and amendments are available for inspection at the
office of the town clerk, and provided that any penalty clause in any code may
be adopted only if set forth in full and published in the adopting ordinance.
(1972 Charter)
Section 4.14 - Disposition Of Ordinances:
   A true copy of every ordinance, as adopted by council, shall be numbered and
recorded in the official records of the town. Its adoption and publication
shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor, or mayor pro tem, and the
town clerk, and by the certificate of publication. A true copy of every
ordinance, as adopted by the vote of the electors of the town, shall be
separately numbered and recorded commencing with people’s ordinance no. 1.
(1972 Charter)
Section 4.15 - Public Records:
   All public records of the town of Vail shall be open for inspection by any
person at reasonable times in accordance with applicable law.
(1972 Charter)
ARTICLE V: INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section 5.1 - General Authority:
   (a)   Initiative. The registered electors of the town shall have the power
to propose any ordinance to the council, in accordance with the provisions of
this article of the charter. In the event council fails to adopt said proposed
ordinance without any change in substance, the said proposed ordinance shall be
submitted to the registered electors at a town election for their acceptance or
rejection.
   (b)   Referendum. The registered electors of the town shall have the power
to require reconsideration by the council of any ordinance and, if the council
fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a town
election, in accordance with the provisions of this article of this charter;
provided that such power shall not extend to the appropriation of any revenues,
calling a special election, and any ordinance necessary for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health, or safety.
(1972 Charter)
Section 5.2 - State Statute:
   The procedures for initiative and referendum shall be as provided in state
statute governing municipal initiative and referendum.
(Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 5.3 - Petitions:
   (a)   Number Of Signatures. Initiative petitions must be signed by
registered electors of the town in number to at least fifteen (15) percent of
the total number of electors registered to vote at the last regular municipal
election. Referendum petitions must be signed by registered electors of the
town equal in number to at least ten (10) percent of the total number of
electors registered to vote at the last regular municipal election.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 5.4 - Procedures After Filing:
(Rep. by Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 5.5 - Referendum Petitions; Suspension Of Effect Of Ordinance:
(Rep. by Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 5.6 - Actions On Petitions:
(Rep. by Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 5.7 - Submission By Council:
   The council on its own motion shall have the power to submit at a regular or
special election any proposed ordinance or any question to a vote of the
registered electors.
(1972 Charter)
Section 5.8 - Results Of Election:
   (a)   Initiative. If a majority of the registered electors voting on a
proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted
upon certification of the election results. If conflicting ordinances are
approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of
affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.
   (b)   Referendum. If a majority of the registered electors voting on a
referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon
certification of the election results.
   (c)   An ordinance adopted by the electorate may not be amended or repealed
for a period of six (6) months after the date of the election at which it was
adopted, and an ordinance repealed by the electorate may not be reenacted for a
period of six (6) months after the date of the election at which it was
repealed; provided, however, that any ordinance may be adopted or amended or
repealed at any time by appropriate referendum or initiative procedure in
accordance with the foregoing provisions of this article, or, if submitted to
the electorate by the council on its own motion.
(1972 Charter)
ARTICLE VI: TOWN ADMINISTRATION
Section 6.1 - Town Manager:
   The town manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of
the town. As such, he/she shall possess, have, and exercise all the executive
powers and administrative powers vested in the town. The council, by a majority
vote, shall appoint a town manager within six (6) months whenever a vacancy
exists in such position. Such appointment shall be without definite term and
shall be at a salary to be fixed from time to time by the council. The manager
shall be appointed without regard to any consideration other than his/her
fitness, competency, training and experience in professional urban
administration. At the time of his/her appointment, he/she need not be a
resident of the town or state. No member of the council shall be appointed
manager during the term for which he/she shall have been elected, nor within
two (2) years after the expiration of his/her term of office.
   The council, at a regular or special meeting, may, upon the vote of the
majority of the entire council, remove the town manager from office. Upon such
termination, the council may in its discretion provide termination pay. If
removed at any time after six (6) months of service, the town manager may
demand written charges and a public hearing before the council and these shall
be granted to him/her prior to his/her final removal. Pending such hearing, the
council may suspend him/her from office.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 6.2 - Acting Town Manager:
   To perform his/her duties during his/her temporary absence or disability,
the town manager shall designate by letter filed with the town clerk, a
qualified administrative town employee who shall serve as acting manager. In
the event of the failure of the manager to make such a designation, the council
may appoint a qualified town employee to perform the duties of the manager.
Such acting town manager shall, while he/she is in office, have all
responsibilities, duties, functions, and authority of the town manager. No
member of the council shall be appointed acting town manager during the term
for which he/she shall have been elected, nor within two (2) years thereafter.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 6.3 - Powers And Duties:
   The manager shall be responsible to the council for the proper
administration of all affairs of the town placed in his/her charge, and to that
end he/she shall have the power and duties and be required to:
   (a)   Be responsible for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances of the
town;
   (b)   Hire, suspend, transfer and remove town employees;
   (c)   Make appointments on the basis of executive and administrative ability
and of the training and experience of such appointees in the work which they
are to perform;
   (d)   Cause a proposed budget to be prepared annually and submit to the
council and be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption.
   (e)   Prepare and submit to the council as of the end of the fiscal year a
complete report on finances and administrative activities of the town for the
preceding year and, upon request of the council, make written or verbal reports
at any time concerning the affairs of the town under his/her supervision;
   (f)   Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs
of the town and make such recommendations to the council for adoption as he/she
may deem necessary or expedient;
   (g)   Exercise supervision and control over all executive and administrative
departments, and recommend to the council any proposal he/she thinks advisable
to establish, consolidate or abolish administrative departments;
   (h)   Be responsible for the enforcement of all terms and conditions imposed
in favor of the town in any contract or public utility franchise, and upon
knowledge of any violation thereof, report the same to council for such action
and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the same;
   (i)   Attend council meetings and participate in discussions with the
council in an advisory capacity;
   (j)   Establish a system of accounting and auditing for the town which shall
reflect, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, the
financial condition and financial operation of the town;
   (k)   Provide for engineering, architectural, maintenance, and construction
services required by the town;
   (l)   Serve in an ex-officio capacity on all present and future boards,
committees, and commissions of the town;
   (m)   Perform other such duties as may be prescribed by this charter, or by
ordinance or by other applicable law, or required of him/her by council, which
are not inconsistent with this charter.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 6.4 - Relationship Of Council To Administrative Service:
   Neither the council, its members, the mayor, nor any council committee shall
dictate the appointment of any person to office by the town manager except as
otherwise provided in this charter or in any way interfere with the town
manager or other town officer to prevent him/her from exercising his/her
judgment in the appointment or employment of officers and employees in the
administrative service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its
members, the mayor, and any council committee shall deal with the
administrative service solely through the town manager and neither the council,
its members, the mayor, nor any council committee thereof shall give orders to
any of the subordinates of the town manager.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 6.5 - Town Clerk:
   The town manager shall appoint a town clerk, who shall be custodian of the
town seal and who shall keep a journal of council proceedings and record in
full all ordinances, motions and resolutions. He/she shall have power to
administer oaths and take acknowledgements under seal of the town, and shall
perform such other duties as required by this charter, the council, or the
manager.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 6.6 - Departments Created:
   The administrative functions of the town shall be performed by the
departments existing at the time this charter is adopted and such other
departments as may be hereafter established by ordinance. The council may, by
ordinance, consolidate or merge any of the said departments, whether set forth
by this charter or created by ordinance.
(1972 Charter)
Section 6.7 - Bonding Of Employees:
   All town officials and employees dealing directly with municipal funds shall
post bond in an amount and under such conditions as required by council, and at
the expense of the town.
(1972 Charter)
ARTICLE VII: LEGAL AND JUDICIARY
Section 7.1 - Town Attorney:
   The council shall appoint a town attorney to serve at the pleasure of
council. He/she shall be an attorney-at-law admitted to practice in Colorado.
The town attorney shall be the legal representative of the town and he/she
shall advise the council and town officials in matters relating to their
official power and duties and perform such other duties as council may
prescribe by ordinance or resolution. The council may provide the town attorney
such assistants as council may deem necessary, and may upon its own motion or
upon request of the town attorney in special cases employ special counsel to
serve under the direction of the town attorney. Council shall establish
compensation for the town attorney, his/her assistants and special counsel.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 7.2 - Judiciary Compensation:
   (a)   Presiding Municipal Judge. There shall be a municipal court vested
with jurisdiction of all cases arising under the ordinances of the town and as
may be conferred by law. The municipal court shall be presided over and its
functions exercised by a judge, appointed by the council for a specified term
of two (2) years. The council may, when his/her appointment for term of office
expires, re-appoint the municipal judge. Any vacancy in the office of municipal
judge shall be filled by appointment by the council for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
   (b)   Deputy Judges. Council may appoint one or more deputy judges as it
deems necessary. The deputy municipal judges shall all have the powers of the
municipal judge when called upon to act by the municipal judge or council. In
the event that more than one municipal judge is appointed, the council shall
designate a presiding municipal judge, who shall serve in this capacity during
the term for which he/she was appointed. The deputy municipal judges shall
serve at the pleasure of the council.
   (c)   Compensation. The municipal judge shall receive a fixed salary or
compensation set by the council, which shall not be decreased during his/her
term of office. The deputy municipal judges may receive such compensation for
services rendered as council may determine.
   (d)   Removal. Any municipal judge may be removed during his/her term of
office only for cause. A judge may be removed by a majority vote of the council
for cause if:
      (1)   He/she is found guilty of a felony or any other crime involving
moral turpitude; or
      (2)   He/she has willfully or persistently failed to perform his/her
duties; or
      (3)   He/she has a disability which interferes with the performance of
his/her duties which is, or is likely to become, of permanent character.
(1972 Charter; Ord. 21(2005) § 1; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
ARTICLE VIII: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section 8.1 - Existing Boards And Commissions:
   All existing boards and commissions shall continue as established by
ordinance, except as otherwise provided in this charter.
(1972 Charter)
Section 8.2 - Composition Of Boards And Commissions:
   The composition of all existing permanent boards and commissions and those
hereafter established shall be such that: no town employee shall be allowed to
serve; neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall serve on any board or
commission. Terms and conditions of appointment to such boards and commissions
shall be determined by ordinance.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 8.3 - Planning And Environmental Commission:
   There shall be established a seven (7) member planning and environmental
commission appointed by the council. Members of the planning and environmental
commission shall be residents of the town of Vail and registered electors. The
terms of appointment to the planning commission shall be two (2) years on an
overlapping basis. The functions of the planning and environmental commission
shall be defined by ordinance and include but not be limited to aesthetic,
architectural, environmental and ecological coordination and planning relating
to the enhancement and the preservation of the quality of life.
(Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 8.4 - Environmental Commission:
(Rep. by Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 8.5 - Vacancies:
   Whenever a vacancy occurs on any board or commission, the council shall
cause public notice of such vacancy to be made and encourage qualified
volunteers to seek appointment to such board or commission. The council shall
then make appointments to fill such vacancies.
(1972 Charter)
Section 8.6 - Right To Establish:
   In addition to those boards and commissions heretofor created by ordinance,
council shall have the power and authority to create boards and commissions,
including advisory and appeal boards. All permanent boards and commissions,
including advisory and appeal boards, shall be created by ordinance, which
shall set forth the number and qualifications of members including residency
requirements, if any, and the powers and duties delegated to such boards and
commissions. Initial appointments by the council to any board or commissions
shall specify the terms of office of its members in order to achieve
overlapping tenure. All members, however, shall be subject to removal by the
council. Each board and commission shall elect its own chairperson and vice-
chairperson from among its members. Each board and commission shall operate in
accordance with its own rules of procedure and its meetings shall be open to
the public. Any board or commission created under this article which is not
required by statute or this charter may be abolished by the council.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
ARTICLE IX: TOWN FINANCES
Section 9.1 - Fiscal Year:
   The fiscal year of the town shall commence on the first day of January or on
such date each year as shall be fixed by the council.
(1972 Charter)
Section 9.2 - Provision For Tax System:
   The council may by ordinance provide a system for the assessment, levy and
collection of all town taxes, not inconsistent with this charter.
(1972 Charter)
Section 9.3 - Budget:
   The town manager shall annually prepare and submit to the council a budget
and accompanying message. The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of
all town funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as
required by law or this charter, shall be in such form as the manager deems
desirable or the council may require. In organizing the budget, the manager
shall utilize the most feasible combination of expenditure classification by
fund, organization unit, program, purpose or activity and object. It shall
begin with a clear, general summary of its contents and shall be so arranged as
to show comparative figures for income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal
year.
(1972 Charter)
Section 9.4 - Capital Program:
   Each annual budget shall include a long-range capital program. The
percentage of revenues to be allocated to the long-range capital program shall
be established by ordinance of the town council.
(Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 9.5 - Budget Hearing:
   A public hearing on the proposed budget and proposed capital program shall
be held by the council no later than thirty (30) days prior to the close of the
fiscal year. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published
one (1) time at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
(1972 Charter)
Section 9.6 - Council Amendments:
   After the public hearing, the council may adopt the budget with or without
amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts
and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures
required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit.
(1972 Charter)
Section 9.7 - Council Adoption:
   The council shall adopt the budget by ordinance on or before the final day
of the fiscal year. If it fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts
appropriated for the current operation for the current fiscal year shall be
deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all
items in it pro-rated accordingly, until such time as the council adopts the
budget for the ensuing fiscal year.
(1972 Charter)
Section 9.8 - Property Tax Levy:
   Adoption of the budget by council shall constitute appropriations of the
amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated. Council
shall cause the property tax to be certified to the county for collection as
required by law.
(1972 Charter)
Section 9.9 - Public Records:
   Copies of the budget and the capital program as adopted shall be public
records and shall be made available to the public in the municipal building.
(1972 Charter)
Section 9.10 - Amendments After Adoption:
   (a)   Supplemental Appropriations. If, during the fiscal year, the manager
certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of
those estimated in the budget, the council by ordinance may make supplemental
appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess.
   (b)   Emergency Appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting life,
health, property or the public peace, the council may make emergency
appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance in
accordance with provisions of
section 4.11 of this charter. To the extent that there are no available
unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the council may by
emergency ordinance authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which may be
renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals of any fiscal
year will be paid no later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding
that in which the emergency appropriation was made.
   (c)   Reduction Of Appropriation. If, at any time during the fiscal year, it
appears probable to the manager that the revenues available will be
insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he/she shall report to the
council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of deficit, any remedial
action taken by him/her and his/her recommendation as to any other steps to be
taken. The council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to
prevent or minimize any deficit and for that purpose it may by ordinance reduce
one or more appropriations.
   (d)   Transfer Of Appropriations. Any time during the fiscal year, the
manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance
among programs within a department, office, agency and, upon written request of
the manager, the council may by resolution transfer part or all of any
unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office, agency, or
object to another.
   (e)   Limitation; Effective Date. No appropriation for debt service may be
reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount
required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the
unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental and emergency appropriations and
reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made
effective immediately upon adoption.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 9.11 - Independent Audit:
   An independent audit shall be made of all town accounts at least annually
and more frequently if deemed necessary by the council. Such audit shall be
made by certified public accountants selected by the council who shall complete
the audit within four (4) months time of the close of the fiscal year. Copies
of such audit shall be made available for public inspection at the municipal
building.
(1972 Charter)
ARTICLE X: MUNICIPAL BORROWING
Section 10.1 - Forms Of Borrowing:
   The town may borrow money and issue the following securities to evidence
such borrowing:
   (a)   Short-term notes;
   (b)   Anticipation warrants;
   (c)   General obligation bonds and other like securities;
   (d)   Revenue bonds and other like securities;
   (e)   Local improvement bonds and other like securities.
(1972 Charter)
Section 10.2 - Short-Term Notes:
   The municipal government, upon the affirmative vote of the majority of the
entire council, may borrow money without an election in anticipation of the
collection of taxes or other revenues and to issue short-term notes to evidence
the amount so borrowed. Any such short-term notes shall mature within twelve
(12) months.
(1972 Charter)
Section 10.3 - Anticipation Warrants:
   Anticipation warrants may mature within such period as shall be determined
by the council; however, any such anticipation warrants payable solely from the
revenue sources specified in
section 10.6 of this charter which mature after the last day of the fiscal year
in which the same were issued shall be considered revenue bonds and shall be
subject to all the provisions and limitations of
section 10.6 of this charter.
(1972 Charter)
Section 10.4 - General Obligation Bonds:
   No bonds or other evidence of indebtedness payable in whole or in part from
the proceeds of general property taxes, or to which the full faith and credit
of the town are pledged, shall be issued, except in pursuance of an ordinance,
nor until the question of their issuance shall, at a special or regular
election, be submitted to a vote of the registered electors, and approved by a
majority of those voting thereon; provided however, that such securities issued
for improving or extending any municipal utility system, including water and
sewer systems, may be so issued without an election.
(1972 Charter)
Section 10.5 - Limitations:
   There shall be no limitation as to the amount of bonds and securities,
except in documents providing for the issuance of same, which may be issued by
the town subject only to the election provisions of
section 10.4 of this charter. All bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of
this charter shall be sold at public or private sale to the best advantage of
the town at above or below par. Bonds may contain provisions for calling same
at designated periods prior to the final due date, with or without the payment
of a prior redemption premium.
(1972 Charter)
Section 10.6 - Revenue Bonds:
   Revenue bonds issued for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, improving
or extending any municipal utility system or other income-producing project may
be issued without an election and may be made payable solely from the net
revenues derived from the operation of such system or project. Any two (2) or
more of such systems or projects may be combined, operated and maintained
jointly, in which case such revenue bonds shall be made payable out of the net
revenues derived from the operation of the joint enterprise. Neither a failure
of the town historically to have maintained a special fund for any such
existing municipal utility system or other income-producing project nor a
previous commingling of revenues deriving from the operation thereof with the
general fund of the town shall prevent a pledge of such revenues for the
payment of revenue bonds issued pursuant to this section or the issuance of
such bonds without an election, provided that such a special fund is created
prior to or contemporaneously with the issuance of such revenue bonds and
thereafter maintained separate and apart from the general fund.
   Revenue bonds issued for any public purpose of the town may be made payable
solely from all or a portion of the proceeds of any tax, other than a general
property tax, imposed by or payable to the town. Neither a failure of the town
historically to have maintained special funds into which the proceeds of such
existing taxes are deposited nor a previous commingling of such tax proceeds
with the general fund of the town shall prevent a pledge of such revenues for
the payment of revenue bonds issued pursuant to this section or the issuance of
such bonds without an election, provided that such special funds are created
prior to or contemporaneously with the issuance of such revenue bonds and
thereafter maintained separate and apart from the general fund.
   Nothing herein shall be construed so as to prevent the issuance of revenue
bonds pursuant to this section for any of the purposes specified in the first
paragraph of this section which are payable from both system or project
revenues and the proceeds of the taxes herein specified. Revenue bonds issued
pursuant to this section may also be secured by a pledge of the full faith and
credit of the town or of general property taxes; however, except for such bonds
issued for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, extending or improving any
municipal utility system, no such bonds shall be issued until the question of
their issuance shall have been approved at an election as required by
section 10.4 of this charter. Revenue bonds issued pursuant to this section may
also be secured by a pledge of the governmental grants received or to be
received from the United States Of America or any agency thereof or from the
state of Colorado or any agency thereof or by a pledge of grant receipts
together with any other revenues or taxes as herein provided.
(1972 Charter)
Section 10.7 - Refunding Bonds:
   The council may authorize, by ordinance, without an election, the issuance
of refunding bonds or other like securities for the purpose of refunding any of
the bonded indebtedness of the town of Vail, whether due or not, or which has
or may become payable at the option of the town, or by the consent of the bond
holders or by any lawful means, whether such bonded indebtedness be now
existing or may hereafter be created. The proceeds derived from the issuance of
any refunding bonds under the provisions of this section shall either be
immediately applied to the payment, or redemption, and retirement of the bonds
to be refunded, and the costs and expenses incident thereto, or shall
immediately be placed in escrow to be applied to the payment of said bonds upon
their presentation therefor, and the costs and expenses incident thereto, as
may be provided by the town council. Any funds of the town legally available
therefore may be placed in any escrow account established under the provisions
of this section, and may be used for the purposes specified in the escrow
agreement, if such procedure is deemed by the town council to be in the best
interests of the town.
(1972 Charter)
Section 10.8 - Special Or Local Improvement District Bonds:
   The town shall have the power to create local improvement districts and to
assess the costs of, or relating to, the construction or installation of
special or local improvements of every character against benefited property
within designated districts in the town by:
   (a)   Order of council, subject however, to protest by a majority of the
owners of property in the proposed district; or
   (b)   On a petition by a majority of the owners of property in the proposed
district.   
   In either event, a public hearing shall be held at which all interested
parties may appear and be heard. Right to protest and notice of public hearing
shall be given as provided by council by ordinance. Such improvements shall
confer special benefits to the real or personal property within said district
and general benefits to the town at large. The council shall have the power by
ordinance without an election to prescribe the method of making such
improvements, of assessing the cost thereof, and of issuing bonds for cost of
constructing or installing such improvements including the cost incidental
thereto.
   Where all outstanding bonds of a special or local improvement district have
been paid and any monies remain to the credit of the district, they shall be
transferred to a special surplus and deficiency fund and whenever there is a
deficiency in any special or local improvement district fund to meet the
payments of outstanding bonds and interest due thereon, the deficiency may be
paid out of said surplus and deficiency fund. However, subject to the
requirements of any covenants contained in any ordinance authorizing the
issuance of special or local improvement district bonds, the town shall not be
obligated to make such transfers of payments or maintain the special surplus
and deficiency fund. Whenever a special or local improvement district has paid
and cancelled three-fourths of its bond issued, and for any reason the
remaining assessments are not paid in time to take up the remaining bonds of
the district and the interest due thereon and there are not sufficient monies
in the special surplus and deficiency fund, then the town shall pay said bonds
when due and the interest thereon, and reimburse itself by collecting the
unpaid assessments due said district.
   In consideration of general benefits conferred upon the town at large from
the construction and installation of improvements in improvement districts, the
council may levy annual taxes without an election on all taxable property
within the town at a rate to be determined by the council for the purpose of
advancing monies to maintain current payments of interest and equal annual
payments to the principal amount of bonds issued for any improvement district
hereafter created. The proceeds of such taxes shall be placed in a special fund
and shall be disbursed only for the purposes specified herein, provided that in
lieu of such tax levies, the council may annually transfer to such special fund
any available monies of the town.
(1972 Charter)
ARTICLE XI: TAXATION
Section 11.1 - Authority To Levy Taxes:
   The council may levy and collect taxes without limitation as to amount for
municipal purposes which may include but shall not be limited to: general ad
valorem property taxes, sales tax, use tax, bed tax, occupation tax, excise
tax.
   No sales tax or bed tax shall be levied after the adoption of this charter
until such tax shall have been approved by a majority of the registered
qualified electors voting a regular or special election.
(1972 Charter)
ARTICLE XII: PUBLIC UTILITIES AND FRANCHISES
Section 12.1 - General Powers:
   The town shall have and exercise with regard to all utilities and franchises
all municipal powers including, without limitation, all powers now existing and
which may be hereafter provided by the constitution and statutes. The right of
the town to construct, purchase or condemn any public utility, work or way, is
expressly reserved. Except as otherwise provided by constitution or this
charter, all powers concerning the granting, amending, revoking or otherwise
dealing in franchises shall be exercised by the council.
(1972 Charter)
Section 12.2 - Water Rights:
   The town shall have the power to buy, exchange, lease, own, and control
water rights.
(1972 Charter)
Section 12.3 - Utility Rates And Service Areas:
   The council shall by ordinance establish rates for services provided by
municipality-owned utilities. All newly-annexed territory shall be served by
municipal utilities within a reasonable period of time after annexation. If the
council desires to extend the municipal utilities beyond town boundaries, it
shall do so by ordinance.
(1972 Charter)
Section 12.4 - Granting Of Franchises:
   No franchise shall be granted that exceeds twenty (20) years.
(1972 Charter)
Section 12.5 - Franchise Review:
   Each franchise granted under the provisions of this charter shall include a
section specifying a periodic review of said franchise.
(1972 Charter)
Section 12.6 - Franchise Records:
   The council shall cause to be kept in the office of the town clerk an
indexed franchise record in which shall be transcribed copies of all franchises
heretofor and hereafter granted. The index shall give the name of the grantee
and any assignees. The record, a complete history of all such franchises, shall
include a comprehensive and convenient reference to all actions at law
affecting the same, and copies of all annual reports and such other matters of
information and public interest as the council may from time to time require.
(1972 Charter)
Section 12.7 - Existing Franchises:
   All franchise ordinances of the town in effect at the time that this charter
is adopted shall remain in full force and effect according to their provisions
and terms until the expiration date provided in such ordinance or until
modified by another franchise.
(1972 Charter)
ARTICLE XIII: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 13.1 - Reservation Of Power:
   The power to supersede any law of this state now or hereafter in force,
insofar as it applies to local or municipal affairs, shall be reserved to the
town, acting by ordinance, subject only to restrictions of article XX of the
state constitution and subsequent amendments to the charter and by ordinance.
(1972 Charter)
Section 13.2 - Liability Of The Town:
   Any person claiming to have suffered any injury by the town or by an
employee thereof while in the course of such employment shall file a written
notice as provided in this section within one hundred eighty (180) days after
the date of the discovery of the injury. Substantial compliance with notice
provisions of this section shall be a condition precedent to any action brought
against the town or any employee thereof in negligence or tort, and failure of
substantial compliance shall be a complete defense to any such action.
   (a)   The notice shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the claimant, and the name and address of
his/her attorney, if any;
      (2)   A concise statement of the basis of the claim, including the date,
time, place, and circumstances of the act, omission, or event complained of;
      (3)   The name and address of any public employee involved, if known;
      (4)   A concise statement of the nature of the event and the extent of
the injury claimed to have been suffered;
      (5)   A statement of the amount of monetary damages that is being
requested.
   (b)   The notice required by this section shall be presented to the town
council or the town attorney.
   (c)   If the claim is one for death by wrongful act or omission, a notice
may be presented by the personal representative, surviving spouse, or next of
kin of the deceased.
   (d)   Any action brought against the town of Vail in negligence or tort
shall be commenced within a time period provided by the Colorado Revised
Statutes relating to limitation of actions, or it shall be forever barred.
   (e)   This section shall not be construed as a waiver of any governmental
immunity the town may have now or in the future.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 13.3 - Sale Or Lease Of Property:
   Council may sell, exchange or dispose of public utilities, or permanent
public buildings or real or personal property with or without first obtaining
the approval of a majority of the registered electors voting thereon, as shall
be determined by the council. The council may lease, for such term as council
shall determine, any real or personal property to or from any person, firm or
corporation, public or private, governmental or otherwise.
(1972 Charter)
Section 13.4 - Bequests, Gifts, And Donations:
   Council, on behalf of the town, may receive or refuse bequests, gifts, and
donations of all kinds of property in fee simple or in lease hold, or in trust
for public, charitable, or other purposes, and do all things and acts necessary
to carry out the purpose of such gifts, bequests, and donations with power to
manage, sell, lease, or otherwise dispose of the same in accordance with the
terms of the gift, bequest, or trust.
(1972 Charter)
Section 13.5 - Emergency Powers:
   In case of riot, insurrection, or extraordinary emergency, the town manager
shall assume the authority to execute any action necessary for the protection
of life and property. Such authority may include but not be limited to
establishing regulations governing conduct and activities related to the cause
of the emergency, and if the emergency situation continues, the town manager
shall convene the council who may take such action as it deems necessary. In
the event it becomes necessary, the line of succession provided in
section 13.6 of this charter shall be followed.
(1972 Charter)
Section 13.6 - Continuity Of Government:
   The council shall have the power to provide for continuity of government of
the town of Vail in the event of natural or enemy caused disaster. Such power
shall be employed in a manner which will preserve representative government in
the town of Vail, and which will provide an orderly line of succession of
officers, notwithstanding the provisions of this charter. Such succession shall
commence with the town manager, the mayor and the mayor pro tem and shall then
revert to the councilmembers by order of seniority, then through an orderly
line of succession of the administrative department heads.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-6-2012)
Section 13.7 - Severability Of Charter Provisions:
   If any provision, section, article or clause of this charter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be found to be invalid
by a court, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or
application of the charter which can be given effect without the invalid
portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are
not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end, this charter is
declared to be severable.
(1972 Charter)
Section 13.8 - Charter Amendments:
   This charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by the
constitution. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the
submission to the people of more than one charter amendment at any one
election. If provisions of two or more proposed amendments adopted or approved
at the same election conflict, the amendment receiving the highest affirmative
vote shall become effective.
(1972 Charter)
Section 13.9 - Interpretations:
   Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the contents
hereof, all words used in this charter indicating the present tense shall not
be limited to the time of the adoption of this charter but shall extend to and
include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which
provision is made herein. The singular number shall include the plural, the
plural shall include the singular and the masculine gender shall extend to and
include the feminine gender and neuter, and the word “person” may extend and be
applied to bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships as well as to
individuals.
(1972 Charter)
Section 13.10 - Definitions:
   (a)   Appropriation. The authorized amount of monies set aside for
expenditures during a specified time for a specific purpose.
   (b)   Town. Town of Vail, Colorado, a municipal corporation.
   (c)   Council. The town council of the town of Vail, including the mayor,
unless provided otherwise.
   (d)   Manager. The town manager of the town of Vail appointed pursuant to
section 6.1 of this charter.
   (e)   Employee. A person employed by the town of Vail.
   (f)   Regular Municipal Election. A municipal election held every two (2)
years at which candidates for elective offices of the town are voted upon in
accordance with this charter.
   (g)   Public Utility. Any person, firm, or corporation operating heat,
power, or light systems, communications systems, water, sewer or scheduled
transportation systems, and serving or supplying the public under a franchise
granted by the town.
   (h)   Officer. Any person elected to office or appointed by council,
including appointees to boards and commissions.
   (i)   Constitution. The constitution of the state of Colorado.
   (j)   Statutes. The applicable laws of the state of Colorado as they now
exist or as they may be amended, changed, repealed, or otherwise modified by
legislative procedure.
   (k)   Elector. A person otherwise qualified to vote in the municipal
elections under applicable law whether registered or not.
   (l)   Registered Elector. A person who is qualified to vote under applicable
law and who is also registered to so vote in municipal elections.
   (m)   Permanent Board Or Commission. A board or commission intended by
council to be a part of the permanent governmental structure of the town of
Vail as established by ordinance.
(1972 Charter)
Section 13.11 - Designated Open Space:
   (a)   As used in this charter, designated open space shall mean any interest
in real property owned by the town of Vail which, whether acquired by purchase,
donation, condemnation, or any other means, has been dedicated by ordinance as
designated open space. Such designated open space shall not be alienated, sold,
leased, or subjected to a zoning designation change other than one of the open
space zone districts identified in this article, unless all terms and
provisions of this article have been met.
   (b)   Characteristics Of Designated Open Space. To qualify as designated
open space, the designated parcel must be owned by the town of Vail and zoned
natural area preservation, outdoor recreation, or agriculture open space and be
either:
      (1)   Environmentally sensitive lands (wetlands, riparian areas, critical
habitat identified by the division of wildlife, or the natural heritage
program);
      (2)   High natural hazard areas including the 100-year flood plain, red
avalanche hazard area, high rock fall hazard area, and high debris flow hazard
area; or
      (3)   Town of Vail parks that provide passive outdoor recreation
opportunities.
   (c)   Creation Of The Designated Open Space Board Of Trustees. There shall
be an open space board of trustees consisting of three members. The members of
the board shall be the town manager, one town of Vail councilmember and one
planning and environmental commissioner. The town councilmember and the
planning and environmental commissioner shall be designated by their respective
boards. The designated open space board shall not perform any administrative
functions unless expressly provided in this charter. The board shall:
      (1)   Make recommendations to the town council of appropriate parcels to
be designated as open space; and
      (2)   Make recommendations to the town council concerning removing
parcels from a designated open space status.
      The town council and/or the town manager shall not act on any of the
matters set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) without securing a recommendation
from the board as above provided. The board’s recommendation shall not be
binding upon the town council.
   (d)   Creation Of A Designated Open Space Parcel. Upon unanimous
recommendation from the open space board of trustees concerning a parcel of
land which meets the characteristics as set forth in this charter, the town
council shall consider an ordinance to include such parcel as designated open
space. Every ordinance designating open space shall require the affirmative
vote of three-fourths of the entire council for final passage.
      No designated open space may be sold, leased, traded, or otherwise
conveyed, nor may any exclusive license or permit on such designated open space
land be given, nor may any use or zone change other than one of the open space
zone districts identified in this section to such designated open space be
permitted, until such disposal as set forth in paragraph (e) below has been
approved.
   (e)   Disposal Of Designated Open Space. Town council may consider the sale,
lease, trade, alienation, partition, granting of an exclusive license or
permit, use or zone change other than one of the open space zone districts
identified in this section of designated open space only upon receiving a
unanimous recommendation of such action from the open space board of trustees.
      Once such recommendation is received, the town council shall consider an
ordinance referring such question of disposal of designated open space to the
registered electors at a town election for their acceptance or rejection. The
ordinance shall give the location of the land in question and the intended
disposal thereof. Every such ordinance shall require the affirmative vote of
three-fourths of the entire council for passage. The vote of the town on
proposed disposal of designated open space shall be held not less than thirty
days and not later than ninety days from the date of the final council vote
thereon. If no regular town election is to be held within the period prescribed
in this subsection, the council shall provide for a special election;
otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as such regular election,
except that the council may at its discretion provide for a special election at
an earlier date within the prescribed period. Copies of the proposed ordinance
to dispose of designated open space shall be made available to the public
within a reasonable time before the election and also at the polls at the time
of the election.
(1972 Charter; Charter amd. 11-21-1995)
ARTICLE XIV: TRANSITION PERIOD
Section 14.1 - Effective Date Of Charter:
   This charter shall become effective immediately upon voter approval except
that those provisions of
article IX of this charter relating to the preparation and submission of the
budget and capital program shall become effective for the 1973 annual budget,
and those provisions in
article III of this charter relating to the election of councilmembers shall
become effective at the first regular election scheduled under this charter to
be held in November, 1973.
(Charter amd. 11-6-2012: 1972 Charter)
Section 14.2 - Prior Town Legislation:
   All bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the town which
are not inconsistent with this charter and which are in force and effect at the
effective date of this charter shall continue in full force and effect until
repealed or amended. Those provisions of any effective bylaw, ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation which are inconsistent with this charter are
hereby repealed.
(1972 Charter)
Section 14.3 - Present Elected Officials To Continue In Office:
   The present town council and mayor in office at the time of the adoption of
this charter shall continue at their present salaries, to serve and carry out
the functions, powers and duties of their offices until their successors assume
the duties of their office.
(1972 Charter)
Section 14.4 - Continuation Of Present Boards And Commissions:
   All boards and commissions in existence at the time of adoption of this
charter shall continue to function under the provisions of this charter.
(1972 Charter)
Section 14.5 - Continuation Of Appointed Officers And Employees:
   Except as otherwise provided herein, after the effective date of this
charter, all appointive officers and all employees of the town shall continue
in that town office or employment, which corresponds to the town office or
employment, which they held prior to the effective date of this charter, as
though they had been appointed or employed in the manner provided in this
charter, and they shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this
charter, except that any officer or employee who holds a position which this
charter provides be held at the pleasure of the appointing officer or body,
shall hold such position only at such pleasure regardless of the term for which
originally appointed.
(1972 Charter)
Section 14.6 - Saving Clause:
   This charter shall not affect any suit pending in any court or any document
heretofor executed in connection therewith. Nothing in this charter shall
invalidate any existing contracts between the town of Vail and individuals,
corporations or public agencies.
(1972 Charter)
THE TOWN OF VAIL, COLORADO
CHARTER COMMISSION
CERTIFICATE OF FINAL ADOPTION
   We, the undersigned, present members of the Vail charter commission, duly
elected by the people of Vail, Colorado, at a special election held on April
18, 1972, under the authorization of article XX, the constitution of the state
of Colorado, to frame a home rule charter for the town of Vail, do hereby
certify that the foregoing is the proposed charter as finally approved and
adopted by the members of the commission on the thirty-first day of July, 1972,
for submission to the people of Vail at a special election to be held on
September 12, 1972.
   Done in triplicate at Vail, Colorado, this thirty-first day of July, 1972.
 
/s/ Albert G. White, Chairman  /s/ Thomas I. Steinberg, Vice-Chairman
/s/ Doris A. Bailey, Secretary /s/ John A. Dobson
/s/ John Donovan               /s/ Mervyn L. Lapin
/s/ James M. Stevin            /s/ Hans Weibel
/s/ Willis J. Wright
 
STAFF
Lawrence B. Robinson, Town Attorney
   Terrell J. Minger, Town Manager
      Sharon L. Hobart, Administrative Assistant
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1: OFFICIAL TOWN CODE
Section
1-1-1 Title; citation; reference
1-1-2 Codification authority
1-1-3 Reference applies to all amendments
1-1-4 Reference to specific ordinances
1-1-5 Effect of code on past actions and obligations
1-1-6 Liberal construction
1-1-7 Discretionary powers
1-1-8 Filing at town offices
1-1-9 Required acts performed by agents
1-1-10 Code alterations
§ 1-1-1 TITLE; CITATION; REFERENCE.
   This code shall be known as the VAIL TOWN CODE and it shall be sufficient to
refer to said code as the Vail town code in any prosecution for the violation
of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be
sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or
repealing all or any portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to,
correction or repeal of the Vail town code. Further reference may be had to the
titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Vail town code and such
references shall apply to that number, title, chapter, section or subsection as
it appears in the code.
(Ord. 12(1977) § 3)
§ 1-1-2 CODIFICATION AUTHORITY.
   This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of
the administrative ordinances of the Town of Vail, Colorado, codified pursuant
to the provisions of C.R.S. §§ 31-1-201 through 31-16-2-208, as amended.
(Ord. 12(1977) § 5)
§ 1-1-3 REFERENCE APPLIES TO ALL AMENDMENTS.
   Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Vail town code or to any
portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the Town of Vail, Colorado, the
reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions thereto, now
or hereafter made.
(Ord. 12(1977) § 6)
§ 1-1-4 REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES.
   The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record
which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein
specifically designated by number or otherwise which are included within the
code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding
provisions contained in the code.
(Ord. 12(1977) § 8)
§ 1-1-5 EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS.
   Neither the adoption of this code, nor the repeal or the amendment of this
code by any ordinances or part or portion of any ordinance of the town shall in
any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which
violations were committed prior to the effective date of this code, nor be
construed as a waiver of any license, fee, penalty, at said effective date, due
and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the
provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license,
fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof,
nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required
to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and
obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.
Further, the adoption of this section shall not affect or impair or be
applicable to:
   (A)   Any preceding suit, or legal action presently pending;
   (B)   Any special ordinance, resolution or motion heretofore passed, adopted
and made validating, ratifying or legalizing the acts or omissions of any
officer or validating any ordinance, act or proceeding whatever; and all
validating and legalizing acts of and by the Town Council whatsoever and now in
force are hereby continued in force;
   (C)   Any ordinance relating to the public debt or the public credit or any
annexation of territory;
   (D)   Any ordinance relating to a contract to which the town is a party or
to any contract made for its benefit;
   (E)   Any ordinance, resolution or motion making appropriation of public
funds;
   (F)   Any ordinance levying a special benefit assessment or creating a lien
and debt against any property situated within the town, and improved by the
opening, widening, extension or paving of any street or public thoroughfare
within the town and/or the installation of gutters, curbs, curbwalks or
sidewalks along said street or thoroughfare, and/or the installation,
construction of utilities or other similar type improvements;
   (G)   Any ordinance or resolution granting any franchise, license, right or
revocable permit to any person, which franchise, license, right or revocable
permit was legally in force and effect on the effective date of this chapter;
it being the express intent and purpose of the Town Council that every such
franchise, license right or revocable permit shall expire as originally
provided by the ordinance granting the same unless sooner terminated by the
Council acting under and pursuant to the ordinances and Charter of the town, or
the terms and conditions set forth in the ordinance or resolution making the
grant;
   (H)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money by the town or authorizing the issuance and sale of general obligation or
revenue bonds by the town;
   (I)   Any administrative ordinance or resolution of the town not in conflict
or inconsistent with the provisions of this code;
   (J)   Any ordinance providing for and making the annual tax levy in and for
the town, or ordinance adopting the budget for the town or making the annual
appropriation;
   (K)   Any ordinance or resolution establishing land use zoning districts in
the town, adopting a map of zoning districts, providing for adjustment,
enforcement and amendment thereof, or any ordinance approving a subdivision of
land within the town or annexation to the town;
   (L)   Any ordinance, resolution or motion naming, renaming, opening,
accepting or vacating streets, alleys or rights-of-way in the town; and
   (M)   Any ordinance relating to the sale or purchase of real property or
personal property or relating to the vacation or release of rights in real
property, or any ordinance providing for rights in real or personal property,
or any ordinance designating the purpose for which land is to be used, or any
ordinance relating to any other such similar matter.
(Ord. 12(1977) § 9)
§ 1-1-6 LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION.
   All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this code shall
be liberally construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote
justice.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 2(1-2-10))
§ 1-1-7 DISCRETIONARY POWERS.
   Whenever in this code or in any code adopted herein it is provided that
anything must be done to the approval or permission of, or subject to the
direction of, any administrative officer or employee of the town, this shall be
construed to give such officer or employee only the discretion of determining
whether the rules and standards established by this code or by any code adopted
herein have been complied with; and no such provision shall be construed as
giving any administrative officer or employee discretionary powers as to what
such regulations or standards shall be, or power to require conditions not
prescribed by this code or by any code adopted herein or to enforce the
provisions thereof in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 2(1-2-11))
§ 1-1-8 FILING AT TOWN OFFICES.
   Whenever this code requires filing with, payment to, or notification of any
certain town official or department, the requirement shall be satisfied by
filing, payment or notification at the regular office of such town official or
department during business hours on any business day.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 2(1-2-6))
§ 1-1-9 REQUIRED ACTS PERFORMED BY AGENTS.
   When an act is required by this code, and it may be done as well by an agent
as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed as to include all such
acts performed by an authorized agent.
(Ord. 2(1976) § 3(1-3-3))
§ 1-1-10 CODE ALTERATIONS.
   It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or
deface in any way any section or any part of this town code in such a manner
that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement
pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized
by the Town Council. The Town Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk.
Any person having custody of a copy of the town code shall make every effort to
maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered or made available to such person through the office of the Town
Clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession by officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the town and shall be
returned to the office of the Town Clerk when directed so to do by order of the
Town Council.
(1997 Code)
CHAPTER 2: SAVING CLAUSE
Section
1-2-1 Repeal of general ordinances
1-2-2 Public ways and public utility ordinances
1-2-3 Court proceedings
1-2-4 Severability clause
§ 1-2-1 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Repeal; exceptions. All general ordinances of the town passed prior to
the adoption of this town code are hereby repealed, except such as are included
in this town code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal
(subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the town; and all special ordinances.
   (B)   Repeal shall not revive any ordinance. The repeal of an ordinance
shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance
which has been repealed thereby.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 2(1-2-9); 1997 Code)
§ 1-2-2 PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public
ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities
shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this town code or by virtue of
the preceding section, excepting as the town code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case, this town code shall be considered as amending
such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
(1997 Code)
§ 1-2-3 COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Prior acts. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   (B)   Extend to all repeals. This section shall extend to all repeals,
either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance
making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (C)   Currently pending actions. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the town herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the town under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this town code.
(1997 Code)
§ 1-2-4 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this town code is
for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The Town Council
declares that it would have passed this code, any section, subsection,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared
invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared
invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be
in full force and effect.
(Ord. 12(1977) § 13)
CHAPTER 3: DEFINITIONS
Section
1-3-1 Construction of words
1-3-2 Definitions, general
1-3-3 Other definitions
1-3-4 Catchlines
§ 1-3-1 CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS.
   (A)   Singular/plural. Whenever any word in any section of this town code
importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters,
parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be
included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject
matter, party or person is referred to in this town code by words importing the
singular number only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or
persons and the opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be
included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to
any section of this town code which contains any express provision excluding
such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant
thereto. Unless the context requires otherwise, the use of either past,
present, or future tense shall include the other tenses.
   (B)   Construction. Words and phrases shall be construed and understood
according to the common and approved use of the language, except that technical
words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
construed and understood according to their technical import.
   (C)   Conjunctions. The words “or” and “and” may be read interchangeably in
situations where the context requires it.
   (D)   Substituting particular words. The word “ordinance” contained in the
ordinances of the town has been changed in the content of this town code to
“title”, “chapter”, “section” and/or “subsection” or words of like import for
organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the town’s
ordinances is not meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original
ordinances.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 2(1-2-4),(1-2-7); Ord. 29(1976) §2(1-2-1); 1997 Code)
§ 1-3-2 DEFINITIONS, GENERAL.
   Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto.
   AGENT. A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act shall be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is
a Sunday or legal holiday, such day shall be excluded.
   COUNCIL. Unless otherwise indicated, the Town Council of the Town of Vail.
   COUNTY. The County of Eagle, State of Colorado.
   EMPLOYEES. Whenever reference is made in this code to a town employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the
Town of Vail”.
   FEE. A sum of money charged by the town for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   FISCAL YEAR. The fiscal year of the town shall commence on January 1 and end
on December 31 of each year.
   GENDER. A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to all persons.
   LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   MAY. Is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   MUST/SHALL. Is mandatory.
   NUISANCE. Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or
any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the town, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who occupies the whole or any part of a building or
land, either alone or with others.
   OFFENSE. Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICERS. Whenever reference is made in this code to a town officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the Town of
Vail”.
   OPERATOR. The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OWNER. As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, corporation, firm, partnership,
association, organization or other group acting as a unit. It also includes any
executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed by
law. Whenever the word “person” is used in any section prescribing a penalty or
fine, it shall include the partners or members of any partnership or
corporation, and, as to corporations, the officers, agents or members thereof
who are responsible for the violation.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
   PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Includes tangible or intangible, real, personal or mixed property.
   PUBLIC WAY. Includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, bike path or other public thoroughfare.
   PUBLICATION, PUBLISH or PUBLISHED. For the purposes of the Town Charter and
this code, except where publication in a newspaper is specifically required by
the Charter, an ordinance or state statute, the term PUBLICATION, PUBLISH or
PUBLISHED shall mean posting on the Town of Vail website. If, for any reason,
publication on the town’s website cannot be accomplished PUBLICATION, PUBLISH
or PUBLISHED shall mean a minimum of one of the following two methods:
      (1)   Physical posting at the Town of Vail municipal building; or
      (2)   Publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of
Vail.
   RETAILER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the
consumer.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of Colorado.
   STREET. Includes any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, alley or other public thoroughfare. Each of these words includes the
others, and if the context permits, also includes “sidewalk”.
   TENANT. Any person who occupies the whole or any part of a building or land,
either alone or with others.
   TOWN. The Town of Vail, Colorado, or the area within the territorial limits
of the Town of Vail, Colorado, and such territory outside of the town over
which the town has jurisdiction by virtue of any constitutional or statutory
provision.
   TOWN CODE or CODE. Unless it shall be otherwise expressed, this town code of
Vail, Colorado.
   WHOLESALER and WHOLESALE DEALER. As used in this code, unless otherwise
specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the purpose of
resale.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING. May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person’s proper mark.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
(1997 Code; Ord. 20(1976) §§2(1-2-5), 3(1-3-1), 5; Ord. 30(2008) § 1)
§ 1-3-3 OTHER DEFINITIONS.
   Certain chapters of this code contain other definitions applicable
particularly to those chapters. In case of any conflict between the definitions
in §
1-3-2 of this chapter and the other definitions, the other definitions shall
prevail in the chapters where applicable.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 3(1-3-2))
§ 1-3-4 CATCHLINES.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted.
(1997 Code)
CHAPTER 4: GENERAL PENALTY
Section
1-4-1 General penalty
1-4-2 Application of provisions
1-4-3 Liability of officers
1-4-4 Restitution
1-4-5 Penalty for late filing of employee housing unit verification affidavits
1-4-6 Penalty assessment
§ 1-4-1 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation and punishment.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail
to comply with any of the requirements of this code. Unless otherwise
specifically provided, any person 18 years of age or older violating any
section of this code shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,650, or by
incarceration not to exceed 180 days or by both such fine and incarceration.
      (2)   Any person under 18 years of age convicted of violating any
provision of this code may be punished by a fine of not more than $2,650.
         (a)   Any person under the age of 18 years convicted of violating any
provision of the Model Traffic Code adopted by §
7-1-1 of this code may be punished by a fine of not more than $300 or by
incarceration not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and incarceration.
         (b)   Any such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day during any portion of which a violation of any provision of this
code is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punished
accordingly.
   (B)   Public nuisance. In addition to penalties provided in this section,
any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provisions of
this code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be by this town similarly
abated as such and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as
a new and separate offense.
(Ord. 34(1980) § 3; Ord. 31(1981) § 1; Ord. 17(1988) § 1; Ord. 12(1994) § 3;
Ord. 9(2009) § 1; Ord. 14(2013) § 1; Ord. 2(2014) § 1)
Statutory reference:
   General penalty, see C.R.S. § 31-16-101
§ 1-4-2 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Application of penalty. The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section.
   (B)   One judgment only. In all cases where the same offense is made
punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   (C)   Breach of provisions. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(1997 Code)
§ 1-4-3 LIABILITY OF OFFICERS.
   No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the Town Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty.
(1997 Code)
§ 1-4-4 RESTITUTION.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to provide for and collect full
restitution for victims of those municipal ordinance offenses that are under
the jurisdiction of the town’s municipal court in the most expeditious manner.
It is the intent of the Town Council that restitution be timely ordered,
collected and disbursed to victims, and this section shall be liberally
construed to accomplish such intent.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings.
      CONVICTION. A guilty verdict, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere that is
accepted by the municipal court, and a deferred judgment and sentence which has
not been successfully completed, for any violation of this code.
      PROXIMATELY CAUSED. A cause which in the natural and probable sequence
produced the claimed injury and without which the claimed injury would not have
been sustained.
      RESTITUTION. A pecuniary loss suffered by a victim and proximately caused
by a defendant’s conduct, including, without limitation: all out of pocket
expenses, interest, loss of use of money, anticipated future expenses, rewards
paid by victims, money advanced by law enforcement agencies, extraordinary
public and private investigative costs, money advanced by a governmental agency
for a service animal, adjustment expenses, overtime wages for peace officers or
other government employees, operating expenses for equipment such as protective
clothing, costs to remove, clean up or remediate a place used to manufacture or
attempt to manufacture a controlled substance or which contains a controlled
substance or which contains chemicals; costs to store, preserve or test
evidence of a controlled substance violation; and costs incurred to sell and
provide for the care of and provision for an animal disposed of under any
applicable animal cruelty law. RESTITUTION does not include damages for
physical or mental pain and suffering, loss of consortium, loss of enjoyment of
life, loss of future earnings or punitive damages.
      VICTIM. A person aggrieved by the conduct of an offender, including,
without limitation: a person against whom a violation of this code has been
perpetrated or attempted; a person harmed by an offender’s conduct in the
course of a scheme, conspiracy or pattern of criminal activity; a person,
including an insurer, who has suffered losses because of a contractual
relationship with a victim; a victim compensation board that has paid a victim
compensation claim; and if any victim is deceased or incapacitated, the
victim’s spouse, parent, legal guardian, natural or adopted child, child living
with the victim, sibling, grandparent, significant other or other lawful
representative. VICTIM shall not include a person who is accountable for the
crime or a crime arising from the same conduct, criminal episode or plan. Any
VICTIM under the age of 18 is considered incapacitated, unless that person is
legally emancipated or the court orders otherwise.
   (C)   Every order of conviction shall include one or more of the following:
      (1)   An order of a specific amount of restitution to be paid by the
defendant;
      (2)   An order that the defendant is obligated to pay restitution, but
that the specific amount of restitution shall be determined within 91 days
following the order of conviction, unless good cause is shown for extending
such time period; or
      (3)   A specific finding that no victim suffered a pecuniary loss and
therefore no order for restitution is being ordered.
   (D)   All restitution shall be paid to the town, which shall distribute the
restitution to the victim(s).
   (E)   The municipal court shall base its order for restitution on
information presented by the prosecuting attorney, who shall compile such
information through victim impact statements or other means to determine the
amount of restitution and the identities of the victims. The municipal court
may not order restitution without a hearing at which the prosecution must prove
the amount of the victim’s loss and its causal link to the defendant’s conduct
by a preponderance of the evidence, and at which the defendant may contest
those matters.
   (F)   An order for restitution may be increased if additional victims or
additional losses not known to the judge or the prosecuting attorney at the
time the restitution order was entered are later discovered and the final
amount of restitution due has not been set by the court; and decreased with the
consent of the prosecuting attorney and the victim(s) to whom the restitution
is owed or if the defendant has otherwise compensated the victim(s) for the
pecuniary losses suffered.
   (G)   If more than one defendant owes restitution to the same victim for the
same loss, the restitution order shall be a joint and several obligation of the
defendants.
   (H)   Any amount paid to a victim under an order of restitution shall be set
off against any amount later recovered as compensatory damages by such victim
in a civil proceeding.
   (I)   The municipal court shall order restitution concerning only the
portion of the victim’s pecuniary loss for which the victim cannot be
compensated under a policy of insurance, self-insurance, an indemnity agreement
or a risk management fund. The court, in determining the restitution amount,
shall consider whether the defendant or the vehicle driven by the defendant at
the time of the offense was covered by: a complying policy of insurance or
certificate of self-insurance as required by the laws of the state; self-
insurance; or any other insurance or indemnity agreement that would indemnify
the defendant for any damages sustained by the victim. The municipal court may
award a victim restitution for a deductible amount under a policy of insurance.
   (J)   A victim’s confidential medical and mental health records in the
possession of the prosecuting attorney shall not be provided to the defendant,
but may be provided to the judge for an in camera review. To obtain an in
camera review of such records, a defendant must show:
      (1)   That his or her request is not speculative; and
      (2)   That an in camera review is warranted, because such records may
disprove all or part of the prosecuting attorney’s restitution request on the
basis that the loss was not proximately caused by the defendant’s conduct, or
that such records are otherwise relevant to the allegations pending against the
defendant.
(Ord. 2(2014) § 2)
§ 1-4-5 PENALTY FOR LATE FILING OF EMPLOYEE HOUSING UNIT VERIFICATION
AFFIDAVITS.
   (A)   Any person who is required by §
12-13-3(A)(4) of this code of ordinances or any deed restriction applicable to
any real property in the town to file an annual verification affidavit, and who
fails to file such affidavit, along with all required supporting documentation,
by February 1 of any given year, shall be liable for an administrative penalty
of $250.
   (B)   Written notice of the administrative penalty shall be provided by
first-class United States mail to such person at such person’s last known
address. The administrative penalty shall be due and payable within 14 days of
the date of the notice.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to fail to timely pay the administrative
penalty imposed by this section. Violations of this section shall be subject to
the general penalty set forth in §
1-4-1 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 24(2021)) Penalty, see §
1-4-1
§ 1-4-6 PENALTY ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Applicability. A penalty assessment notice may be issued for any
offense under this Code. For traffic infractions, the provisions of Article 2A
of Chapter 7 of this Code shall apply in lieu of this Section.
   (B)   Notice.  The penalty assessment notice shall be indicated on the
summons and complaint and shall include the fine amount. If the alleged
offender issued a penalty assessment notice hereunder chooses to acknowledge
their guilt, they may pay the specified fine online, in person, or by mail at
the Municipal Court within the time specified in the notice. If they choose not
to acknowledge their guilt and pay the applicable fine, they shall appear as
required in the summons and complaint.
   (C)   Fine schedule.
      (1)   The following fines shall apply to penalty assessments other than
those specifically listed below:
         (a)   First offense: $100;
         (b)   Second offense: $500;
         (c)   Third offense: $1,000; and
         (d)   Fourth and all subsequent offenses: $2,500.
      (2)   For deceptive use of a ski facility, the fine shall be $500 for the
first offense, and for any subsequent offense, penalty assessment shall be
unavailable.
      (3)   For any bear-related violation, the fine shall be $1,000 for the
first offense, and for any subsequent offense, penalty assessment shall be
unavailable. For purposes of this subsection, “bear-related violation”
includes: non-approved bear resistant/proof garbage and recycling containers;
improper recycling; feeding wildlife; dawn to dusk residential violation;
multi-family housing-residential refuge disposal; garbage/recycling container
not secure; garbage/recycling container repair; and address missing from
garbage/recycling container.
(Ord. 21(2023) § 1)
CHAPTER 5: MAYOR AND TOWN COUNCIL
Section
1-5-1 Composition; election
1-5-2 Terms of office
1-5-3 Mayor
1-5-4 Mayor Pro Tem
1-5-5 Powers and duties of Council
1-5-6 Qualifications
1-5-7 Financial interest prohibited
1-5-8 Compensation
1-5-9 Vacancies
1-5-10 Oath of office
1-5-11 Regular and special Council meetings
§ 1-5-1 COMPOSITION; ELECTION.
   The legislative affairs of the town shall be vested in a Council consisting
of seven Council members, all of whom shall be nominated and elected at large
from the town.
(Charter(1972) § 3.1)
§ 1-5-2 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The terms of office for Council members shall be four years; provided,
however, that no Council member shall serve for more than eight consecutive
years. In the regular municipal election to be held in 1973, the three
candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected for four-year
terms and the four candidates receiving the fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh
highest number of votes shall serve for two-year terms. In the municipal
election to be held in 1975 and thereafter, the three candidates receiving the
highest number of votes shall be elected for four-year terms and the candidate
receiving the fourth highest number of votes shall be elected for a two-year
term. If a vacancy exists, those candidates receiving the fifth, sixth and
seventh highest number of votes, depending upon the number of vacancies to be
filled, shall be elected for two-year terms.
(Charter(1972) § 3.2)
§ 1-5-3 MAYOR.
   (A)   Elected from Council. The Mayor shall be elected from the duly elected
Council by a majority vote at its first organizational meeting to be held
within seven days from the election, and shall serve at the pleasure of the
Council for a two-year term.
   (B)   Mayoral powers and duties. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the
Council and shall exercise such powers and perform such other duties as are or
may be conferred and imposed upon the Mayor by the Charter or by ordinance or
other applicable law. The Mayor shall have all of the powers, rights and
privileges of a Council member including the right to vote; however, the
Mayor’s vote shall be registered after all other votes are cast. The Mayor
shall be recognized as the head of the town government for all ceremonial and
legal purposes and shall execute and authenticate legal instruments requiring
the Mayor’s signature as such official. In the event of a vacancy in the office
of Mayor, the Council shall choose his or her successor.
(Charter(1972) § 3.3)
§ 1-5-4 MAYOR PRO TEM.
   (A)   Elected from Council. The Mayor Pro Tem shall be elected by a majority
vote of the Council at the first organization meeting to be held within seven
days from the election and shall serve at the pleasure of the Council for a
two-year term.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities. In the absence or disability of the
Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform all duties and have all powers of the
Mayor. In the event of a vacancy in the office of Mayor Pro Tem, the Council
shall choose his or her successor.
(Charter(1972) § 3.4)
§ 1-5-5 POWERS AND DUTIES OF COUNCIL.
   The Council shall be the legislative and governing body of the town and
shall exercise, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all powers
conferred upon or possessed by the town and shall adopt such laws, ordinances,
and resolutions as it shall deem proper.
(Charter(1972) § 3.5)
§ 1-5-6 QUALIFICATIONS.
   Each Council member when nominated and elected shall be a citizen of the
United States; a registered elector of the Town of Vail; and shall have resided
in the town or any territory thereafter annexed for two years immediately
preceding such election. The Council shall be the judge of election and
qualifications of its own members.
(Charter(1972) § 3.6)
§ 1-5-7 FINANCIAL INTEREST PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Contracts; employee status prohibited. No member of the Council,
during the term of office, shall be a salaried employee of the town, nor shall
such member have any direct or indirect financial interest in any contract with
the town. A “contract” shall for the purposes of this section include any
arrangement or agreement pursuant to which any land, material, service or other
thing of value is to be furnished to the town for a valuable consideration to
be paid by the town or sold or transferred by the town.
   (B)   Stockholder in contracting firm prohibited. Ownership by a member of
the Council or member of his or her family of securities of a corporation or of
any beneficial interest in a partnership or firm with which a contract is made
shall not be deemed to create a financial interest in such contract unless the
aggregate amount of such securities in a corporation or interest in such
partnership or firm so owned by such Council member and the members of his or
her family shall amount to 10% of any class of the securities of such
corporation or 10% ownership in such partnership or firm.
   (C)   Exceptions. This prohibition shall not extend to, nor include, minor
incidental transactions as approved by the Council.
   (D)   Violation voids contract. Any violation of this section by persons
contracting with the town shall render the contract voidable by the Town
Manager or the Council or any citizen.
(Charter(1972) § 3.7)
§ 1-5-8 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Mayor. The Mayor shall receive compensation in the amount of $1,700
per month during the Mayor's term of office.
   (B)   Town Council. Each Town Council member shall receive compensation in
the amount of $1,200 per month during their term of office.
   (C)   Annual Increase. The monthly compensation for the Mayor and Town
Council members shall automatically increase on January 1st of each year
beginning January 1, 2025, in an amount equal to the percentage increase in the
Denver-Aurora-Lakewood Consumer Price Index ("CPI"). Should the CPI decrease in
any given year, the monthly compensation shall not decrease, but instead, shall
remain the same as the prior year.
   (D)   If the Town of Vail budget for any year does not include monies
allocated for employee compensation increases, the monthly compensation for
Mayor and Town Council will not increase, but instead remain the same as the
prior year.
(Ord. 30(2007) § 1; Ord. 14(2023) § 1)
§ 1-5-9 VACANCIES.
   A Council member shall continue to hold his or her office until his or her
successor is duly qualified. A Council seat shall become vacant whenever any
Council member is recalled, dies, becomes incapacitated, resigns, ceases to be
a resident of the town or is convicted of a felony. If a vacancy occurs with
365 or more days remaining in the unexpired term of the Council position
vacated, a special election shall be called to fill said term. If a vacancy
occurs with 364 days or less remaining in the full unexpired term of the
Council position vacated, the Council may choose to call an election or to
appoint an individual to fill said term. If three or more vacancies exist
simultaneously, the remaining Council members shall, at the next regular
meeting of the Council, call a special election to fill said terms, provided
there will not be a regular municipal election within 90 days and provided that
their successors have not previously been elected.
(Charter(1972) § 3.9)
§ 1-5-10 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, every Council member
shall take, subscribe before, and file with the Town Clerk an oath or
affirmation that he or she will support the Constitution of the United States,
and Constitution of the State of Colorado, the Charter and the ordinances of
this town and will faithfully perform the duties of the office.
(Charter(1972) § 3.10)
§ 1-5-11 REGULAR AND SPECIAL COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings.
      (1)    Time and place. The Council shall meet regularly at a day and hour
to be fixed by the rules of the Council.
      (2)   Deferment. In the event a regular meeting pursuant to subsection
(A)(1) of this section would fall on a legal holiday recognized by the town or
a regular meeting cannot for good reason be held by the Town Council on a
regular meeting date, the regular meeting shall automatically be held on the
next secular day at the same time and place; provided, however, that for good
cause the Council at a regular meeting preceding the regular meeting which will
be deferred may defer the regular meeting to a subsequent date not later than
one week after the deferred regular meeting date.
   (B)   Notice.
      (1)   This section constitutes notice of regular meetings to be held
pursuant to subsection (A) of this section and no other notice shall be
required.
      (2)   With respect to a special meeting which is called, in addition to
the requirements of §
4.2 of the Town Charter, the Town Council will endeavor to have a legal notice
of the meeting published once preceding the date of the meeting; provided,
however, that the publication shall not be required in the absence of adequate
time therefor or may be dispensed with for other good cause.
   (C)   Order of business.
      (1)   In regular and special meetings of the Town Council the order of
business shall be as follows:
         (a)   Call to order by the Mayor;
         (b)   Determination of quorum;
         (c)   Citizen participation;
         (d)   Consent agenda including minutes of preceding meetings;
         (e)   Consideration of ordinances, resolutions and motions;
         (f)   Consideration of other matters on the agenda;
         (g)   Reports from Town Manager and Town Attorney;
         (h)   Statements, observations and inquiries by the Mayor and Council
members;
         (i)   Concluding statement by the Mayor; and
         (j)   Adjournment.
      (2)   The Mayor has authority to vary the order of business when it is in
the public interest and to facilitate the orderly hearing of matters of great
public concern.
   (D)   Purpose of meetings. Regular and special meetings of the Town Council
held in accordance with §§
4.1  and
4.2  of the Town Charter, while open to the public and citizens of the town,
fundamentally are administrative hearings, the principal purposes of which are
to enable the Council to obtain information, consider, and determine
legislative and administrative matters.
   (E)   Formal rules of evidence not required. In administrative hearings the
Town Council shall not be required to observe any formal rules of evidence and
may consider any matter which a majority of the present Council members
concludes is reasonably reliable and calculated to aid the Council in reaching
a reasonable determination of the issues involved.
   (F)   Preservation of order. The Town Council in its public meetings shall
have the right to preserve order and to take such actions and follow such
procedures as are necessary or reasonable to enable it to conduct the meeting
and its business in a proper manner.
   (G)   Rules of procedure. Except as otherwise provided by applicable law or
the provisions of this section, Robert’s Rules of Order, as amended, shall
generally govern the public meetings of the Town Council.
(Ord. 1(1974) §§ 1–6; Ord. 15(1990) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 2(1998) § 1; Ord. 1
(2001)§ 1; Ord. 11(2023) § 1)
Charter reference:
   Similar provisions, see
Charter Article IV
CHAPTER 6: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
1-6-1 Employees’ Pension Fund
1-6-2 Policemen’s Pension Fund
§ 1-6-1 EMPLOYEES’ PENSION FUND.
   The town has adopted a trust agreement pursuant to the employees’ pension
plan in accordance with Ordinance 30 series of 1994, as amended.
(1997 Code)
§ 1-6-2 POLICEMEN’S PENSION FUND.
   The town has adopted a trust agreement pursuant to the police and fire
employees’ pension plan in accordance with Ordinance 29 series of 1994, as
amended.
(1997 Code)
ARTICLE 6A: TOWN MANAGER
Section
1-6A-1 Appointment; removal
1-6A-2 Acting Town Manager
1-6A-3 Powers and duties
1-6A-4 Relationship of Council to administrative service
§ 1-6A-1 APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL.
   (A)   Appointment. The Town Manager shall be the chief executive and
administrative officer of the town. As such, he or she shall possess, have and
exercise all the executive powers and administrative powers vested in the town.
The Council, by a majority vote, shall appoint a Town Manager within six months
whenever a vacancy exists in such position. Such appointment shall be without
definite term and shall be at a salary to be fixed from time to time by the
Council. The Manager shall be appointed without regard to any consideration
other than fitness, competency, training and experience in professional urban
administration. At the time of the appointment, the Manager need not be a
resident of the town or state. No member of the Council shall be appointed
Manager during the term for which such member shall have been elected, nor
within two years after the expiration of such member’s term of office.
   (B)   Removal from office. The Council, at a regular or special meeting,
may, upon the vote of the majority of the entire Council, remove the Town
Manager from office. Upon such termination, the Council may in its discretion
provide termination pay. If removed at any time after six months of service,
the Town Manager may demand written charges and a public hearing before the
Council and these shall be granted to the Manager prior to his or her final
removal. Pending such hearing, the Council may suspend the Manager from office.
(Charter(1972) § 6.1)
§ 1-6A-2 ACTING TOWN MANAGER.
   To perform the duties during the Manager’s temporary absence or disability,
the Town Manager shall designate by letter filed with the Town Clerk, a
qualified administrative town employee who shall serve as Acting Manager. In
the event of the failure of the Manager to make such a designation, the Council
may appoint a qualified town employee to perform the duties of the Manager.
Such Acting Town Manager shall, while in office, have all responsibilities,
duties, functions and authority of the Town Manager. No member of the Council
shall be appointed Acting Town Manager during the term for which such person
shall have been elected, nor within two years thereafter.
(Charter(1972) § 6.2)
§ 1-6A-3 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the proper
administration of all affairs of the town placed in the Manager’s charge, and
to that end shall have the power and duties and be required to:
   (A)   Be responsible for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances of the
town;
   (B)   Hire, suspend, transfer and remove town employees.
   (C)   Make appointments on the basis of executive and administrative ability
and of the training and experience of such appointees in the work which they
are to perform;
   (D)   Cause a proposed budget to be prepared annually and submit to the
Council and be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption;
   (E)   Prepare and submit to the Council as of the end of the fiscal year a
complete report on finances and administrative activities of the town for the
preceding year and, upon request of the Council, make written or verbal reports
at any time concerning the affairs of the town under such Manager’s
supervision;
   (F)   Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs
of the town and make such recommendations to the Council for adoption as such
Manager may deem necessary or expedient;
   (G)   Exercise supervision and control over all executive and administrative
departments, and recommend to the Council any proposal such Manager thinks
advisable to establish, consolidate or abolish administrative departments;
   (H)   Be responsible for the enforcement of all terms and conditions imposed
in favor of the town in any contract or public utility franchise, and upon
knowledge of any violation thereof, report the same to Council for such action
and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the same;
   (I)   Attend Council meetings and participate in discussions with the
Council in an advisory capacity;
   (J)   Establish a system of accounting and auditing for the town which shall
reflect, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, the
financial condition and financial operation of the town;
   (K)   Provide for engineering, architectural, maintenance, and construction
services required by the town;
   (L)   Serve in an ex officio capacity on all present and future boards,
committees and commissions of the town; and
   (M)   Perform other such duties as may be prescribed by the Charter, or by
ordinance or by other applicable law, or required of such Manager by Council,
which are not inconsistent with the Charter.
(Charter(1972) § 6.3)
§ 1-6A-4 RELATIONSHIP OF COUNCIL TO ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE.
   Neither the Council, its members, the Mayor, nor any Council committee shall
dictate the appointment of any person to office by the Town Manager except as
otherwise provided in the Charter or in any way interfere with the Town Manager
or other town officer to prevent such person from exercising judgment in the
appointment or employment of officers and employees in the administrative
service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members, the
Mayor, and any Council committee shall deal with the administrative service
solely through the Town Manager, and neither the Council, its members, the
Mayor, nor any Council committee thereof shall give orders to any of the
subordinates of the Town Manager.
(Charter(1972) § 6.4)
ARTICLE 6B: TOWN CLERK
Section
1-6B-1 Appointment; powers and duties
§ 1-6B-1 APPOINTMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Town Manager shall appoint a Town Clerk, who shall be custodian of the
town seal and who shall keep a journal of Council proceedings and record in
full all ordinances, motions and resolutions. The Clerk shall have power to
administer oaths and take acknowledgments under seal of the town, and shall
perform such other duties as required by the Charter, the Council or the
Manager.
(Charter(1972) § 6.5)
ARTICLE 6C: TOWN ATTORNEY
Section
1-6C-1 Appointment; duties; compensation
§ 1-6C-1 APPOINTMENT; DUTIES; COMPENSATION.
   The Council shall appoint a Town Attorney to serve at the pleasure of
Council. The Town Attorney shall be an attorney-at-law admitted to practice in
Colorado. The Town Attorney shall be the legal representative of the town and
shall advise the Council and town officials in matters relating to their
official power and duties and perform such other duties as Council may
prescribe by ordinance or resolution. The Council may provide the Town Attorney
such assistants as Council may deem necessary, and may upon its own motion or
upon request of the Town Attorney in special cases employ special counsel to
serve under the direction of the Town Attorney. Council shall establish
compensation for the Town Attorney, his or her assistants and special counsel.
(Charter(1972) § 7.1)
CHAPTER 7: ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
Section
1-7-1 Departments enumerated
1-7-2 Directors’ duties
1-7-3 Functions and direction
§ 1-7-1 DEPARTMENTS ENUMERATED.
   The administrative departments of the town shall be as follows:
   (A)   Community Development;
   (B)   Public Works;
   (C)   Administrative Services;
   (D)   Fire;
   (E)   Library;
   (F)   Police;
   (G)   Human Resources; and
   (H)   Finance.
(1997 Code; Ord. 6(1985) § 1)
§ 1-7-2 DIRECTORS’ DUTIES.
   Each department shall be under the direction of a director whose functions
and duties shall be in accordance with the provisions of the statutes of the
state, the Town Charter, the ordinances of the town, and the procedures
established by the Town Manager. Any reference in this code to a department
director shall include his or her designee.
(1997 Code; Ord. 6(1985) § 1)
§ 1-7-3 FUNCTIONS AND DIRECTION.
   The Town Manager shall determine and direct the operation and function of
each administrative department, including the employment of the heads of the
departments.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 9(2-8-2))
CHAPTER 8: ELECTIONS
Section
1-8-1 Regulations
1-8-2 Applicability
1-8-3 Write in candidates
§ 1-8-1 REGULATIONS.
   Special elections shall be held on any Tuesday designated by the Town
Council except within the 30 days preceding a regular election. No special
election shall be called within 30 days before the date thereof. Special
elections shall be conducted as nearly as practicable in the same manner as
regular elections.
(1997 Code; Ord. 10(1973) § 1)
§ 1-8-2 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter is adopted in accordance with the provisions of the Home Rule
Charter for the town; and any provisions of the Colorado Municipal Election
Code inconsistent or incompatible with the provisions of §
1-8-1 of this chapter shall be deemed inapplicable to any special elections
conducted within the town and are repealed or modified as they may apply to
elections conducted within the town pursuant to the Home Rule Charter.
(Ord. 10(1973) § 2)
§ 1-8-3 WRITE IN CANDIDATES.
   In any noncoordinated polling place election conducted under the Colorado
Municipal Election Code, C.R.S. §§ 31-10-101 et seq., no write in vote for any
town office shall be counted unless an affidavit of intent has been filed with
the Town Clerk at least 21 days before the date of the election by the person
whose name is to be written in. The affidavit shall be on a form provided by
the Town Clerk, and shall state that such person desires the office and is
qualified to assume the duties of the office if elected.
(Ord. 11(2015) § 2)
CHAPTER 9: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
1-9-1 Established
1-9-2 Statute conformance
1-9-3 Town rules
1-9-4 Jurisdiction, powers and procedures
1-9-5 Sessions
1-9-6 Municipal Judge
1-9-7 Clerk of the Municipal Court
1-9-8 Court costs
1-9-9 Exception to jurisdiction
1-9-10 Sealing and expungement of records
§ 1-9-1 ESTABLISHED.
   The Municipal Court in and for the town created by Article VII, §
7.2 of the Town Charter is established as a qualified Municipal Court of
Record. The Court shall keep a verbatim record of the proceedings and evidence
at trials by either electrical devices or stenographic means, and shall require
as a qualification for the office of Judge of the Municipal Court that such
person has been admitted to and is currently licensed in the practice of law in
Colorado.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 7(2-7-1)(a); Ord. 1(1980) § 1)
§ 1-9-2 STATUTE CONFORMANCE.
   The operation of the Municipal Court shall be governed by C.R.S. Title 13,
Article 10, as amended, which is incorporated by reference herein and made a
part hereof, excluding any provision or portion thereof in said statute which
is inconsistent with any applicable provisions of the Charter, this code or any
ordinance of the town.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 7(2-7-1)(b))
§ 1-9-3 TOWN RULES.
   The operation of the Municipal Court shall be implemented by the Town
Council through its adoption of resolutions.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 7(2-7-1)(c))
§ 1-9-4 JURISDICTION, POWERS AND PROCEDURES.
   The Municipal Court shall have original jurisdiction of all cases arising
under this code and other ordinances of the town with full power to punish
violators thereof by the imposition of such fines and penalties as are
prescribed by ordinance or court rule. The procedures of the court shall be in
accordance with the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure as promulgated by the
Colorado Supreme Court.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 7(2-7-2))
§ 1-9-5 SESSIONS.
   (A)   There shall be regular sessions of the court for the trial of cases,
provided that the Municipal Judge may hold a special session of court at any
time.
   (B)   All sessions shall be open to the public, except where the nature of
the case is such that it would be in the best interest of justice to exclude
persons not directly connected with the proceeding, the Municipal Judge may
order that the courtroom be cleared.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 7(2-7-3))
§ 1-9-6 MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
   (A)   Appointment; term. The Court shall be presided over by a Municipal
Judge appointed for a term of two years by resolution of the Town Council.
Additional Judges may be appointed as may be needed to transact the business of
the court.
   (B)   Compensation. The compensation of the Judge shall be an annual salary
in an amount set by the Town Council and shall be payable as other salaries to
municipal employees.
   (C)   Oath. Before entering upon the duties of such office, a Municipal
Judge shall take an oath or affirmation that he or she will support the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Colorado
and the Charter and the laws of the town and faithfully perform the duties of
such office.
   (D)   Rule adoption authority. In addition to other powers, a Municipal
Judge shall have full power and authority to make and adopt rules and
regulations for conducting the business of the Municipal Court, consistent with
the Municipal Court rules of procedure promulgated by the Colorado Supreme
Court.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 7(2-7-4)(a - d))
§ 1-9-7 CLERK OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT.
   (A)   Appointment; duties. There is created the position of Clerk of the
Municipal Court. The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall be appointed by the
presiding Municipal Judge and shall have such duties as are delegated to him or
her by law, court rule or the presiding Municipal Judge.
   (B)   Salary. The Town Manager shall determine the salary of the Clerk of
the Municipal Court.
   (C)   Financial reports. All fines, costs and other funds collected or
received by the Municipal Court shall be reported and paid monthly by the Clerk
to the Finance Director of the town in accordance with such person’s
directions, the monthly report and funds to be submitted on or about the last
day of each month.
   (D)   Bond. The performance bond to be given by the Clerk of the Municipal
Court to the town pursuant to C.R.S. § 13-10-109, as amended, shall be
satisfied by the bond applicable to employees of the town, provided that the
Clerk is within the purview of said bond.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 7(2-7-5)(a - d))
§ 1-9-8 COURT COSTS.
   (A)   Plea entered at or subsequent to arraignment. The Judge shall assess
court costs in the amount of $25, which shall be assessed against all
defendants upon entry of a conviction at or subsequent to arraignment, but the
Judge may suspend the cost in the interest of justice. No cost shall be
assessed when conviction is by a plea of guilty entered by mail pursuant to the
penalty assessment procedures set forth in this code.
   (B)   Cost of witnesses. The Judge shall assess against a convicted
defendant for all witnesses subpoenaed and appearing at the trial and all
witness fees which are required to be paid by the court.
   (C)   Additional costs. The Judge may assess against a convicted defendant
any other costs similar to those authorized by state law.
   (D)   Jury trial. Costs for persons convicted after trial by a jury are $50
instead of the $25 described by subsection (A) of this section.
   (E)   Use of collection agencies. To collect past due fines, penalties,
costs, fees, surcharges and restitution, the town may assign such accounts to
any private collection agency, which agency shall be entitled to recover costs
of collection in addition to the amount due. All fees or costs of a collection
agency shall be added to the amount due, but such fees and costs shall not
exceed 25% of the amount due to be collected.
   (F)   Record sealing fee. The Municipal Court shall assess costs of $65 upon
a defendant’s request to seal his or her criminal justice record for violations
other than convictions. Such costs shall be in addition to any fines or
penalties.
(Ord. 30(2016) § 1; Ord. 2(2018) § 1; Ord. 23(2017) § 1)
§ 1-9-9 EXCEPTION TO JURISDICTION.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
1-9-4 of this chapter or §
7.2 of the Town Charter, the Municipal Court shall not have jurisdiction over
any civil action brought against the town, including any claim brought pursuant
to Rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure.
(Ord. 23(2004) § 1)
§ 1-9-10 SEALING AND EXPUNGEMENT OF RECORDS.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the following meanings.
      BASIC IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION. The name, place and date of birth,
last-known address, Social Security number, occupation and address of
employment, physical description, photograph, handwritten signature, sex,
fingerprints and any known aliases of any person.
      JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.
      PERSON IN INTEREST. The person who is the primary subject of a criminal
justice record or any representative designated by said person by power of
attorney or notarized authorization; except that, if the subject of the record
is under legal disability, PERSON IN INTEREST means and includes his or her
parents or duly appointed legal representative.
   (B)   Sealing of records other than convictions.
      (1)   A person in interest may petition the Municipal Court for the
sealing of all criminal records of a defendant, except basic identification
information, in the following circumstances:
         (a)   Upon the complete dismissal of a case against the defendant;
         (b)   Upon acquittal of the defendant on all counts in a case;
         (c)   Upon completion of all terms of a diversion agreement by the
defendant; or
         (d)   Upon completion of a deferred judgment and sentence where all
counts are dismissed.
      (2)   Notwithstanding subsection (B)(1) of this section, a person in
interest may not obtain a sealing order if:
         (a)   The defendant owes restitution, fines, court costs, late fees or
other fees in the case that is the subject of the petition to seal criminal
records, unless the Municipal Court vacated the order for restitution, fines,
court costs, late fees or other fees;
         (b)   An offense is not charged due to a plea agreement in a separate
case;
         (c)   A dismissal occurs as part of a plea agreement in a separate
case in which a judgment of conviction has been entered; or
         (d)   The only charges against the defendant involved a Class 1 or
Class 2 misdemeanor traffic offense or a Class A or Class B traffic infraction.
   (C)   Minors in possession of alcohol or marijuana.
      (1)   Automatic sealing. The Municipal Court shall immediately issue a
sealing order in a case in which a defendant under the age of 21 is charged
with illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol or marijuana in the
following circumstances:
         (a)   Upon the complete dismissal of a case against the defendant;
         (b)   Upon completion of a deferred judgment or diversion or any other
action resulting in dismissal of the case against defendant; or
         (c)   Upon completion of any court-ordered substance abuse education
and payment of any fine for a first time conviction.
      (2)   Sealing upon petition. The defendant may petition the Municipal
Court for an order sealing criminal records upon expiration of one year from
the date of a second or subsequent conviction for illegal possession or
consumption of ethyl alcohol or marijuana. The Municipal Court shall grant the
petition if the defendant has not been arrested for, charged with or convicted
of any felony, misdemeanor, or petty offense during the period of one year
following the date of the defendant’s conviction.
   (D)   Expungement of juvenile records.
      (1)   The Municipal Court shall automatically expunge the record of a
juvenile charged with a violation of this code, within 42 days of the
occurrence of the following:
         (a)   Upon a finding of not guilty at an adjudicatory trial;
         (b)   Upon the complete dismissal of a case; or
         (c)   Upon completion of a sentence.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (D)(1) of this
section, the Municipal Court shall not expunge the record of a juvenile if the
juvenile has any felony, misdemeanor, petty offense or delinquency actions
pending. In such case, the Municipal Court shall stay the petition for
expungement proceedings until resolution of any pending cases.
      (3)   The Municipal Court may not expunge the records of a person
charged, adjudicated or convicted of any offense or infraction pursuant to the
Vehicles and Traffic Law, C.R.S. Title 42.
      (4)   The Municipal Court shall notify the Prosecuting Attorney that all
records in a case charging a juvenile with a municipal violation will be
expunged 42 days after completion of the sentence. The prosecuting attorney may
object within the 42-day period and, in such case, the Municipal Court will
schedule a hearing on the expungement with notice sent to the juvenile’s last
known address. The juvenile is not required to appear at the hearing. The
Municipal Court shall expunge the juvenile’s records upon written findings that
the juvenile successfully completed the sentence or that the case is closed.
(Ord. 2(2018) § 2)
TITLE 2: REVENUE AND FINANCE
CHAPTER 1: TAX LEVIES; CORPORATE FUNDS
Section
2-1-1 Rate of tax levy
2-1-2 Debt Service Fund
2-1-3 Conservation Trust Fund
§ 2-1-1 RATE OF TAX LEVY.
   The Town Council shall by ordinance fix the rate of tax to be levied upon
all the taxable property within the town for municipal purposes and, through
the Town Clerk, shall officially certify the levy to the County Commissioners
as may be required by law.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 5)
§ 2-1-2 DEBT SERVICE FUND.
   (A)   Established. There is hereby established a Debt Service Fund to be
used for the payment of the town’s bonded debt service. At the time that the
town’s annual budget is adopted, the Town Council may designate that certain
funds be set aside in the Debt Service Fund for use as hereinafter specified.
   (B)   Restricted use of Fund.
      (1)   The funds in the Debt Service Fund may be used to pay debt service
payments on the town’s bonded indebtedness. The Town Council, by resolution,
adopted by an affirmative vote of five members of the Council, may, when it
deems proper, authorize the expenditure of funds from the Debt Service Fund for
the payment of the town’s bonded indebtedness.
      (2)   The Town Council may authorize the use of the funds in the Debt
Service Fund for any other appropriate public purpose of the town upon the
adoption of a resolution of the Town Council by an affirmative vote of no less
than seven members of the Council.
   (C)   Budget status report. At the time the annual budget is submitted to
the Town Council for its review, there shall be included in the budget a report
of the status of the Debt Service Fund.
   (D)   Interest. At such time as the Town Council adopts the town’s annual
budget, any interest that may be earned on the Debt Service Fund may be
appropriated to any public purpose other than debt service.
(Ord. 47(1978) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 2-1-3 CONSERVATION TRUST FUND.
   (A)   Title. This section shall be known as the section creating a
Conservation Trust Fund.
   (B)   Created. Pursuant to C.R.S. Article 21, Title 29, there is created the
Conservation Trust Fund of the town.
   (C)   Deposit of funds. All funds received by the town from the State
Conservation Trust Fund shall be forthwith deposited in the Conservation Trust
Fund of the town; and the Town Council shall by the adoption of a resolution
authorize the expenditure of the deposited funds in accordance with the
applicable provisions of C.R.S. § 29-21-101.
   (D)   Certification to state. The Town Manager is authorized and directed to
forthwith prepare, execute and deliver the necessary instruments certifying to
the Department of Revenue of the state that the town has created the
Conservation Trust Fund.
(Ord. 11(1994) §§ 1–4; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 2: INVESTMENT POLICY
Section
2-2-1 Statement of purpose
2-2-2 Scope
2-2-3 Objective
2-2-4 Standards of care
2-2-5 Safekeeping and custody
2-2-6 Suitable and authorized investments
2-2-7 Investment parameters
2-2-8 Reporting
2-2-9 Policy
§ 2-2-1 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this investment policy is to establish the investment scope,
objectives, delegation of authority, standards of prudence, reporting
requirements, internal controls, eligible investments and transactions,
diversification requirements, risk tolerance, and safekeeping and custodial
procedures for the investment of the funds of the Town of Vail, Colorado
(hereby referred to as the “town”). The investment policy of the Vail Town
Council for the town of Vail represents the financial boundaries within which
its cash management process will operate.
(Ord. 24(2016) § 1)
§ 2-2-2 SCOPE.
   The investment policy applies to all financial funds of the town, except the
Pension Trust Fund.
(Ord. 24(2016) § 2)
§ 2-2-3 OBJECTIVE.
   The primary objectives, in priority of order, of investment activities shall
be:
   (A)   Safety. Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the
investment program. Investments shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to
ensure the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. The objective will
be to mitigate credit risk and interest rate risk.
      (1)   Credit risk. Credit risk is the risk of loss due to the failure of
the security issuer or backer. Credit risk may be mitigated by restricting the
types of securities which may be purchased, their credit ratings, and through
diversification to reduce exposure to any one security type or issuer.
      (2)   Interest rate risk. Interest rate risk is the risk that the market
value of securities in the portfolio will fall due to changes in general
interest rates. Interest rate risk may be mitigated by holding most investments
to their maturity date, by limiting the types and maturities of permitted
securities and, when feasible, by selecting maturities of investments to
coincide with large cash outflows.
   (B)   Liquidity. The investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently liquid
to meet all operating requirements that may be reasonably anticipated. This is
accomplished by structuring the portfolio so that securities mature concurrent
with cash needs to meet anticipated demands (static liquidity). Furthermore,
since all possible cash demands cannot be anticipated, the portfolio should
consist largely of securities with active secondary or resale markets (dynamic
liquidity).
   (C)   Yield. After the objectives of safety and liquidity are met, the
investment portfolio shall be managed with the objective of attaining a market
rate of return throughout interest rate cycles.
      (1)   The core of investments are limited to relatively low risk
securities in anticipation of earning a fair return relative to the risk being
assumed.
      (2)   Speculative investments will not be allowed. Speculative
investments are those attempting to gain market premium appreciation through
short term market volatility resulting in increased risk and loss exposure. The
town will not purchase a security which cannot be held to maturity. This does
not mean an investment cannot be sold prior to maturity.
(Ord. 24(2016) § 3)
§ 2-2-4 STANDARDS OF CARE.
   (A)   Prudence.
      (1)   The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall
be the “prudent person” standard and shall be applied in the context of
managing an overall portfolio. Investment officers acting in accordance with
written procedures and this investment policy and exercising due diligence
shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security’s
credit risk or market price changes, provided deviations from expectations are
reported in a timely fashion and the liquidity and the sale of securities are
carried out in accordance with the terms of this policy.
      (2)   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for
speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their
capital as well as the probable income to be derived.
   (B)   Ethics and conflicts of interest. Officers and employees involved in
the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that could
conflict with the proper execution and management of the investment program, or
that could impair their ability to make impartial decisions. Employees and
investment officials shall disclose any material interest in financial
institutions with which they conduct business. They shall further disclose any
personal financial/investment positions that could be related to the
performance of the investment portfolio. Employees and officers shall refrain
from undertaking personal investments transactions with the same individual
with whom business is conducted on behalf of their entity.
   (C)   Delegation of authority.
      (1)   Management responsibility for the investment program is held by the
Town Manager and appointed designees. No employee may engage in an investment
transaction except as provided under the terms of this policy and any
procedures which may be established by the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall
review the quarterly investment report (see §
2-2-8 of this chapter).
      (2)   There is hereby created an Investment Committee, consisting of the
Town Manager, Finance Director and the Finance Controller or such comparable
positions as may exist from time to time. Members of the Committee will meet at
least quarterly to determine general strategies and to monitor results. Minutes
of the decisions made by the Investment Committee shall be kept on file in the
Town Clerk’s office. The Committee shall include in its review and
deliberations such topics as: potential risks; authorized depositories; rate of
return; maturity structure; and investment transactions.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director or his or her
appointed designee to manage the day to day operations of the portfolio, and
place actual purchase/sell orders with institutions. In the absence of the
Finance Director, an appointed designee shall assume these duties. The Finance
Director or his or her appointed designee shall maintain internal procedures
for investing which provide appropriate investment and accounting controls and
which shall be available for review annually by the independent auditor.
      (4)   Management of a portion of the portfolio and placing of buy/sell
orders for a portion of the portfolio may be delegated to an independent
investment manager designated by the Town Council. The transactions of any
selected independent investment manager will be subject to the town’s
investment policy and will be reviewed and verified by the Finance Department.
      (5)   The authority for the investment philosophy and selection of
investment managers for the Town of Vail employee pension plan and the Town of
Vail police and fire employees pension plan shall be the responsibility of the
“pension plan trustee” as defined in the pension plan document.
(Ord. 3(1997) § 1; Ord. 24(2016) § 4)
§ 2-2-5 SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.
   (A)   Authorized financial dealer and institution.
      (1)   Qualified banks can only be commercial banks and the town’s
investment with the bank may be in excess of $250,000 or whatever amount is
currently insured by the FDIC. The town’s Finance Director or his or her
appointed designee shall obtain and review whatever documents are necessary to
verify the bank’s continued stability including the monthly listing of
securities pledged for collateralization to monitor the bank’s
collateralization of town deposits.
      (2)   Nonqualified banks can be either commercial banks or savings and
loans or savings banks and the town’s investment with the bank will not be in
excess of $250,000 or whatever amount is currently insured by the FDIC. The
Finance Director or his or her appointed designee shall inquire with bank
officials and/or review an independent bank evaluation to determine the bank
meets the standard selection criteria established by the Investment Committee.
      (3)   The town has selected a primary bank, which bank the town uses to
process daily deposits and checks. It is the responsibility of the Investment
Committee to determine that the bank continues to meet the Committee’s standard
selection criteria. At the discretion of the Investment Committee, whether the
bank continues to meet the criteria or not, a new bank may be selected as the
primary bank. A formal request for proposal should be used in the selection
process.
      (4)   The town shall maintain a list of banks and securities dealers
approved for securities transactions initiated by the town, and it shall be the
policy of the town to purchase securities only from those authorized firms.
Securities dealers not affiliated with a bank shall be required to be
classified as reporting dealers affiliated with the New York Federal Reserve
Bank, as primary dealers. Broker/dealers which are not primary dealers may be
used if they have been approved by the Investment Committee. The Investment
Committee shall develop and document the methodology for qualifying nonprimary
broker/dealers.
   (B)   Internal controls.
      (1)   The Finance Director is responsible for establishing and
maintaining an internal control structure designed to ensure that the assets of
the entity are protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control
structure shall be designed to provide reasonable assurance that these
objectives are met. The concept of reasonable assurance recognizes that:
         (a)   The cost of a control should not exceed the benefits likely to
be derived; and
         (b)   The valuation of costs and benefits requires estimates and
judgments by management.
      (2)   Accordingly, the Finance Director shall establish a process for
annual independent review by an external auditor to assure compliance with
policies and procedures. The internal controls shall address the following
points.
         (a)   Control of collusion. Collusion is a situation where two or more
employees are working in conjunction to defraud their employer.
         (b)   Separation of transaction authority from accounting and
recordkeeping. By separating the person who authorizes or performs the
transaction from the people who record or otherwise account for the
transaction, a separation of duties is achieved.
         (c)   Custodial safekeeping. Securities purchased from any bank or
dealer shall be placed with an independent third party designated as primary
agent for custodial safekeeping. The primary agent shall issue a safekeeping
receipt to the town listing the specific instrument, rate, maturity and other
information. Securities may be purchased from the primary agent’s brokerage
department and kept safe by the same bank’s trust department.
         (d)   Avoidance of physical delivery securities. Book entry securities
are much easier to transfer and account for since actual delivery of a document
never takes place. Delivered securities must be properly safeguarded against
loss or destruction. The potential for fraud and loss increases with physically
delivered securities.
         (e)   Clear designation of authority to subordinate staff members.
Subordinate staff members must have a clear understanding of their authority
and responsibilities to avoid improper actions. Clear delegation of authority
also preserves the internal control structure that is contingent on the various
staff positions and their respective responsibilities.
         (f)   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments
and wire transfers. Due to the potential for error and improprieties arising
from telephone transactions, all telephone transactions should be supported by
written communications and approved by the appropriate person. Written
communications may be via e-mail or fax if on letterhead and the safekeeping
institution has a list of authorized signatures.
   (C)   Delivery versus payment. All trades where applicable will be executed
by delivery versus payment (DVP). This ensures that securities are deposited in
the eligible financial institution prior to release of funds. Securities will
be held by a third party custodian as evidenced by safekeeping receipts.
(Ord. 3(1997) § 1; Ord. 24(2016) §§ 5, 6)
§ 2-2-6 SUITABLE AND AUTHORIZED INVESTMENTS.
   (A)   Types of accounts or securities. The town shall invest in the
following accounts, or securities:
      (1)   (a)   Fully collateralized or insured interest bearing checking
accounts, savings accounts and certificates of deposit at commercial banks with
amount not to exceed $250,000 or the current FDIC limit if the bank is not
designated as a qualified institution by the Investment Committee; and
         (b)   A commercial bank may use any securities authorized by the
public deposit protection act as collateral.
      (2)   (a)   Certificates of deposit at savings and loan associations
insured by the FDIC or other agency of the federal government with amount not
to exceed $250,000 or the current FDIC limit; and
         (b)   Deposits with savings banks insured by the FDIC with amount not
to exceed $250,000 or the current FDIC limit.
      (3)   (a)   Any security issued by, guaranteed by, or for which the
credit of any of the following is pledged for payment: the United States, a
Federal Farm Credit Bank, the Federal Land Bank, a Federal Home Loan Bank, the
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, the Federal National Mortgage
Association, or the Government National Mortgage Association;
         (b)   Any security issued by, guaranteed by, or for which the credit
of the following is pledged for payment: an entity or organization which is not
listed in subsection (A)(3)(a) of this section but which is created by, or the
creation of which is authorized by, legislation enacted by the United States
Congress and which is subject to control by the federal government which is at
least as extensive as that which governs an entity or organization listed in
subsection (A)(3)(a) of this section. No security may be purchased pursuant to
this subsection (A)(3)(b)2. unless, at the time of purchase, the security is
rated in its highest rating category by one or more nationally recognized
organizations which regularly rate such obligations.
      (4)   Colorado investment pools: the town may participate in a Colorado
public investment pool, the Colorado Local Government Liquid Asset Trust or
other similar local government pools organized in conformity with C.R.S. Title
24, Article 75, Part 7, which provides specific authority for pooling of local
government funds;
      (5)   Any money market fund that is registered as an investment company
under the Federal Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, if, at the time
the investing public entity invests in such fund:
         (a)   The investment policies of the fund include seeking to maintain
a constant share price; and
         (b)   No sales or load fee is added to the purchase price or deducted
from the redemption price of the investments in the fund.
      (6)   No load mutual funds that invest in mortgage backed securities
issued by the Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA) or the Federal
National Mortgage Association (FNMA), or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation (FHLMC); and
      (7)   Taxable municipal securities: taxable obligations of political and
governmental subdivisions may be purchased. The issue must be rated at least
“AA” by a nationally recognized security rating organization.
   (B)   Criteria for choice.
      (1)   If a specific maturity date is required for cash flow purposes,
bids will be requested for instruments which meet the maturity requirement. If
no specific maturity is required, a market trend (yield curve) analysis will be
conducted to determine which maturities would be most advantageous. After
selecting a type of instrument at least two bids should be obtained from
similar institutions. Two bids are not required if treasury bills or notes are
purchased at a treasury auction or for overnight or open term repurchase
transactions.
      (2)   The town may place an investment with a local institution that is
not the highest bidder, provided the bid is not more than 25 basis points below
the highest bidder.
      (3)   The rate of interest must be at least equivalent to the average
rate of return available in the market place.
      (4)   It is the responsibility of the Finance Director to demonstrate
compliance with this section. A LOCAL INSTITUTION is defined as a bank or
savings and loan association doing business inside the corporate limits of the
Town of Vail and/or Eagle County.
   (C)   Interest allocation method. All investments will be in the name of the
town and in most cases it will be a general policy of the town to pool all
available operating cash into a treasury cash management investment portfolio.
However, a specific investment purchased by a specific fund shall incur all
earnings and expenses to that particular fund. Interest earnings from pooled
funds shall be allocated to all participating funds based on the average
monthly cash balance of each fund included in the common portfolio for the
earning period.
   (D)   Funds borrowing from Pooled Cash Fund. All funds may borrow cash from
the pooled cash fund in order to cover shortfalls in their equity in pooled
cash. The interest rate charged shall be equal to the interest rate earned on
the pool at the time the money is borrowed.
(Ord. 3(1997) § 1; Ord. 24(2016) §§ 7, 8, 9)
§ 2-2-7 INVESTMENT PARAMETERS.
   (A)   Portfolio diversification.
      (1)   The town will diversify use of investment instruments to avoid
incurring unreasonable risks inherent in overinvesting in specific instruments,
and individual financial institutions.
 Maximum Percent Of Portfolio
                                                                          Maximum
                                                                          Percent
                                                                          Of
                                                                          Portfolio
Diversification by instrument:
   Money market and interest bearing checking accounts with commercial 50%
banks
   Money market funds                                                  50%
   U.S. treasury obligations (bills, notes and bonds)                  100%
   U.S. government agency securities (per §                           100%
2-2-6(A)(3)(a) of this chapter)
   U.S. government agency securities (per §                           25%
2-2-6(A)(3)(b)1. of this chapter)
   Taxable municipal securities                                        20%
   Certificate of deposit commercial banks or savings banks            100%
   Certificate of deposit savings and loan association                 25%
   Local government investment pool                                    100%
Diversification by financial institution:
   Repurchase agreements: No more than 50% of the total investment portfolio shall
be secured in repos with any 1 institution.
   Certificates of deposit - commercial banks: No more than 20% of the total
investment portfolio shall be secured in any 1 commercial bank’s CDs.
 
      (2)   If the amount of any of the above investments are in excess of the
percentage allowed, it is not considered a violation of this policy if the
amount is corrected within 30 days.
   (B)   Maturity scheduling. Investment maturities for operating funds shall
be scheduled to coincide with projected cash flow needs, taking into account
large routine expenditures (payroll, bond payments) as well as considering
sizable blocks of anticipated revenue (sales tax, property tax). The period
from the date of purchase of a security to its maturity date will be five years
or less except for transactions initiated by an appointed independent
investment manager, or if authorized by the Town Council.
(Ord. 24(2016) § 10: Ord. 3(1997) § 1)
§ 2-2-8 REPORTING.
   (A)   Methods. The Finance Director or his or her appointed designee will
submit a quarterly investment report which discloses investments on the last
day of the quarter. This report will be distributed to the Town Manager and
Town Council members. The Finance Director or designee will present at least
annually the investment report to the Town Council.
   (B)   Performance standards. The investment portfolio will be managed in
accordance with the parameters specified within this policy. The portfolio
should obtain a market average rate of return during a market/economic
environment of stable interest rates. Portfolio performance should be compared
to appropriate benchmarks on a regular basis.
   (C)   Marking to market. A statement of the market value of investments
having a remaining maturity exceeding two years shall be issued at least
quarterly. This will ensure that the minimal amount of review has been
performed on such long term investments in terms of value and subsequent price
volatility.
   (D)   Monitoring and adjusting portfolio. The Finance Director or his or her
appointed designee will routinely monitor the contents of the portfolio, the
available markets and the relative values of competing instruments, and will
adjust the portfolio accordingly.
(Ord. 3(1997) § 1; Ord. 24(2016) §§ 11, 12)
§ 2-2-9 POLICY.
   (A)   Exemption. Any investment currently held that does not meet the
guidelines of this policy shall be exempted from the requirements of this
policy. At maturity or liquidation, such monies shall be reinvested only as
provided by this policy.
   (B)   Policy review. The investment policy shall be reviewed annually by the
Investment Committee. A recommendation will be made periodically to the Town
Council for any proposed changes to the investment policy.
(Ord. 3(1997) § 1; Ord. 24(2016) § 13)
CHAPTER 3: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT AWARDING
(Rep by Ord. 18(2025) § 1)
CHAPTER 4: ELECTRICAL UTILITY TAX
Section
2-4-1 Tax only on local functions
2-4-2 Levy; amount
2-4-3 Payment of tax
2-4-4 Tax in lieu of other occupation taxes
2-4-5 Failure to pay or file; collection; penalty
2-4-6 Effective date
2-4-7 Saving clause
§ 2-4-1 TAX ONLY ON LOCAL FUNCTIONS.
   The tax provided herein is upon the affected occupations and businesses in
their performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions
relating to interstate commerce.
(Ord. 48(1978) § 3)
§ 2-4-2 LEVY; AMOUNT.
   There is hereby levied against every electrical utility which is engaged in
the business of furnishing electrical utility service within the town a tax on
the privilege of engaging in such business. The amount of such tax shall be as
determined by the franchise that may be granted to the electrical utility by
the town.
(Ord. 48(1978) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 2-4-3 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   The tax levied by this chapter shall be due on the date upon which the
Public Utilities Commission of the state finally approves the franchise that
may be granted to electrical utilities by the town, whichever date shall occur
later, and shall be payable in full on that date.
(Ord. 48(1978) § 2)
§ 2-4-4 TAX IN LIEU OF OTHER OCCUPATION TAXES.
   The tax provided for in this chapter shall be in lieu of all other
occupation taxes or taxes on the privilege of doing business within the town,
on any electrical utility subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 48(1978) § 6)
§ 2-4-5 FAILURE TO PAY OR FILE; COLLECTION; PENALTY.
   (A)   Tax due plus penalty. If any electrical utility subject to this
chapter fails to pay the taxes as provided herein, the full amount thereof
shall be due and collected from each company, and the same, together with an
addition of 10% of the amount of taxes due, shall be and is hereby declared to
be a debt due and owing from such utility to the town.
   (B)   Payment due cumulative. If any officer, agent or manager of an
electrical utility which is subject to the provisions of this chapter shall
fail, neglect or refuse to file any statement required by this chapter within
the time herein prescribed, such officer, agent or manager shall be subject to
penalty as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code; provided, that each day after such statement becomes
delinquent during which said officer, agent or manager shall so fail, neglect
or refuse to file such statement, shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 48(1978) § 4; 1997 Code)
§ 2-4-6 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the town.
(Ord. 48(1978) § 9)
§ 2-4-7 SAVING CLAUSE.
   All offenses committed and all liabilities incurred prior to the effective
date hereof shall be treated as though all prior applicable ordinances and
amendments thereto were in full force and effect for the purpose of sustaining
any proper suit, action or prosecution with respect to such offenses and
liabilities. All taxes, the liability for which has been accrued under the
terms of the provisions of Ordinance 1, Series of 1967, on or before the
effective date hereof, shall be and remain unconditionally due and payable, and
shall constitute a debt to the town, payable in conformity with the provisions
and terms of said Ordinance 1, Series of 1967, prior to the adoption this
chapter; and all of said terms and provisions of Ordinance 1, Series of 1967,
shall be and remain in full force and effect for the purpose of the collection
of payment of any and all such taxes due and payable thereunder,
notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 48(1978) § 5)
CHAPTER 5: RECREATIONAL AMENITIES TAX AND FUND
Section
2-5-1 Title
2-5-2 Definitions
2-5-3 Tax levied
2-5-4 Tax credit
2-5-5 Retroactive effect
2-5-6 Payment of tax
2-5-7 Reevaluation before occupancy permit issuance
2-5-8 Exempt entities
2-5-9 Revenues paid into Real Estate Transfer Tax Fund
2-5-10 Purpose of appropriations
§ 2-5-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the RECREATIONAL AMENITIES TAX CHAPTER.
(Ord. 2(1974) § 1)
§ 2-5-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply.
   BUILDING. The same as defined in the Town Uniform Building Code, Part II,
Chapter 4, as amended.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The same as defined in the Town Uniform Building Code,
Part II, Chapter 4, as amended.
   BUILDING PERMIT. The same as defined in the Town Uniform Building Code, Part
II, Chapter 4, as amended.
   FLOOR AREA. The same as defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code.
   OTHER DESIGNATED TOWN OFFICIAL. An official designated by the Town Manager.
   ZONING DISTRICT. Those districts designated in §
12-4-1 of this code, with provisions for each district set forth in Title 12 of
this code.
(Ord. 2(1974) § 2; 1997 Code)
§ 2-5-3 TAX LEVIED.
   The recreational amenities tax, as provided in this chapter, shall be levied
by the town for the construction or enlargement of each building in the town
after the effective date hereof for which a building permit is required from
the Building Official upon the person, corporation or entity applying for the
building permit; this tax shall be levied one time only and is not an annual
tax.
   (A)   Rate of assessment. For buildings constructed in the various zoning
districts of the town, the tax on each building shall be assessed after the
filing of an application for a building permit by the Building Official or
other designated town official in accordance with the rate schedule on file
with the Department of Community Development. The rate schedule on file with
the Department of Community Development shall be reviewed annually by the Town
Council and may be raised or lowered by resolution of the Council after such
review.
   (B)   Exceptions. When the actual use of a property differs from the normal
use of properties in that zone district, the rate of assessment can become the
rate of that zone district most similar to the actual use of the property. Such
a rebate must be requested by the property owner on a form provided by the
Administrator prior to the payment and issuance of the building permit. The
request may be approved by the Administrator subject to appeal by the Town
Council at their next regularly scheduled meeting. All previously paid building
permits which fall under the conditions of the section and which were protested
at the time of payment, shall be allowed to apply for this rate exception.
(Ord. 2(1974) § 3; Ord. 45(1979) § 1; Ord. 19(1981) § 1; Ord. 11(1989) § 1;
1997 Code)
§ 2-5-4 TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   When credit allowed. In the event the plans for a building or
enlargement which are submitted to the Building Official in conjunction with an
application for a building permit include recreational amenities within the
development, the person, corporation or entity applying for the building permit
may request from the Building Official or other designated town official a tax
credit relating to the recreational amenities tax assessed against the
development; provided, however, that with the approval of the Town Manager the
recreational amenities may be developed on public property rather than within
the development.
   (B)   Types of construction designated. Types of outdoor or indoor
recreational amenities which shall be considered for tax credit are as follows:
      (1)   Tennis court, paddle tennis court;
      (2)   Golf course, pitch and putt course, driving range, putting green.
      (3)   Football field, baseball field, soccer field;
      (4)   Basketball court, volleyball court, handball court;
      (5)   Ice skating rink, ice hockey rink;
      (6)   Swimming pool;
      (7)   Bicycle trail, pedestrian trail;
      (8)   Park, picnic area, playground;
      (9)   Amphitheater, theater, museum; and
      (10)   Any other type determined by the Town Manager, acting with
reasonable discretion, to be appropriate and beneficial for the town, its
residents, and visitors.
   (C)   Basic rate. The person, corporation, or entity upon which the tax is
assessed shall be entitled to a basic credit of 50% of the cost of the
recreational amenities included in the assessed development, provided that the
credit shall not exceed 50% of the tax assessment.
   (D)   Additional. Residential buildings or units which are restricted for
use for employee housing shall be entitled to additional tax credits according
to the following schedule:
 
Years Restricted Additional Credit
7—9            10%
10—15          20%
16—20          30%
21—25          40%
26 + years       50%
 
   (E)   Maximum rate. The maximum credit allowed under both subsections (C)
and (D) of this section shall not exceed 50% of the tax assessment.
   (F)   Exclusions. No tax credit shall be allowed with respect to a tax
assessment for a building or enlargement constructed in zoning districts SFR, R
and A.
(Ord. 2(1974) §§ 5, 6, 7(A),(D); Ord. 19(1981) §§2, 3; Ord. 11(1989) §§ 2, 3;
1997 Code)
§ 2-5-5 RETROACTIVE EFFECT.
   The tax credit provided in this chapter shall apply retroactively to the
recreational fees assessed under Ordinance 5, Series of 1973, and the
effectuation of this provision shall be carried out by the Building Official or
other designated town official regardless of whether a party assessed with a
recreational fee makes application for a tax credit thereon.
(Ord. 2(1974) § 8)
§ 2-5-6 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   The amount of tax assessed, reduced by any tax credit relating thereto, to-
wit the net tax due, shall be paid to the Department of Finance of the town
prior to the issuance of the building permit for the building or enlargement on
which the tax assessment is predicated, and the payment of the net tax due is a
prerequisite for the issuance of the building permit.
(Ord. 2(1974) § 9)
§ 2-5-7 REEVALUATION BEFORE OCCUPANCY PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   In the event a tax credit was allowed, upon the filing of an application for
the occupancy permit for the building or enlargement on which the tax
assessment is predicated, the Building Official or other designated town
official shall reevaluate the tax credit and, if the credit is increased or
decreased, will redetermine the net tax due; after such a redetermination, any
additional tax due or any tax refund owing shall be paid prior to the issuance
of the occupancy permit, and the payment is a prerequisite for the issuance of
said occupancy permit.
(Ord. 2(1974) § 10)
§ 2-5-8 EXEMPT ENTITIES.
   Government facilities, schools, hospitals and churches are exempt from this
tax.
(Ord. 2(1974) § 11)
§ 2-5-9 REVENUES PAID INTO REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX FUND.
   All recreational amenities taxes collected pursuant to this chapter shall be
paid into the Real Estate Transfer Tax Fund. The Finance Director shall
maintain a special account for said revenues.
(Ord. 2(1974) § 12; Ord. 5(1987) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 2-5-10 PURPOSE OF APPROPRIATIONS.
   By resolution, the Town Council shall appropriate available revenues from
the recreational amenities tax from the Real Estate Transfer Tax Fund. Such
appropriations shall be made for the purposes set forth in §
2-6-9 of this title.
(Ord. 2(1974) § 13; Ord. 5(1987) § 2; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 6: REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX
Section
2-6-1 Definitions
2-6-2 Tax imposed
2-6-3 Liability for payment
2-6-4 Amount payable
2-6-5 Exemptions
2-6-6 Application for exemption
2-6-7 Lands affected
2-6-8 Enforcement; collection of tax
2-6-9 Real Estate Transfer Tax Fund
2-6-10 Due date; penalties for delinquency
2-6-11 Recordation before payment of tax prohibited
2-6-12 Evasion by artifice or device
2-6-13 Unpaid tax a lien; remedies and penalties
2-6-14 Report to Council
Editor’s note:
   The chapter heading changed from “Land Transfer Tax” to “Real Estate
Transfer Tax” in the 1997 recodification.
§ 2-6-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSIDERATION. The full value of the real property affected by the transfer
and includes actual cash paid, and value of property delivered or conveyed, or
contracted to be paid or delivered or conveyed, in return for the transfer of
ownership, title or interests in real property and shall include the amount of
any lien, mortgage, contract indebtedness or other encumbrance or debt, either
given to secure the purchase price, or any part thereof, or remaining unpaid on
the property at the time of the transfer. The term does not include as an
addition to full value the amount of any outstanding lien or encumbrance in
favor of the United States, the State of Colorado, or of a municipal or quasi-
government corporation or district for taxes, special benefits or improvements.
In the event the transaction or transfer is by lease agreement not specifically
exempted in §
2-6-5 of this chapter, the consideration shall be deemed to be the capitalized
value of the average annual rental under the lease, computed as follows: the
average annual rental over the entire term of the lease, including any renewal
term, plus the actual consideration, other than rent, paid or to be paid shall
be computed, and the average annual rental shall be 10% of the capitalized
value. The payment of ad valorem real property taxes, insurance and the
assumption of maintenance obligations shall not be included in the annual rent-
capitalization computation; however, capital improvements required to be made
shall be part of the actual consideration. When the average annual rental
cannot be determined, or at the election of the Town Manager, the tax shall be
based upon the assessed value of the property covered by the lease.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, association or any other legal entity.
   REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX. The tax imposed by this chapter on the transfer of
real property.
   REAL PROPERTY. Defined by and under the laws of the state.
   TAXABLE LEASE. Any lease of real property with a term or initial term and
all renewal terms which aggregate in length 29 years or more; provided lessee
has possession or the right to possession on payment of rents. TAXABLE LEASE
also means any lease of real property for less than 29 years of term or initial
term and all renewal terms aggregated if lessee has a clause which would permit
lessee at its discretion to extend the lease beyond 29 years or if lessee has
an option to purchase some or all of the real property leased. If lessee has a
lease with such an option to purchase, which option may be exercised only
within three years after the date the lease and option is entered into, then
the real estate transfer tax shall not be due and payable unless and until the
exercise and consummation of such option. If any other lease with such an
option to purchase is entered into, the real estate transfer tax shall be due
and payable at the time of such transfer.
   TRANSFER. Means whether or not the same is in writing or is recorded, and
includes:
      (1)   Any sale, grant, assignment, transfer, exchange or conveyance of
any ownership or title to real property situated in the town; or
      (2)   The sale, letting, conveyance, assignment or transfer for a
possessory interest in real property, subject to the exemptions provided in
this chapter.
(Ord. 6(1979) § 3; Ord. 5(1980) § 3; 1997 Code)
§ 2-6-2 TAX IMPOSED.
   There is imposed a tax on all transfers whether by deeds, instruments,
writings, leases or any other documents, or otherwise, by which any lands,
tenements or other interests in real property located in the town are sold,
granted, let, assigned, transferred, exchanged or otherwise conveyed to or
vested in a purchaser, or purchasers thereof, or any other person or persons,
except as may be specifically exempted by §
2-6-5 of this chapter. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of
transfer and contemporaneously therewith.
(Ord. 26(1979) § 1; Ord. 5(1980) § 1)
§ 2-6-3 LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT.
   Each seller and each buyer and each person from whom or to whom a transfer
is made, which is subject to the tax imposed under §
2-6-2 of this chapter shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of the
tax. The seller or person from whom a transfer is made shall remit the tax to
the Finance Department.
(Ord. 26(1979) § 2; Ord. 5(1980) § 2; 1997 Code)
§ 2-6-4 AMOUNT PAYABLE.
   The amount of tax payable in each case shall be as follows.
   (A)   Exception. Where there is no consideration or when the consideration
is $500 or less, no real estate transfer tax shall be payable.
   (B)   Amount payable. Where the consideration shall exceed $500, the payable
shall be 1% of the consideration, the proceeds of which tax shall be earmarked
for the purposes set forth in §
2-6-9(A) of this chapter. No increase in the 1% tax established by this
subsection (B) shall be levied after the passage of the effective date of this
subsection (B) until such tax rate increase shall have been approved by a
majority of the registered electors voting at a regular or special election.
(Ord. 26(1979) § 4; Ord. 5(1980) § 4; Ord. 8(1987) § 1; Ord. 10(1992) § 1)
§ 2-6-5 EXEMPTIONS.
   The real estate transfer tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Governmental entities. Any transfer wherein the United States, or any
agency or instrumentality thereof, the state, any county, city and county,
municipality, district or other political subdivision of this state, is either
the grantor or grantee;
   (B)   Gift. Any gift of real property, where there is no consideration other
than love and affection or charitable donation;
   (C)   Joint properties. Any transfer by document, decree or agreement
partitioning, terminating or evidencing termination of a joint tenancy, tenancy
in common or other co-ownership in real property; however, if additional
consideration of value is paid in connection with such partition or
termination, the tax shall apply and be based upon such additional
consideration;
   (D)   Death. The transfer of title or change of interest in real property by
reason of death, pursuant to: a will, the law of descent and distribution, or
otherwise;
   (E)   Changes within entity. Transfers made pursuant to reorganization,
merger or consolidation of corporations, or by a subsidiary to a parent
corporation for no consideration other than cancellation or surrender of the
subsidiary’s stock, or transfers made to a corporation, partnership, limited
partnership, joint venture, business trust or other association or
organization, if that association or organization is owned by the persons by
whom such transfer was made, if such owners have the same relative interests in
such association or organization as they had in the real property immediately
prior to such transfer and there is no consideration other than their
respective interests in the new association or organization;
   (F)   Bankruptcies. Transfers to make effective any plan confirmed or
ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction under the Bankruptcy Act or in an
equity receivership proceeding;
   (G)   Corrections to title. Any transfer made and delivered without
consideration for the purpose of confirming, correcting, modifying or
supplementing a transfer previously recorded; making minor boundary
adjustments; removing clouds on titles; or granting easements, rights-of-way or
licenses;
   (H)   Court order. Any decree or order of a court of record quieting,
determining or resting title, including a final order awarding title pursuant
to a condemnation proceeding;
   (I)   Cemetery lots. Any transfer of cemetery lots;
   (J)   Leases. Any lease of any real property (or assignment or transfer of
any interest in any such lease) provided the terms and conditions of such lease
do not constitute a taxable lease of the property;
   (K)   Mineral rights. Any mineral transfer or royalty transfer;
   (L)   Debt securities. Transfers to secure a debt or other obligation, or
releases on real property which is security for a debt or other obligation;
   (M)   Executory contract. Any executory contract for the sale of real
property, of less than three years’ duration, under which the vendee is
entitled to or does take possession thereof without acquiring title thereto, or
any assignment or cancellation of any such contract;
   (N)   Prior to effective date. Any transfer that is made pursuant to a valid
and legally enforceable contract for sale entered into between the seller and
purchaser prior to the effective date of Ordinance 26, Series of 1979, pursuant
to which transaction the deed or instrument of conveyance is executed and
recorded on or before June 1, 1980;
   (O)   Presale contract.
      (1)   Any transfer that is made pursuant to a valid and legally
enforceable presale contract:
         (a)   Entered into between a seller and a purchaser prior to the
effective date of Ordinance 26, Series of 1979; or
         (b)   Pursuant to which transaction the deed or instrument of
conveyance is executed and recorded on or before June 1, 1980.
      (2)   A PRESALE CONTRACT is defined as a valid and legally enforceable
contract for the sale of real property which has been signed prior to the
commencement of construction of improvements thereon, to be closed following
completion of the improvements and pursuant to which contract seller is
obligated to construct the improvements to the property after the contract is
signed and prior to the closing date of the contract.
   (P)   Certain housing projects. Any sale or conveyance of real property or
improvements for the purpose of constructing, or providing low or moderate
priced housing units for sale or lease to low or moderate income persons;
provided, that the parties to the transaction shall apply to the Town Manager
for the exemption prior to its being allowed, and the parties shall agree to
appropriately restrict the future use of the property to low and moderate
priced housing units by recorded agreement, deed restriction, covenants,
declarations or similar instrument as may be required by the Town Manager; and
   (Q)   Properties not annexed. Any transfer that is made pursuant to a valid
and legally enforceable contract for sale or presale contract entered into
between the seller and the purchaser prior to the effective date of the
annexation and pursuant to which transaction, the deed or instrument of
conveyance is executed and recorded within 180 days after the date the
annexation of the property to the town is effective.
(Ord. 26(1979) § 5; Ord. 5(1980) § 5; Ord. 42(1980) § 1)
§ 2-6-6 APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION.
   (A)   Required; form. In the event of any transfer claimed to be exempt from
the real estate transfer tax imposed in this chapter, the grantor or grantee
shall apply for and obtain from the Town Manager a certificate of exemption,
which may be affixed to the deed or instrument of transfer. The burden of
proving any exemption shall in all cases be upon the one claiming it; provided
further, that the exemption provided in §
2-6-5(P) of this chapter shall be allowed only with a certificate of exemption
issued by the Town Manager prior to the due date of this transfer tax. The
certificate of exemption shall be in substantially the following form:
   EXEMPTION FROM REAL
   ESTATE TRANSFER TAX
The undersigned, as grantor (grantee) of a deed or instrument of conveyance
from                               to                                (name of
grantor and grantee), dated               , hereby apply for exemption from the
payment of the Real Estate Transfer Tax, imposed by Ordinance No. 26, Series of
1979, of the Town of Vail, as amended by Ordinance No. 5, Series of 1980. The
basis of such exemption is as follows:
(State briefly grounds for exemption, including applicable section and
subdivision of Ordinance No. 26, as amended)
I hereby certify under penalty of perjury that the foregoing statements are
true and correct.
                                
   Grantor or Grantee
Certificate of Exemption
I hereby certify that the above described transfer of real property is exempt
from the payment of real estate transfer tax under Ordinance No. 26, Series of
1979, as amended by Ordinance No. 5, Series of 1980, Section           .
                       
   Town Manager
   (B)   Appeal. Any person whose claim of exemption duly applied for under the
provisions of this section is denied by the Town Manager may immediately appeal
to the Town Council for a determination of such exemption and such appeal shall
be considered by the Town Council within 30 days of receipt of the same. In the
event of a determination by the Town Council favorable to the appellant, any
amount previously deposited, or so much thereof as may be allowed by the Town
Manager, shall be promptly refunded to the person paying or depositing the
same. If a decision is not made by the Town Council within 30 days of the
receipt of the appeal, the decision will be deemed favorable to the appellant,
unless appellant has obtained a continuance of the matter, in which case the
Town Council shall make its decision within six months after receipt of the
appeal.
   (C)   Refund payment. In case of an application for an exemption which is
not granted before the transfer takes place, the tax shall be paid as required
by this chapter. Thereafter, if the exemption shall be allowed, upon
application to the Town Manager, the person who has paid such tax shall be
entitled to a refund thereof, or so much of such tax as shall qualify for
refunding pursuant to the exemption granted.
(Ord. 26(1979) §6; Ord. 5(1980) § 6)
§ 2-6-7 LANDS AFFECTED.
   When a transfer subject to this chapter includes real property located
within the town and real property located elsewhere, the tax imposed under the
authority of this chapter shall be computed only with respect to real property
located within the town, and the tax shall be assessed based on that part of
the consideration fairly attributable to such real property located within the
town.
(Ord. 26(1979) § 7; Ord. 5(1980) § 7)
§ 2-6-8 ENFORCEMENT; COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   Town Manager to enforce. The Town Manager is charged with the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and is authorized and empowered
to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations pertaining
thereto.
   (B)   Report required. At the time of any transfer upon which a tax is
imposed or which is claimed to be exempt under this chapter, there shall be
made a report to the Town Manager on forms prescribed by the Town Manager,
setting forth the true, complete and actual consideration for the transfer, the
names of the parties thereto, the location of the real property transferred,
the basis of the claimed exemption, and such other information as the Town
Manager may require.
   (C)   Authorized collection entities. For the purpose of collection of the
taxes imposed by this chapter, all banks, title companies, escrow companies,
building and loan institutions, attorneys, real estate agencies, or other
closing agents or agencies, permitted as such to do business under the laws of
the state may collect the real estate transfer tax (holding such funds in trust
for the town) and remit the same to the town for and on behalf of the seller
and buyer, forthwith.
   (D)   County may collect. The Town Manager is authorized to negotiate and
enter into an intergovernmental contract with appropriate officers of Eagle
County for the collection of this tax, including the payment of a fee to the
county officers for such collection.
(Ord. 26(1979) § 8; Ord. 5(1980) § 8)
§ 2-6-9 REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX FUND.
   (A)   Creation; purpose. All funds received by the town pursuant to this
chapter shall be deposited in the Real Estate Transfer Tax Fund, which fund is
hereby created. The fund shall be subject to appropriation for only the
following purposes within the town or within one mile of the boundaries of the
town. However, it is the express intention of the town of Vail that in any
annual budget cycle the Town Council shall ensure that the fund can adequately
satisfy the purposes set forth in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(4) of this
section, and that the purposes described in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(4)
of this section are in fact satisfied, prior to the Town Council’s
appropriation of any amount from the fund to be used for the purposes listed in
subsection (A)(5) of this section:
      (1)   Acquiring, improving, maintaining and repairing real property for
parks, recreation, open space and similar purposes;
      (2)   The construction, maintenance and repair of buildings which are
incidental to park, recreation, and open space land;
      (3)   Landscaping parks and open space;
      (4)   The construction, maintenance, repair and landscaping of recreation
paths set forth in the Town of Vail recreation trails plan as it may be amended
by the Town Council from time to time;
      (5)   Supporting sustainable environmental practices as determined
necessary for the environmental health and welfare of the Town of Vail, its
inhabitants and its environs in the discretion of the Town Council; and
      (6)   Paying incidental costs and principal of and interest on any funds
borrowed for the purposes set forth in this subsection.
   (B)   Building defined. For the purposes of this chapter, BUILDING shall
mean any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, or any other
enclosed structure for the housing of persons, animals or property.
(Ord. 26(1979) § 9; Ord. 5(1980) § 9; Ord. 8(1987) § 2; Ord. 10(1992) § 2; 1997
Code; Ord. 31(2006) §1)
§ 2-6-10 DUE DATE; PENALTIES FOR DELINQUENCY.
   The tax imposed under this chapter is due and payable at the time of the
transfer, and is delinquent if it remains unpaid for 30 days thereafter. In the
event that the tax is not paid prior to becoming delinquent, a delinquency
penalty of 10% of the amount of tax due shall accrue. In the event a portion of
the tax is paid prior to becoming delinquent, the penalty shall only accrue as
to the portion which is delinquent. Interest shall accrue at the rate of 1.5%
per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of tax, exclusive of penalties,
from the date the tax becomes delinquent to the date of payment. Interest and
penalty accrued shall become part of the tax.
(Ord. 26(1979) § 10(a); Ord. 5(1980) § 10(a))
§ 2-6-11 RECORDATION BEFORE PAYMENT OF TAX PROHIBITED.
   Any person liable for a real estate transfer tax upon a transfer who shall
cause the deed, instrument of conveyance or document evidencing such transfer
to be filed of record in the office of the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder or
attempt to so record the document until and unless the real estate transfer tax
and all penalties and interest thereon have been paid in full, shall be in
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 26(1979) § 10(b); Ord. 5(1980) § 10(b))
§ 2-6-12 EVASION BY ARTIFICE OR DEVICE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
2-6-5 of this chapter, if an artifice or device is employed in connection with
the transfer of real property, which term ARTIFICE OR DEVICE means a
transaction or transactions, a substantial purpose of which was to evade the
provisions of this chapter and the imposition of the tax under this chapter,
then such transfer will nevertheless be subject to the real estate transfer
tax.
   (B)   ARTIFICE OR DEVICE includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   A transfer to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership,
joint venture, business trust, or other association or organization followed
within three years by an assignment of the controlling interest in such
association or organization; and
      (2)   Such a transfer plus the intent to ultimately assign the
controlling interest in such association or organization.
(Ord. 26(1979) § 10(c); Ord. 5(1980) § 10(c))
§ 2-6-13 UNPAID TAX A LIEN; REMEDIES AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Perpetual lien. The tax imposed by this chapter, and any penalty and
interest due thereon, if not paid when due, and all costs of collection of such
tax, penalty and interest, shall constitute a perpetual lien on the real
property transferred in the amount applicable to each lot or parcel of real
property transferred and shall have priority over all other liens except
general tax liens and special improvement district assessment liens. Except as
aforesaid, the lien for such tax shall be and until paid shall remain a first
and prior lien superior to all other liens upon such property and shall take
precedence on such property over other liens or claims of whatsoever kind or
nature. Such lien shall continue until the amount thereof is paid or until its
discharge of record by foreclosure or otherwise.
   (B)   Recording constitutes notice. The recording of this chapter in the
office of the Clerk and Recorder of the County of Eagle, State of Colorado,
shall constitute notice to all persons interested in the transfer of real
property of the existence of and the lien imposed by the real estate transfer
tax.
   (C)   Delinquent tax notice. If the tax is unpaid and delinquent, the Town
Manager shall give written notification to the buyer at the address shown on
any deed or instrument evidencing the transfer, or the buyer’s last known
address, and the seller at the seller’s last known address, of such
delinquency. Such notification shall be mailed certified or registered mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and shall be effective on the date
of the mailing. If the tax, penalty and interest are not paid within 30 days of
the effective date of the notification, the Town Manager shall make the same
delinquent on the town’s tax roll and shall, at least once each calendar year,
but not sooner than October 1, certify such delinquencies, along with the
interest and penalty, to the County Treasurer; and the County Treasurer shall
extend such delinquencies upon the real property tax rolls of the county and
collect the same in the same manner as delinquent general taxes levied upon
such property. Upon certification of the delinquent taxes, the penalties and
interest thereon shall also be due and payable.
   (D)   Suit for recovery. The amount of the tax, penalty and interest imposed
under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the town. Any
person owing money to the town under the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable to an action brought in the name of the town for the recovery of such
amount.
   (E)   Penalty. Any person who shall fail or refuse to pay any tax due under
this chapter may be subject to penalty as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
   (F)   Remedies cumulative. Any remedies provided for in this chapter shall
be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be, in addition to any other remedies
provided by law.
(Ord. 26(1979) § 11; Ord. 5(1980) § 11; Ord. 23(1984) § 1; Ord. 23(1993) § 1)
§ 2-6-14 REPORT TO COUNCIL.
   The Town Manager shall prepare a report of the receipts from the real estate
transfer tax, expenditures made in the preceding fiscal year, real properties
purchased by the town or in the process of being purchased, a list of
properties to be purchased by the town and the priorities of purchase
(provided, however, the list of properties to be purchased and the priorities
thereof shall be confidential to the Town Council), and the projected revenue
and expenditures for the next fiscal year. Such report shall be submitted to
the Council two weeks prior to the submission of the budget as required by §
9.3 of the Charter of the town.
(Ord. 26(1979) § 12; Ord. 5(1980) § 12)
CHAPTER 7: PUBLIC/PRIVATE JOINT VENTURE PROGRAM
Section
2-7-1 Public/private joint venture program established
2-7-2 Funding
2-7-3 Types of projects
2-7-4 Participants
2-7-5 Town’s participation
Cross-reference:
   Design Review Board, see Title 3, Ch. 4
§ 2-7-1 PUBLIC/PRIVATE JOINT VENTURE PROGRAM ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a public/private joint capital improvement
program.
(Ord. 11(1979) § 1)
§ 2-7-2 FUNDING.
   The town’s funding of the joint venture may be provided in each yearly
budget.
(Ord. 11(1979) § 1)
§ 2-7-3 TYPES OF PROJECTS.
   The town may provide partial funding for joint public/private capital
improvements projects on public and/or private property that serve the
community’s needs. Such projects may include (but are not limited to)
landscaping, beautification, trash collection areas located on town property,
drainage projects, lighting, improvement of pedestrianways and public
recreation amenities. Any capital improvements on private property which have
been required as part of an approved site plan and have been reviewed by the
Design Review Board shall not be eligible for this joint venture program.
(Ord. 11(1979) § 1)
§ 2-7-4 PARTICIPANTS.
   Any person or entity paying real or personal property taxes to the town may
apply for participation in the joint venture program, and any tenant or manager
who has the authorization of the property owner may apply for participation in
the joint venture program and any tenant or manager who has the authorization
of the property owner may apply for participation in the name of the property
owner.
(Ord. 11(1979) § 1)
§ 2-7-5 TOWN’S PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Town share determination. The town’s share of the joint venture
project’s funding shall be determined by the Planning and Environmental
Commission as provided in subsection (C) of this section. Application forms
shall be provided by the Department of Community Development. At the time an
application is filed with the Department of Community Development, the
applicant shall attach thereto a proposed cost budget for the project (which
may include design, architectural and engineering costs) and the proposed
public/private shares.
   (B)   Reimbursement. For approved joint venture projects, the town will
reimburse the applicant for its share of the project expenses after the
completion of the project. The town’s share shall be a percentage of the total
project cost up to but not to exceed a maximum amount. The applicant shall
document the project expenses by submitting to the town bills, receipts or
invoices for the project expenses, or such other information or documentation
as may be required by the town.
   (C)   Application procedure. Applications for participation in this program
shall be submitted to the Department of Community Development. The town staff
shall review all applications and shall then submit to the Design Review Board
all applications and recommendations relating thereto. The Design Review Board
shall then review the applications and the staff’s recommendations and make
recommendations to the Planning and Environmental Commission as to the proposed
projects that the town should participate in and the amount of the town’s share
in each recommended project. The Planning and Environmental Commission shall
review all applications and reports and make a final determination of the
projects to be funded and the amount of the town’s share.
   (D)   Evaluation criteria.
      (1)   The evaluation of the proposed projects by the staff, Design Review
Board and Planning and Environmental Commission shall be done on the project
evaluation forms hereby approved. The areas of evaluation being:
         (a)   Project location and visibility from public rights-of-way;
         (b)   Type of project;
         (c)   General design quality;
         (d)   Seasonal use of project;
         (e)   Energy and resource conservation; and
         (f)   Ease of maintenance.
      (2)   In addition thereto, project cost and proposed cost division
between the town and the applicant shall be considered.
   (E)   Maintenance. The town shall not pay or be responsible for operating or
maintenance costs of the project after the initial construction costs.
(Ord. 11(1979) § 1)
CHAPTER 8: USE TAX ON CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING MATERIALS
Section
2-8-1 Title, purpose and applicability
2-8-2 Definitions
2-8-3 Imposition and rate of tax
2-8-4 Collection
2-8-5 Exemptions
2-8-6 Duties and powers of Finance Director
2-8-7 Books, records, reports and returns
2-8-8 Audit
2-8-9 Limitation of actions
2-8-10 Lien
2-8-11 Penalties and interest
2-8-12 Remedies not exclusive
2-8-13 Refunds
2-8-14 Hearing before Finance Director
2-8-15 Disposition of funds
2-8-16 Violation and penalty
§ 2-8-1 TITLE, PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter shall be known as and referred to as USE TAX ON
CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING MATERIALS.
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to raise revenue for capital
acquisitions and capital projects in the town and provide a complementary tax
to the town’s sales tax. The Town Council finds that every person who uses or
consumes in the town any construction and building materials is exercising a
taxable privilege.
   (C)   Subject to the specific exemptions listed in §
2-8-5 of this chapter, the use tax imposed by this chapter shall apply to any
use or consumption in the town of construction and building materials purchased
at retail inside or outside the town on or after January 1, 2008.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1)
§ 2-8-2 DEFINITIONS.
   When not otherwise clearly indicated by the context, the following terms,
words, and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings.
   APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT REVIEW. An application submitted to the Town of
Vail Community Development Department for administrative review, or for review
by the Town of Vail Design Review Board, Planning and Environmental Commission
and/or Town Council, as prescribed by Title 12, Zoning Regulations, of this
code.
   BUILDING PERMIT. The permit, issued by the town by authority of the adopted
building codes of the town, allowing the permit holder to construct, enlarge,
repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or
to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any
electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, which is regulated by the
adopted building codes of the town. A BUILDING PERMIT shall not include any
permit for demolition or dewatering.
   CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING MATERIALS. Tangible personal property which, when
combined with other tangible personal property, loses its identity to become an
integral and inseparable part of a completed structure or project. CONSTRUCTION
MATERIALS include, but are not limited to, such things as, asphalt, bricks,
builders’ hardware, caulking material, cement, concrete, conduit, electric
wiring and connections, fireplace inserts, electrical heating and cooling
equipment, flooring, glass, gravel, insulation, lath, lead, lime, lumber,
macadam, millwork, mortar, oil, paint, piping, pipe valves and pipe fittings,
plaster, plumbing fixtures, putty, reinforcing mesh, road base, roofing, sand,
sanitary sewer pipe, sheet metal, site lighting, steel, stone, stucco, tile,
trees, shrubs and other landscaping materials, wallboard, wall coping,
wallpaper, weather stripping, wire netting and screen, water mains and meters,
and wood preserver. The above materials, when used for forms, or other items
which do not remain as an integral or inseparable part of a complete structure
or project, are not construction and building materials.
   CONSTRUCTION VALUATION. The total value of the work, including labor and
construction and building materials for which the permit is being issued,
including electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent
systems, as determined by the Building Department.
   CONSUMPTION. The act or process of consuming; it includes waste, destruction
or use. CONSUMPTION is the normal use of property for the purpose for which it
was intended.
   FINANCE DIRECTOR. The administrative services director of the town or such
other person designated by the town. FINANCE DIRECTOR shall also include such
person’s designee.
   PURCHASE OR SALE. The acquisition for a price by any person of tangible
personal property, including installment and credit sales, the exchange of
property, as well as the sale thereof for money, and every such transaction,
conditional or otherwise, for a consideration constituting a sale.
   PURCHASE PRICE. The aggregate value in money of anything or things paid or
delivered or promised to be paid or delivered by a purchaser to a retailer or
any person in the consummation of a retail sale as defined herein, without any
deduction therefrom for the cost of the property sold, cost of materials used,
labor or service cost, or any other expense whatsoever, and provided that when
articles of tangible personal property are sold after manufacture or after
having been made to order, the gross value of all materials, labor, service and
profit thereon, shall be included in the said purchase price; provided that the
purchase price shall not include any direct tax imposed by the federal
government, the state or this chapter.
   RETAIL SALE OR PURCHASED AT RETAIL. Any sale or purchase of tangible
personal property, except a wholesale sale or purchase for taxable resale.
   TAXPAYER. Any person from whom a tax is due, or against whom a deficiency is
being asserted.
   USE. The exercise, for any length of time, by any person within the town of
any right, power or dominion over tangible personal property when purchased at
retail from sources either within or without the town from any person.
   WHOLESALE SALE. A sale to a licensed retailer, jobber, dealer or other
wholesaler for resale. Sales by wholesalers to consumers, including persons who
use or consume “construction and building materials”, as defined by this
section, are not WHOLESALE SALES. Sales by wholesalers to nonlicensed retailers
are not WHOLESALE SALES.
   WHOLESALER. Any person selling to retailers, jobbers, dealers or other
wholesalers, for resale, and not for storage, use, consumption or distribution.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1)
§ 2-8-3 IMPOSITION AND RATE OF TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a use tax on the privilege of using or
consuming within the town construction and building materials purchased at
retail inside or outside the town on or after January 1, 2008; provided that
any construction and building materials used or consumed on a project which has
received final approval on all required applications for development review
prior to January 1, 2008, shall not be subject to the use tax imposed by this
chapter. If any approval expires by its terms after January 1, 2008, such
application for development review shall then be subject to the use tax imposed
by this chapter.
   (B)   The use tax imposed by this chapter shall be at the rate of 4% of the
cost of construction and building materials used or consumed in the town. For
purposes of this chapter, the cost of construction and building materials is
deemed to be 50% of the construction valuation.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1)
§ 2-8-4 COLLECTION.
   The use tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected prior to the issuance
of a building permit.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1)
§ 2-8-5 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are exempt from the use tax imposed by this chapter, provided
that the list of exemptions cannot be increased by implication or similarity,
and the burden of proof is upon the taxpayer to establish an exemption:
   (A)   The use or consumption of any construction and building materials the
sale of which is subject to a retail sales tax imposed by the town;
   (B)   The use or consumption of construction and building materials
purchased for resale in the town, either in their original form or as an
ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product, in the regular course of a
business;
   (C)   The use or consumption of construction and building materials by the
federal government, the state or its institutions or political subdivisions in
their governmental capacities, or by religious or charitable corporations in
the conduct of their regular religious or charitable functions;
   (D)   The use or consumption of construction and building materials by a
person engaged in the business of manufacturing or compounding for sale, profit
or use of any article, substance or commodity, which construction and building
materials enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component
part of the product or service which is manufactured, compounded or furnished,
and the container, label or the furnished shipping case thereof;
   (E)   The use or consumption of any construction and building materials the
sale or use of which has already been subjected to a legally imposed sales or
use tax of another statutory or home rule town, city, or city and county equal
to or in excess of the use tax imposed herein, in which case a credit shall be
granted in an amount equal to the tax paid by reason of the imposition of such
sales or use tax, provided that the amount of credit shall not exceed the
amount of the use tax imposed by this chapter;
   (F)   The use or consumption of construction and building materials if a
written contract for the purchase thereof was entered into prior to January 1,
2008;
   (G)   The use or consumption of construction and building materials required
or made necessary in the performance of any construction contract bid, let or
entered into at any time prior to January 1, 2008;
   (H)   The storage of construction and building materials;
   (I)   The first $10,000 of the construction valuation for a building permit;
   (J)   The use or consumption of construction and building materials in the
town on which the use tax imposed by this chapter has already been paid; and
   (K)   Any transaction which the town is prohibited from taxing under
applicable law.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1)
§ 2-8-6 DUTIES AND POWERS OF FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   The administration of this chapter is hereby vested in the Finance Director,
who shall prescribe forms and promulgate rules and regulations for the proper
administration and enforcement of this chapter, and may delegate to any person
the power and authority necessary for the proper administration and enforcement
of this chapter.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1)
§ 2-8-7 BOOKS, RECORDS, REPORTS AND RETURNS.
   (A)   Every person liable to the town for any use tax imposed by this
chapter shall keep and preserve, for a period of three years from the date of
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the improvement on which the use tax
was paid, all books, records, reports and returns necessary to determine the
amount of tax liability.
   (B)   All such books, records, reports and returns shall be open for
examination at any time by the Finance Director.
   (C)   Except by court order or as otherwise provided by law, the Finance
Director shall not divulge any information disclosed in any document, report or
return filed pursuant to this chapter.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication
of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular
reports or returns and the items thereof, or the inspection of returns by the
Town Attorney or other legal representative of the town.
   (E)   Notwithstanding this section, the Finance Director may furnish to the
taxing officials of any other state or its political subdivisions, to the State
of Colorado or its political subdivisions, or to the United States any
information contained in tax returns and related schedules and documents filed
pursuant to this code, or in the report of an audit or investigation made with
respect thereto, provided that said jurisdiction agrees to grant similar
privileges to the town, and that such information will only be used for tax
purposes.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1)
§ 2-8-8 AUDIT.
   (A)   Within three years from the issuance of any certificate of occupancy
for the improvement on which the use tax was paid, the town may audit the
taxpayer or the taxpayer may request an audit.
   (B)   If the recomputed use tax is less than the amount of use tax paid by
the taxpayer, the difference shall be refunded to the taxpayer within 30 days
of the final determination of the town. If the recomputed use tax is more than
the amount of use tax paid by the taxpayer, the difference, along with any
interest and penalty imposed by this chapter, shall be due and payable by the
taxpayer to the town immediately upon the final determination of the town.
   (C)   Any audit requested by the taxpayer, regardless of the result, and any
audit performed by the town finding any failure, neglect or refusal to pay any
use tax due to the town, shall be at the taxpayer’s sole cost.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1)
§ 2-8-9 LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.
   (A)   Use tax, interest and penalties shall be assessed, and any action to
collect the same shall be commenced, within three years of the issuance of
certificate of occupancy for the improvement on which the use tax was paid.
   (B)   Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and
the Finance Director may agree in writing to an extension.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1)
§ 2-8-10 LIEN.
   The tax imposed by this chapter, together with accrued interest and
penalties, shall be a first and prior lien on any real property into which the
construction and building materials were incorporated.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1)
§ 2-8-11 PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   (A)   If any person fails, neglects or refuses to pay the use tax as
required by this chapter, or if any taxpayer fails to remit the proper amount
of tax or underpays the tax, penalties and interest shall be added and imposed
in accordance with this section.
   (B)   If a person neglects or refuses to pay any use tax as required by this
chapter within ten days after the same is due, the Finance Director shall make
an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of
use tax due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent and shall add
thereto a penalty equal to $15 or 10% of the amount due, whichever is greater,
and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate of 1% per month from the time
that payment was due. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the
intent to evade the tax, there shall be added a penalty of 100% of the total
amount of the deficiency, and in such case the whole amount of the tax unpaid,
including the additions, shall become due and payable ten days after written
notice and demand by the Finance Director, and an additional 3% per month on
said amount shall be added from the date payment was due, until paid.
   (C)   The Finance Director may waive, for good cause shown, any penalty or
interest.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1)
§ 2-8-12 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   In addition to the remedies expressly provided by this chapter, the town may
pursue any other remedies available at law or in equity.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1)
§ 2-8-13 REFUNDS.
   (A)   A refund shall be made, or a credit allowed, for use tax paid under
dispute by any person who is entitled to claim an exemption under §
2-8-5 of this chapter if a request for refund is made within ninety (90) days
after issuance of the building permit for which the use tax was paid under
dispute.
   (B)   A refund shall be made, or a credit allowed, for any use tax paid
under this chapter for construction and building materials used or consumed in
the construction of any deed restricted employee housing units, as defined by
Title 12 of this code, which deed restriction additionally includes a perpetual
appreciation cap on either maximum rental rate or sales price, as approved by
the town. No request for refund or credit shall be processed by the town until
the applicable deed restriction has been recorded. A request for a refund or
credit for deed restricted employee housing units shall be submitted within
ninety (90) days of issuance of the last certificate of occupancy for such deed
restricted employee housing units.
   (C)   An application for refund of tax paid in error or by mistake shall be
made within three years after the date of use or consumption of the
construction and building materials for which the refund is claimed.
   (D)   The right of any person to a refund under this chapter shall not be
assignable and the application for refund shall be filed by the taxpayer.
   (E)   The burden of proving the right to a refund shall be on the person
claiming the refund.
   (F)   Upon receipt of a timely application, the Finance Director shall
promptly examine the application, make a decision, and notify the applicant in
writing of the decision.
   (G)   If the Finance Director finds that the use tax, penalty or interest
paid by any taxpayer is in excess of the amount due or has been erroneously
collected, the Finance Director shall rule in favor of the taxpayer for refund,
regardless of whether or not such sum was paid under dispute. The Finance
Director shall issue payment to the taxpayer; provided that the Finance
Director shall retain a statement setting forth the reason for the refund. If
there is an unpaid balance of use tax, penalties or interest owed by such
taxpayer for any other period, the overpayment shall be applied against the
amount due and any excess shall be refunded to the taxpayer.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1; Ord. 20(2024) § 1)
§ 2-8-14 HEARING BEFORE FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   A taxpayer may file a written request for a hearing on any assessment
or denial of refund request within ten days of the decision of the Finance
Director. The request for hearing shall set forth the taxpayer’s reasons for
the request and the disputed amount.
   (B)   The hearing shall be held and a final decision issued within 90 days
of the date of the request, unless a delay is caused by the taxpayer, in which
case the hearing shall be held and final decision shall be issued within 180
days of the request. At least 15 days prior to the hearing, the Finance
Director shall notify the taxpayer in writing of the time and place of the
hearing.
   (C)   At the hearing, the Finance Director may administer oaths and take
testimony, and the taxpayer may assert any facts, make any arguments, and file
any briefs or affidavits he or she believes pertinent to his or her cause.
   (D)   Based on the evidence presented, the Finance Director may modify,
refund or abate the use tax, penalty or interest.
   (E)   Upon rejection, in whole or in part of the claim for refund, or upon a
finding that an assessment in whole or in part has been made against the
taxpayer validly, the Finance Director shall send a hearing determination
notice to the taxpayer in compliance with C.R.S. § 29-2-106.1(2)(a).
   (F)   The decision of the Finance Director shall be final, subject only to
the state hearing and appeal procedures outlined in C.R.S. § 29-2-106.1 and
judicial review. Unless a state hearing is requested, an appeal is filed or
judicial review is sought, the use tax, together with interest thereon and
penalties, if any, shall be paid within 30 days after mailing of the Finance
Director’s hearing determination notice.
   (G)   If a state hearing is requested, an appeal filed or judicial review is
sought, the Finance Director may require payment of the tax or the posting of
security only as provided in C.R.S. § 29-2-106.1.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1)
§ 2-8-15 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   (A)   All revenues derived from the use tax imposed by this chapter, less
costs of collection and administration, shall be placed in the town’s Capital
Projects Fund and used for capital acquisitions and capital projects.
   (B)   There shall be budgeted from the monies received from the imposition
of the use tax an amount necessary to reimburse the town for administrative and
clerical expenses incurred in the collection and administration of the use tax.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1)
§ 2-8-16 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   It is a violation of this chapter for any person subject to the use
tax levied by this chapter to submit any false or fraudulent use tax
information to the town, to make any false statement on any document used to
calculate taxes due under this chapter, to fail or refuse to make payment of
any taxes due, to evade the payment of any taxes due, or to aid or abet another
in any attempt to evade the payment of any taxes due under this chapter.
   (B)   In addition to any other penalty provided in this chapter, any person
who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 37(2007) § 1)
TITLE 3: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS, GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
3-1-1 Duration of terms
3-1-2 Exceptions
3-1-3 Compensation
§ 3-1-1 DURATION OF TERMS.
   No member of any permanent town board or commission shall serve for more
than eight consecutive years. A board or commission member who has served eight
consecutive years may serve again after a period of one year of nonservice.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if there is an insufficient number of applicants
for a vacant position or positions on any permanent town board or commission, a
board or commission member who has served for more than eight consecutive years
shall be eligible to apply for reappointment.
(Ord. 30(1992); Ord. 32(1993))
§ 3-1-2 EXCEPTIONS.
   All current members of the town’s permanent boards or commissions on the
effective date hereof shall be entitled to complete their term of office
regardless of whether the completion of such term would exceed eight years.
(Ord. 30(1992); Ord. 32(1993))
§ 3-1-3 COMPENSATION.
   The Town Council may provide for appropriate compensation, benefits,
privileges or reimbursement of expenses of any or all of the boards and
commissions of the town which are established by the Charter or ordinance of
the town; provided, however, that such compensation shall not be in the form of
the payment of monies but in benefits or privileges in lieu thereof.
(Ord. 37(1981) § 2; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 2: PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
Section
3-2-1 Creation
3-2-2 Membership; appointments; terms
3-2-3 Removal from office
3-2-4 Vacancies
3-2-5 Officers; meetings; rules
3-2-6 Function
§ 3-2-1 CREATION.
   There is created by the Town Council a Planning and Environmental Commission
in accordance with §
8.3 of the Charter of the town, composed of seven members who shall act in
accordance with the Charter, this chapter, the direction of the Town Council
and the ordinances of the town, and shall be appointed and serve as provided in
this chapter.
(Ord. 10(1978) § 1)
§ 3-2-2 MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENTS; TERMS.
   The Planning and Environmental Commission shall have seven members appointed
by the Town Council. All members of the Commission shall be residents,
qualified electors of the town, and if any member ceases to reside in the town,
membership on the Commission shall immediately terminate. The terms of the
members of the Planning and Environmental Commission shall be for two years on
an overlapping basis and shall expire on March 31 of the year of termination.
(Ord. 37(1981) § 1; Ord. 10 (1978) § 1; Ord. 29(1987) § 1; Ord. 10(1996))
§ 3-2-3 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   Members of the Planning and Environmental Commission shall serve at the will
of the Town Council and shall be subject to removal by the Town Council for
inefficiency, neglect of duty, failure to attend meetings, malfeasance in
office or any other reasons the Town Council deems proper.
(Ord. 7(1992))
§ 3-2-4 VACANCIES.
   Vacancies on the Planning and Environmental Commission shall occur whenever
a member of the Commission is removed by the Town Council, dies, becomes
incapacitated and unable to perform his or her duties for a period of 60 days,
resigns, ceases to meet the qualifications for Commission members or is
convicted of a felony. Vacancies shall be filled by a majority vote of the Town
Council.
(Ord. 7(1992))
§ 3-2-5 OFFICERS; MEETINGS; RULES.
   The Commission shall elect its Chairperson from among the members and shall
fill such other offices as it may determine. The term of the Chairperson shall
be for one year with eligibility for reelection. The Commission shall hold at
least one regular meeting each month. It shall adopt rules for transaction of
business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and
determinations, which record shall be a public record kept in the office of the
Town Clerk.
(Ord. 10(1978) § 1)
§ 3-2-6 FUNCTION.
   The Planning and Environmental Commission shall have the following function
and duties:
   (A)   To make and adopt a master plan, for approval by the Town Council, for
the physical development of the town, including any areas outside its
boundaries, subject to the approval of the legislative or governing body having
jurisdiction thereof, which in the Commission’s judgment bear relation to the
planning of the town. The plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and
descriptive matter, shall show the Commission’s recommendations for the
development of the subject territory;
   (B)   To review and recommend to the Town Council a zoning ordinance with
appropriate regulations, which may be specifically provided or required by
ordinance of the town;
   (C)   To review and recommend to the Town Council subdivision regulations as
may be provided or required by ordinance of the town;
   (D)   To review and approve environmental impact reports and mitigation
measures as they relate to the zoning ordinance, codified in Title 12 of this
code;
   (E)   To review and comment on programs, studies of environmental issues for
the town and the Gore Valley;
   (F)   To conduct research and appropriate studies of environmental issues
for the town and the Gore Valley;
   (G)   To make recommendations to the Town Council for the control of
pollution and the protection of the environment;
   (H)   When data is obtained indicating that state air and water pollution
standards have been violated, to advise the Council of the necessary and
appropriate action;
   (I)   To be concerned and involved with environmental issues for the entire
Gore Valley and to take the initiative to organize and coordinate environmental
studies and measures necessary to protect the residents of Gore Valley and
Eagle County; and
   (J)   To consider any other matters pertaining to the Commission as provided
by law, resolution or ordinance, and to act in an advisory capacity to the Town
Council when so requested, and to perform all other powers and duties
authorized and required by ordinance or state law.
(Ord. 10(1978) § 1)
CHAPTER 3: ARTS BOARD
Section
3-3-1 Adoption of policies and guidelines
3-3-2 Appointment
3-3-3 Membership; terms
3-3-4 Removal from office
3-3-5 Vacancies
3-3-6 Officers; meetings; rules
3-3-7 Function
§ 3-3-1 ADOPTION OF POLICIES AND GUIDELINES.
   The Town Council hereby adopts the art in public places program including
the “Art In Public Places Program Policies And Guidelines” dated July 1989, and
as such may be amended from time to time by resolution of the Town Council.
(Ord. 7(1992))
§ 3-3-2 APPOINTMENT.
   The Town Council hereby appoints the Vail Arts Board composed of five
members who shall act in accordance with the Charter, this chapter, the
direction of the Town Council, the ordinances of the town and shall be
appointed and serve as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 3(2015) § 1; Ord. 5(2020) § 1)
§ 3-3-3 MEMBERSHIP; TERMS.
   The Arts Board shall consist of five members appointed by the Town Council.
In addition, the Arts Board may consist of honorary advisory members who shall
not have the power to vote on issues which come before the Board. The number
and term of such advisory members shall be at the discretion of the Town
Council. All members of the Arts Board shall be individuals who have
demonstrated interest or expertise in architecture, art criticism, art
education, art history, foreign arts, graphic arts, interior design, landscape
architecture, town planning or other art and design related fields, or who have
demonstrated a strong interest in the visual arts and civic improvement. All
members shall either be residents of the town, or own property within the town.
The terms of the members of the Arts Board shall be two years on an overlapping
basis and shall expire on March 31 of the year of termination.
(Ord. 3(2015) § 2; Ord. 5(2020) § 1)
§ 3-3-4 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   Members of the Arts Board shall serve at the will of the Town Council and
shall be subject to removal by the Town Council for inefficiency, neglect of
duty, failure to attend meetings, malfeasance in office or any other reasons
the Town Council deems proper.
(Ord. 7(1992))
§ 3-3-5 VACANCIES.
   Vacancies on the Arts Board shall occur whenever a member of the Arts Board
is removed by the Town Council, dies, becomes incapacitated and unable to
perform his or her duties for a period of 60 days, resigns, ceases to meet the
qualifications for Arts Board members or is convicted of a felony. Vacancies
shall be filled by a majority vote of the Town Council.
(Ord. 7(1992))
§ 3-3-6 OFFICERS; MEETINGS; RULES.
   The Arts Board shall elect a Chairperson from among the members and shall
fill such other offices as it may determine. The Chairperson shall not be a
member of the Town Council, the Design Review Board or the Planning and
Environmental Commission. The term of the Chairperson shall be for one year,
with eligibility for reelection for one additional term. The Arts Board shall
meet as it determines to be necessary, and its meetings shall be in accordance
with Robert’s Rules of Order unless it adopts other rules for the transaction
of business. The Board shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions,
findings and determinations.
(Ord. 7(1992))
§ 3-3-7 FUNCTION.
   The Arts Board’s function shall include, without limitation:
   (A)   To promote and encourage the development and public awareness of any
interest in the fine and performing arts in the town;
   (B)   To advise the Town Council in connection with all matters relating to
the artistic and cultural development of the town;
   (C)   To perform such other functions associated with the arts as the Town
Council may, from time to time, direct;
   (D)   To assist in the preparation of applications for grants or other
sources of funding for arts programs for the town; and
   (E)   To administer the town arts program, its policies and guidelines.
(Ord. 7(1992))
CHAPTER 4: DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
Section
3-4-1 Board established
3-4-2 Terms
3-4-3 Vacancies
3-4-4 Procedure
3-4-5 Meetings
§ 3-4-1 BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   There is established a Design Review Board (DRB) of the town. The Design
Review Board shall be composed of five members. Each member shall be a resident
of the town, and appointed by the Town Council.
(Ord. 39(1983) § 1; Ord. 18(1985) §§ 1, 2; Ord. 46(1991) § 1; Ord. 9(1996) § 5;
Ord. 10(1996); Ord. 17(2000) § 1)
§ 3-4-2 TERMS.
   The terms of office for the four members at large shall be two years on an
overlapping basis and shall expire on March 31 of the year of termination.
(Ord. 39(1983) § 1; Ord. 18(1985) §§ 1, 2; Ord. 46(1991) § 1; Ord. 9(1996) § 5;
Ord. 10(1996))
§ 3-4-3 VACANCIES.
   A vacancy on the Design Review Board shall occur whenever a member of the
Board is removed by the Town Council, dies, becomes incapacitated and unable to
perform such duties for a period of 60 days, resigns, ceases to be a resident
of the town or is convicted of a felony. In the event that a vacancy occurs,
the Town Council shall appoint a successor to fill the vacancy and serve the
remainder of the term of the former member. The Board shall select its own
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its members. The Chairperson, or in
his or her absence, the Vice Chairperson, shall be the presiding officer of its
meetings. In the absence of both the Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson from
a meeting, the members present shall appoint a member to serve as acting
Chairperson at the meeting. All business of the Board shall be held at the
municipal building of the town, unless otherwise specified, with adequate
notice given to all interested parties. Three members shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business, but in the absence of a quorum, a lesser
number shall adjourn any meeting to a later time and date, and in the absence
of members, any staff member shall adjourn any meeting to a later time and
date.
(Ord. 39(1983) § 1; Ord. 18(1985) §§ 1, 2; Ord. 46(1991) § 1; Ord. 9(1996) § 5;
Ord. 10(1996))
§ 3-4-4 PROCEDURE.
   The Board shall operate in accordance with its own rules of procedure as
provided for in § 8.6 of the Home Rule Charter. The rules shall be filed with
the Town Clerk and maintained in the records of the town, and shall be subject
to public inspection; provided, however, that the Board shall submit its
proposed rules or any amendment thereto to the Town Council which, by motion,
shall approve the rules or amendment and direct their adoption by the Board or
disapprove the proposal with directions for revision and resubmission.
(Ord. 39(1983) § 1; Ord. 18(1985) §§ 1, 2; Ord. 46(1991) § 1; Ord. 9(1996) § 5;
Ord. 10(1996))
§ 3-4-5 MEETINGS.
   The Design Review Board shall meet the first and third Wednesday of each
month. Additional meetings may be called by the Design Review Board or the town
staff if such meetings are deemed necessary. Should the staff or the Design
Review Board require any additional meetings, a notification of the date and
items to be reviewed at the additional meetings shall be given by publication
once, in a newspaper of general circulation in Eagle County, no later than the
Friday of the week prior to the meeting.
(Ord. 39(1983) § 1; Ord. 18(1985) §§ 1, 2; Ord. 46(1991) § 1; Ord. 9(1996) § 5;
Ord. 10(1996))
CHAPTER 5: LOCAL LICENSING AUTHORITY
Section
3-5-1 Title
3-5-2 Local authority designated
3-5-3 Membership
3-5-4 Compensation
3-5-5 Expenses and staff
3-5-6 Officers
3-5-7 Meetings
3-5-8 Conduct of proceedings and hearings
3-5-9 License application fees
§ 3-5-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the CHAPTER DESIGNATING LOCAL LICENSING
AUTHORITY.
(Ord. 9(1975) § 1)
§ 3-5-2 LOCAL AUTHORITY DESIGNATED.
   Pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. §§ 44-4-103(4), 44-3-103(27), and the
Town Charter § 8.6, there is designated a Local Licensing Authority of the town
(the “Authority”), a commission composed of five members appointed by the Town
Council, for the licensing of locations within the town to sell alcoholic
liquors and fermented malt beverages and for the local administration of the
Colorado Liquor Code of 1935 and the Colorado Beer Code in accordance with said
statutes.
(Ord. 9(1975) § 2; Ord. 5(2022) §1)
§ 3-5-3 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Qualifications. Each member appointed to the Local Licensing Authority
shall be a citizen of the United States, a qualified elector of the town, have
resided in the town or any territory thereafter annexed for not less than two
years immediately preceding such appointment, and have no direct financial
interest in any license to sell alcoholic liquors or fermented malt beverages
or any location having such a license.
   (B)   Terms. The terms of office for members of the Local Licensing
Authority shall be two years on an overlapping basis; provided, however, that
members appointed in June 1979, shall be for two years to June 1981, and the
remaining three members of the Authority shall serve terms that expire in June
1980. Thereafter, the successors shall serve a term of two years.
   (C)   Removal from office. Members of the Local Licensing Authority shall
serve at the will of the Town Council and shall be subject to removal by the
Town Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, failure to attend meetings,
malfeasance in office or any other reasons the Town Council deems proper.
   (D)   Vacancies. A vacancy shall occur whenever a member of the Local
Licensing Authority is removed by the Town Council, dies, becomes incapacitated
and unable to perform such duties for a period of 60 days, resigns, ceases to
be a resident of the town, is convicted of a felony or acquires a direct
financial interest in any license to sell alcoholic liquors or fermented malt
beverages or any location having such a license.
(Ord. 9(1975) §§ 3–5; Ord. 23(1979) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 3-5-4 COMPENSATION.
   All members of the Local Licensing Authority shall serve without
compensation.
(Ord. 9(1975) § 6)
§ 3-5-5 EXPENSES AND STAFF.
   All reasonable expenses of the Local Licensing Authority shall be paid by
the town; technical advice and services shall be provided by the Town Manager,
Town Attorney and any other town employees designated by the Town Council as
the staff of the Local Licensing Authority.
(Ord. 9(1975) § 7)
§ 3-5-6 OFFICERS.
   The Local Licensing Authority shall elect its own Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson from among its members; the Chairperson or, in such person’s
absence, the Vice Chairperson shall be presiding officer at its meetings. In
the absence of both the Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson from a meeting,
the members present shall appoint a member to serve as acting Chairperson at
said meeting.
(Ord. 9(1975) § 8)
§ 3-5-7 MEETINGS.
   All business of the Local Licensing Authority shall be conducted at meetings
which are open to the public. All meetings of the Local Licensing Authority
shall be held at the Municipal Building of the town. Three members shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but in the absence of a
quorum a lesser number shall adjourn any meeting to a later time or date, and
in the absence of all members, any staff member shall adjourn any meeting to a
later time or date.
(Ord. 9(1975) § 9)
§ 3-5-8 CONDUCT OF PROCEEDINGS AND HEARINGS.
   The Authority shall conduct its proceedings in accordance with the
provisions of the Colorado Liquor Code of 1935 and the Colorado Beer Code. In
order to ensure due process of law the Authority shall conduct its hearings and
make its determinations as nearly as practicable in accordance with the
procedures set forth in C.R.S. § 24-4-105, as amended. Written records of its
proceedings shall be maintained, which shall be open to public inspection.
(Ord. 9(1975) § 10; Ord. 5(2022) §2)
§ 3-5-9 LICENSE APPLICATION FEES.
   Each application for a new license, renewal of a license or the transfer of
a license under the Colorado Beer Code or the Colorado Liquor Code, filed with
the Local Licensing Authority shall be accompanied by an application fee to
defray the actual and necessary expenses incurred by the Authority in its
investigation of and hearing upon the application and the expenses of
publishing and posting the required notices. The application fee shall be in
addition to the other fees required by statute, and the same shall be paid into
the treasury of the town. The application fees shall be as established by the
Colorado Department of Revenue Liquor Enforcement Division.
(Ord. 9(1975) § 11; Ord. 28(1976) § 1; Ord. 10(1985) § 1; Ord. 27(1989) § 1;
Ord. 32(1994) § 2; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 6: BUILDING AND FIRE CODE APPEALS BOARD
Section
3-6-1   Board Established
3-6-2   Powers and duties
3-6-3   Membership
3-6-4   Procedures
§ 3-6-1 BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   The Building and Fire Code Appeals Board (the “Board”) is hereby
established.
(Ord. 3 (2023), § 1)
§ 3-6-2 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Board shall be authorized to:
      (1)   Hear and decide upon appeals of an order, decision, determination,
or interpretation made by the Building Official or the Fire Code Official under
Section
10-1-13  of this Code.
      (2)   Assist the Building Official and the Fire Code Official with
determining code compliance of alternative materials, designs and methods of
construction and equipment.
      (3)   Make recommendations to the Town Council on matters relating to
building and fire code adoption, compliance, intent, modification, and
amendment.
(Ord. 3 (2023), § 1)
§ 3-6-3 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Appointment. The Board shall consist of seven (7) members, all
appointed by the Town Council. In addition, the Building Official and Fire Code
Official shall be ex officio members of the Board, but shall have no voting
rights, shall not be counted towards a quorum, and shall not participate in any
appeal made to the Board.
   (B)   Qualifications. Each member shall be qualified by experience,
knowledge, and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction,
codes and standards, hazards of fire or fire protection systems, such as: a
licensed architect; a licensed engineer with structural, mechanical,
electrical, or fire protection engineering experience; a construction company
owner, executive, superintendent, or other manager; or any other individual
with similar experience, knowledge, and training. No Board member shall be an
employee of the Town.
   (C)   Terms. The term for each Board member shall be four (4) years,
provided that terms be staggered, and shorter terms may be required to maintain
the stagger. All terms shall expire on March 31. Section
3-1-1  of this Code shall not apply to this Board.
   (D)   Removal. Board members may be removed by the Town Council for
inefficiency, neglect of duty, failure to attend meetings, or malfeasance in
office; provided that prior to such removal, the Board member shall receive
written notice of the charges supporting removal and shall have an opportunity
to be heard.
   (E)   Vacancies. If a vacancy occurs in the middle of a Board member’s term,
the Town Council shall appoint a successor to fill the vacancy and the new
member shall serve the remainder of the term of the former member.
(Ord. 3 (2023), § 1)
§ 3-6-4 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Board shall establish policies and procedures necessary to carry
out its duties. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules
of evidence or procedure but shall mandate that only relevant information be
presented.
   (B)   The Board shall meet once per month, as necessary. All Board meetings
shall comply with the Colorado Open Meetings Law, C.R.S. § 24-6-401, et seq.
   (C)   The Board shall annually select one of its members to serve as Chair
and another to serve as Vice-Chair. The Chair, or in the Chair’s absence, the
Vice-Chair, shall be the presiding officer at Board meetings. In the absence of
both the Chair and the Vice-Chair, the Board members present shall appoint a
member to serve as acting Chair at said meeting.
   (D)   A quorum of the Board shall be four (4) members. A simple majority of
Board members present shall be required for the Board to take any action.
   (E)   Any Board member with a conflict of interest related to any matter
before the Board shall declare such interest and recuse themselves from any
discussion, deliberation or vote on such matter.
   (F)   All appeals made to the Board shall be in accordance with Section
10-1-13  of this Code.
(Ord. 3 (2023), § 1)
TITLE 4: BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
Section
4-1-1 Purpose
4-1-2 Definitions
4-1-3 License required
4-1-4 Fees
4-1-5 Payment of fee
4-1-6 Exemptions
4-1-7 Administration and enforcement
4-1-8 Delinquencies and penalties
4-1-9 Attorney fees and costs
4-1-10 Revenue disposition
4-1-11 Notice of exemption
4-1-12 Transfer of license
4-1-13 No refunds
4-1-14 Evaluation and extension of chapter
§ 4-1-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter shall be to require the licensing and regulation
of business activities, occupations and enterprises conducted within the town,
to provide the town with necessary information relating to businesses and
professions operating within the town and to generate and raise additional
revenues for the town for the purpose of marketing and promoting the town and
its environs as a year round resort, to promote and market activities and
events beneficial to the economic health of the community.
(Ord. 38(1988) § 1)
§ 4-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   ACCOMMODATION SERVICE. The furnishing of rooms or accommodations by any
person, partnership, association, corporation, estate, representative or any
other combination of individuals, to a person who for a consideration uses,
possesses or has the right to use or possess, any room in a hotel, apartment
hotel, accommodation unit, lodge, lodging house, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest
ranch, trailer coach, mobile home, auto camp, trailer court and park,
fractional fee club, fractional fee club unit, bed and breakfast or short-term
rental property for a period of less than 30 consecutive days under any
concession, permit, right of access, license or agreement, including property
management and similar services, but excluding owners of short-term rental
properties, as that term is defined in §
4-14-2.
   ACCOMMODATION UNIT. Any room or group of rooms without kitchen facilities
designed for or adapted to occupancy by guests and accessible from common
corridors, walks or balconies without necessarily passing through another
accommodation unit or dwelling unit.
   ATHLETIC CLUB. A business which has as one of its primary sources of income
the charging for the use of racquet courts and/or other athletic facilities
such as free weights, weight machines, swimming pools and the like.
   BUSINESS. Any business, profession, occupation or activity engaged in by a
person for profit, gain, benefit or advantage together with all devices,
machines, vehicles and appurtenances which is conducted on premises within the
town.
   BUSINESS FLOOR AREA. The number of square feet located within any “premises”
as defined in this section, except that the number of square feet located in
storage areas and administrative offices within retail business premises shall
not be considered business floor area.
   CONSTRUCTION SERVICES. Building contractors, plumbers, electricians,
carpenters, masons, excavators, roofers and painters.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms with kitchen facilities designed
for or used as an independent housekeeping unit.
   FINANCIAL SERVICES. Any savings and loan company, bank, mortgage company or
mortgage broker.
   GARAGE OR YARD SALES. Any retail sales of secondhand goods in a residential
area, not exceeding a consecutive three-day period nor a total of six days per
calendar year, but not including:
      (1)   Sales conducted by a professional or compensated agent of the owner
of the items to be sold; and
      (2)   Sales of new items that had been held out for sale in a commercial
establishment.
   GENERAL SERVICE BUSINESS. Any business not otherwise defined or classified
herein.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A business which is conducted within a residence and is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the residence for dwelling
purposes.
   LICENSE YEAR. The calendar year January 1 through December 31.
   LICENSEE. Any person required to obtain an annual business license.
   LODGE. A building or a group of associated buildings designed for occupancy
primarily as the temporary lodging place of individuals or families, either in
accommodation units or dwelling units, and in which all such units are operated
under a single management providing the occupants thereof customary hotel
services and facilities.
   LODGE SUPPORT BUSINESS. A business, service or facility located within the
lodge, owned by the same person owning the lodge, and providing customary
services and facilities primarily to occupants of the lodge.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, estate, trust,
association, joint venture or other entity.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS. A premises within the town where a licensee conducts
business. Only one (1) premises owned and operated by a shared services
business shall be considered a place of business and subject to licensing
requirements pursuant to this chapter.
   PREMISES. Any land, structure, lodge, store, office, salesroom, warehouse or
other place of business situated within the town which is owned, leased or
occupied by a business.
   PROFESSIONAL. Any doctor, dentist, psychologist, physical therapist, nurse,
medical assistant, lawyer, architect, booking agent, engineer, title company,
surveyor, insurance company, agent or broker, consultant, securities dealer,
financial planner, veterinarian, accountant, chiropractor and other related
fields of expertise.
   RENTAL INTEREST. The smallest portion of an accommodation service that can
be separately leased, licensed or used.
   RESTAURANT. Any establishment no matter how named or designated at which
food is sold for consumption on the premises.
   RETAIL. The sale of commodities to the consumer.
   SHARED SERVICES BUSINESS. A business operating within the town that provides
products through self-service locations on premises throughout the town.
   SKI COMPANY. A business which has as one of its primary sources of income
the operation of ski lifts.
   TAVERN. A business holding a State of Colorado tavern liquor license.
   TOWN. The Town of Vail, Colorado.
(Ord. 38(1988) § 1; Ord. 6(1998) § 1; Ord. 1(2015) § 1; Ord. 15(2017) § 2; Ord.
3(2019) § 1; Ord. 21(2024) § 1)
§ 4-1-3 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to maintain, operate, conduct or engage in any
business activity, including a shared services business, within the town, or to
use in connection with a business any vehicle, premises, machine or device
without having first obtained a business license pursuant to this chapter. A
business license is required for each place of business.
(Ord. 21(2024) § 2)
§ 4-1-4 FEES.
   (A)   Zones designated. For the purposes of this chapter, the town shall be
divided into Zone 1 and Zone 2, as set forth on the map designated as exhibit A
on file in the office of the Town Clerk, and incorporated herein by reference.
   (B)   Schedule. An annual business license fee shall be paid by every person
doing business within the town in accordance with the following schedule.
      (1)   Accommodation services. Accommodation services shall pay a fee as
follows.
         (a)   Accommodation services with more than two rental interests shall
pay a flat fee of $325, plus a fee of $17 per rental interest located in Zone 1
and $12.75 for each rental interest located in Zone 2.
         (b)   Accommodation services with two or fewer rental interests shall
pay a flat fee of $150, plus a fee of $17 per rental interest located in Zone 1
and $12.75 for each rental interest located in Zone 2.
         (c)   The accommodation service licensing requirement applies to
businesses conducting property management or similar services for short-term
rental property, but it does not apply to short-term rental property owners
separately registered under Title 4, Chapter 14, of this code.
      (2)   Restaurants; taverns. Restaurants and taverns shall pay a business
license fee as follows.
         (a)   Zone 1: Restaurants and taverns located in Zone 1.
            1.   Restaurants with a state restaurant and hotel liquor license
shall pay a minimum fee of $325 and, in addition, a fee of $8 per seat located
indoors.
            2.   Restaurants without any state liquor license shall pay a
minimum fee of $325 and, in addition, a fee of $4 per seat located indoors.
            3.   Establishments with a state tavern license, 3.2 beer license,
beer and wine license or club license shall pay a minimum fee of $325 and, in
addition, a fee of $4 per seat located indoors.
         (b)   Zone 2: Restaurants and taverns located in Zone 2.
            1.   Restaurants with a state restaurant and hotel liquor license
shall pay a minimum fee of $243.75, and in addition, a fee of $6 per seat
located indoors.
            2.   Restaurants without any state liquor license shall pay a
minimum fee of $243.75, and in addition, a fee of $3 per seat located indoors.
            3.   Establishments with a state tavern license, 3.2 beer license,
beer and wine license or club license shall pay a minimum fee of $243.75, and
in addition, a fee of $3 per seat located indoors.
      (3)   Construction. Construction service businesses shall pay a fee as
follows.
         (a)   Construction service businesses in Zone 1 shall pay a business
license fee of $325.
         (b)   Construction service businesses located in Zone 2 shall pay a
fee of $243.75.
      (4)   Real estate. Persons involved in real estate sales and/or
management and/or development shall pay a business license fee as follows.
         (a)   Real estate sales and/or management and/or development
businesses in Zone 1 shall pay a minimum fee of $325, and if there is more than
one person with an active real estate sales or broker’s license employed or
doing business on the premises, a $50 fee for each additional sales person or
broker.
         (b)   Real estate sales and/or management and/or development
businesses located in Zone 2 shall pay a minimum fee of $243.75, and if there
is more than one person with an active real estate sales or broker’s license
employed or doing business on the premises, a $37.50 fee for each additional
sales person or broker.
      (5)   Business professionals. Professionals shall pay a business license
fee as follows.
         (a)   Professionals located in Zone 1 shall pay a minimum fee of $325,
and if there is more than one professional employed or doing business on the
premises, a $50 fee for each additional professional.
         (b)   Professionals doing business in Zone 2 shall pay a minimum fee
of $243.75, and in addition, if there is more than one professional employed or
doing business on the premises, a $37.50 fee for each additional professional.
      (6)   Financial services. Financial services shall pay a business license
fee as follows.
         (a)   Financial services located in Zone 1 shall pay a minimum fee of
$325, and in addition, a fee of $0.10 for each square foot of business floor
area.
         (b)   Financial services located in Zone 2 shall pay a minimum fee of
$243.75, and in addition, a fee of $0.075 per square foot of business floor
area.
      (7)   Athletic clubs. Athletic clubs shall pay a business license fee as
follows.
         (a)   Athletic clubs located in Zone 1 shall pay a fee of $600.
         (b)   Athletic clubs located in Zone 2 shall pay a fee of $450.
      (8)   Retail. Retail businesses shall pay a business license fee as
follows.
         (a)   Retail businesses in Zone 1.
            1.   Retail businesses with a business floor area of not more than
1,500 square feet shall pay a fee of $325.
            2.   Retail businesses with a business floor area of not less than
1,501 square feet nor more than 2,500 square feet shall pay a fee of $650.
            3.   Retail businesses with a business floor area of not less than
2,501 square feet nor more than 3,500 square feet shall pay a fee of $975.
            4.   Retail businesses with a business floor area of not less than
3,501 square feet nor more than 10,000 square feet shall pay a fee of $1,500.
            5.   Retail businesses with a business floor area of not less than
10,001 square feet shall pay a fee of $2,200.
         (b)   Retail businesses in Zone 2.
            1.   Retail businesses with a business floor area of not more than
1,500 square feet shall pay a fee of $244.
            2.   Retail businesses with a business floor area of not less than
1,501 square feet nor more than 2,500 square feet shall pay a fee of $488.
            3.   Retail businesses with a business floor area of not less than
2,501 square feet nor more than 3,500 square feet shall pay a fee of $732.
            4.   Retail businesses with a business floor area of not less than
3,501 square feet nor more than 10,000 square feet shall pay a fee of $1,125.
            5.   Retail businesses with a business floor area of not less than
10,001 square feet shall pay a fee of $1,650.
      (9)   General services. General service business shall pay a business
license fee as follows
         (a)   General service businesses located in Zone 1 shall pay a
business license fee of $325.
         (b)   General service businesses located in Zone 2 shall pay a
business license fee of $243.75.
      (10)   Home occupations. Home occupations shall pay a business license
fee as follows:
         (a)   Zone 1, $150; and
         (b)   Zone 2, $112.50.
      (11)   Lodge support businesses. Lodge support businesses shall pay a
minimum business license fee depending on the category of business being
operated at the rate of 75% of the rate charged for each category listed above,
and shall pay an additional fee depending upon the type of business being
operated at the same rate as set forth for each category listed above.
      (12)   Related businesses under single ownership. Where more than one
business is operated in the same premises and is owned by the same person,
partnership or corporation, the business license fee shall be paid as follows.
         (a)   Only one business license fee shall be paid for all businesses
in the same category of the business categories set forth in subsections (B)(2)
through (B)(10) of this section.
         (b)   A business license shall be paid for each business in different
categories of the business categories set forth in subsections (B)(2) through
(B)(10) of this section.
(Ord. 38(1988) §1; Ord. 8(1989) §§ 1 - 6; Ord. 34(1990) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 1
(2015) § 2; Ord. 15(2017) § 2; Ord. 3(2019) § 2)
§ 4-1-5 PAYMENT OF FEE.
   (A)   Basis for fees. The license fee required hereunder shall be paid as
follows.
      (1)   The license fee shall be paid to the Finance Department of the town
on or before January 31 or at the option of the licensee, 50% on or before
January 31, and 50% on or before February 28 of each license year for any
business in operation prior to said date, which obtained an annual business
license for the preceding year, or otherwise shall be paid prior to the
commencement of business activity in each license year.
      (2)   At the time an applicant applies for a business license hereunder,
the applicant shall advise the town by affidavit under oath of the following.
         (a)   If the business is the short-term rental of accommodation units
or dwelling units the applicant shall advise the town of the number of units he
or she intends to rent for the current year.
         (b)   If the business is the restaurant business, the applicant shall
advise the town of the number of seats in the restaurant for the current year.
         (c)   If the business is a business whose license fee may be computed
on the basis of business floor area, the applicant shall advise the town of the
amount of business floor area in the premises.
         (d)   If the business is a business whose license fee may be computed
on the number of employees, the applicant shall advise the town of the number
of permanent employees.
   (B)   Information validity. In addition, any business license applicant or
licensee shall, upon request, provide the town with information documenting and
validating such information provided under oath.
(Ord. 38(1988) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-1-6 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Criteria. Persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter are as
follows:
      (1)   Persons who pay an occupation tax or franchise tax to the town;
      (2)   Churches or established religious organizations;
      (3)   Nonprofit corporations;
      (4)   Hospitals;
      (5)   Schools;
      (6)   Governments, including Colorado special districts;
      (7)   Persons exempt under federal or Colorado law; and
      (8)   Garage sales or yard sales.
   (B)   Notice to be filed. All exempt individuals, except garage sales or
yard sales, shall be required to file a notice of exemption in accordance with
§
4-1-11 of this chapter.
   (C)   A business that has a state standard retail license and makes retail
sales within the Town, but has no physical presence in the Town, or only has an
incidental presence in the Town, shall be exempt from the requirements of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 38(1988) § 1; Ord. 6(1998) § 1; Ord. 4(2023) § 1)
§ 4-1-7 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The administration of the annual business license required by this chapter
shall be vested in the Finance Director or his or her designee(s) who is
authorized to do the following:
   (A)   Collect license fees;
   (B)   Adopt all forms and prescribe the information to be given therein;
   (C)   Promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations necessary
to the operation and enforcement of this chapter;
   (D)   Investigate and determine the eligibility of each applicant for an
annual business license;
   (E)   Investigate, determine and order the revocation or suspension of an
annual business license for violation by the licensee under provision of this
chapter; and
   (F)   Examine at any time those records of each licensee which the town
determines are necessary to verify and document license requirements, provided
the contents of such records shall remain confidential and not a part of the
public records.
(Ord. 38(1988) § 1)
§ 4-1-8 DELINQUENCIES AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   If the business license fee imposed hereunder is not paid within 30
days from the time it becomes due it shall be deemed delinquent and the town
may assess a delinquency charge in the amount of 10% of the license fee due.
   (B)   A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in §
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that such violation exists or continues to exist
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (C)   The town may seek an injunction to restrain a person from engaging in
business on premises within the town who does not obtain an annual business
license under this chapter or whose license is revoked or suspended, and this
remedy shall be in addition to all other remedies prescribed in this chapter or
available in law or equity.
(Ord. 38(1988) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-1-9 ATTORNEY FEES AND COSTS.
   In the event it is necessary for the town to take action for the enforcement
of this chapter, there shall be added to any fees due hereunder all reasonable
costs and fees incurred by the town including reasonable attorney fees.
(Ord. 38(1988) § 1)
§ 4-1-10 REVENUE DISPOSITION.
   The license fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be special
revenues which shall be credited to a special revenue fund of the town. It
shall be used for the payment of reasonable costs incurred in connection with
the marketing and promotion of the town’s principal industry, tourism, and for
the payment of expenses related to such marketing and promotion, and to promote
and market activities and events beneficial to the economic health and vitality
of the community. The town shall be entitled to receive 5% of the license fees
collected hereunder into the General Fund for administration of the business
license fee.
(Ord. 38(1988) § 1)
§ 4-1-11 NOTICE OF EXEMPTION.
   Any person claiming an exemption from the provisions of this chapter shall
file a notice of exemption with the Finance Director of the town on or before
January 20 of each license year for any business in operation prior to that
date, or otherwise file notice prior to the commencement of business activity
in each year.
(Ord. 38(1988) § 1)
§ 4-1-12 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Transfer fee. If a business is sold or transferred to a different
individual, partnership or corporation after the business license fee for any
given year has been paid, the new owner shall pay a $100 transfer fee, and upon
payment of said fee, shall not be required to obtain a new license or pay an
additional license fee for the year of said transfer.
   (B)   New business in currently licensed premises. If a business opens after
September 1 of any calendar year, and occupies a space or location where the
business license fee has been paid for the current year by a prior business of
the same category as set forth in §
4-1-4 of this chapter, the new business can transfer the business license for a
$100 transfer fee for the remainder of the current year. The transfer of the
business license fee creates no right to a refund for the prior business.
   (C)   License fee prorated. If a business opens during the calendar year the
business license fee as set forth in §
4-1-4 of this chapter, will be prorated on a quarterly basis. If a business
opens on or between January 1 and March 31 of the calendar year 100% of the fee
will be due, if a business opens on or between April 1 and June 30 of the
calendar year 75% of the fee will be due, if a business opens on or between
July 1 and September 30 of the calendar year 50% of the fee will be due, if a
business opens on or after October 1 of the calendar year 25% of the fee will
be due. The proration does not apply to seasonal businesses that have had a
business license in the prior years.
   (D)   Minimum fee. Under no circumstances will the business license fee be
reduced to an amount less than $100 because of proration.
(Ord. 38(1988) § 1; Ord. 8(1989) § 7; Ord. 21(1995) § 1)
§ 4-1-13 NO REFUNDS.
   No business license fee shall be refunded on the basis that the business for
which the license has been issued has ceased, or because the business has been
transferred to new owners.
(Ord. 38(1988) § 1)
§ 4-1-14 EVALUATION AND EXTENSION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   The Town Council, having evaluated the marketing program and this
chapter, hereby extends this chapter indefinitely from the effective date
hereof.
   (B)   At a regular or special Town Council meeting or Town Council work
session, on or before August 31 of each year, the marketing board appointed by
the Town Council shall report to the Town Council members on the marketing
board on the effectiveness of the marketing and promotional program financed by
funds raised pursuant to this chapter, and shall make recommendations to the
Council in regard thereto. Subsequent to this report, the Town Council shall
evaluate the program and this chapter.
(Ord. 38(1988) § 1; Ord. 28(1992) § 1)
CHAPTER 2: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
4-2-1 Standards for issuance of optional premises license
4-2-2 Temporary permits
4-2-3 Bed and breakfast permit
4-2-4 Tastings
4-2-5 Special event permits
4-2-6 Consumption of alcohol in public places
4-2-7 Entertainment districts
4-2-8 Duties of Town Clerk
4-2-9 Hearing Officer
§ 4-2-1 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF OPTIONAL PREMISES LICENSE.
   The following standards for the issuance of optional premises licenses or
for optional premises for a hotel and restaurant license are hereby adopted
pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. § 44-3-310, as amended.
   (A)   Additional standards. These standards adopted herein shall be
considered in addition to all other standards applicable to the issuance of
licenses under the Colorado Liquor Code for optional premises license or for
optional premises for a hotel and restaurant license. These two types of
licenses for optional premises will collectively be referred to as “optional
premises” in these standards unless otherwise provided.
   (B)   Eligible facilities.
      (1)   An optional premises may only be approved when that premises is
located on or adjacent to an “outdoor sports and recreational facility” as
defined in C.R.S. § 44-3-103(33)(b), as amended. The types of outdoor sports
and recreational facilities which may be considered for an outdoor premises
license include the following:
         (a)   Country club;
         (b)   Golf courses and driving ranges;
         (c)   Ice skating areas;
         (d)   Ski areas; and
         (e)   Swimming pools.
      (2)   There are no restrictions on the minimum size of the outdoor sports
and recreational facilities which may be eligible for the approval of an
optional premises license. However, the Local Licensing Authority may consider
the size of the particular outdoor sports or recreational facility in
relationship to the number of optional premises requested for the facility.
   (C)   Number of optional premises. There are no restrictions on the number
of optional premises which any one licensee may have on his or her outdoor
sports or recreational facility. However, any applicant requesting approval of
more than one optional premises shall demonstrate the need for each optional
premises in relationship to the outdoor sports or recreational facility and its
guests.
   (D)   Submittal requirements. When submitting a request for the approval of
an optional premises, an applicant shall also submit the following information:
      (1)   A map or other drawing illustrating the outdoor sports or
recreational facility boundaries and the approximate location of each optional
premises requested;
      (2)   A legal description of the approximate area within which the
optional premises shall be located;
      (3)   A description of the method which shall be used to identify the
boundaries of the optional premises when it is in use; and
      (4)   A description of the provisions which have been made for storing
malt, vinous and spirituous liquors in a secured area on or off the optional
premises for the future use on the optional premises.
   (E)   Advance notification. Pursuant to C.R.S. §44-3-310(3) and (4), as
amended, no alcoholic beverages may be served on the optional premises until
the licensee has provided written notice to the state and local licensing
authorities 48 hours prior to serving alcoholic beverages on the optional
premises. Such notice must contain the specific days and hours on which the
optional premises are to be used. In this regard, there is no limitation on the
number of days which a licensee may specify in each notice. However, no notice
may specify any date of use which is more than 180 days from the notice date.
(Ord. 20(1984) § 1; Ord. 5(2022) §4)
§ 4-2-2 TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   (A)   Statutory authorization. This section is enacted in accordance with
C.R.S. §§ 44-3-303 which authorize a Local Licensing Authority, at its
discretion, to issue a temporary permit to a transferee of a fermented malt
beverage license or a liquor license issued by the state licensing authority.
   (B)   Authority to issue. The Local Licensing Authority is hereby authorized
to issue a temporary permit to a transferee of a fermented malt beverage
license or of any class of liquor license which shall authorize the transferee
to continue selling such fermented malt beverages or alcoholic beverages as
permitted under the permanent license during the period in which an application
to transfer the ownership of the license is pending.
   (C)   Conditions; fee. A temporary permit shall authorize the transferee to
conduct business and sell either fermented malt beverages or alcoholic
beverages, as the case may be, at retail in accordance with the license of the
transferrer subject to compliance with all of the following conditions:
      (1)   The premises where such fermented malt beverages or alcoholic
beverages are sold shall have been previously licensed by the state and Local
Licensing Authority and such license shall have been valid at the time the
application for transfer of ownership was filed with the Local Licensing
Authority;
      (2)   The applicant has filed with the Local Licensing Authority on forms
provided by the Department of Revenue a completed application for the transfer
of the fermented malt beverage license or the liquor license; and
      (3)   The application for a temporary permit shall be filed no later than
30 days after the filing of the application for transfer of ownership and shall
be accompanied by a temporary permit fee of $100.
   (D)   Process. The temporary permit set forth in this section may be granted
by the Town Clerk with the verbal approval of the Chairperson of the Local
Licensing Authority and if the Chairperson is not available such approval may
be given by any member of the Local Licensing Authority. If so granted, the
temporary permit shall be issued within three working days after the receipt of
the completed application. A temporary permit issued in accordance with this
section shall be valid until such time as the application to transfer ownership
of the license to the applicant is granted or for 120 days, whichever shall
occur first; except that, if the application to transfer the license has not
been granted within the 120-day period and the transferee demonstrates good
cause, the Local Licensing Authority may extend, in its discretion, the
validity of said permit for an additional period not to exceed 60 days.
   (E)   Bankruptcy. A temporary permit may also be authorized in the event of
a transfer of possession of the licensed premises by operation of law, a
petition in bankruptcy pursuant to federal bankruptcy law, the appointment of a
receiver, a foreclosure action by a secured party or a court order
dispossessing the prior licensee of all rights of possession pursuant to C.R.S.
Title 13, Article 40, as amended.
   (F)   Cancellation. A temporary permit issued in accordance with this
section may be canceled, revoked or summarily suspended if the local or state
licensing authority determines that there is probable cause to believe that the
transferee has violated any provision of this section or has violated any rule
or regulation adopted by the local or state licensing authority or has failed
to truthfully disclose those matters required pursuant to the application forms
required by the Department of Revenue.
(Ord. 20(1984) § 1; Ord. 23(1991); Ord. 5(2022) §5)
§ 4-2-3 BED AND BREAKFAST PERMIT.
   (A)   Statutory authority. This section is enacted in accordance with C.R.S.
§ 44-3-412, as amended, which authorizes a Local Licensing Authority, at its
option, to issue a bed and breakfast permit to a person operating a bed and
breakfast establishment.
   (B)   Authority to issue. The Local Licensing Authority is hereby authorized
to issue a bed and breakfast permit, in lieu of a hotel and restaurant license,
to a person operating a bed and breakfast establishment to offer complimentary
alcoholic beverages to its guests.
   (C)   Conditions. A bed and breakfast permit may be issued, upon appropriate
approval of the Local Licensing Authority, to a person operating a bed and
breakfast establishment subject to compliance with all of the following
conditions.
      (1)   Alcoholic beverages restricted. A bed and breakfast permittee shall
be an overnight lodging establishment that provides at least one meal per day
at no charge other than a charge for overnight lodging and does not sell
alcoholic beverages by the drink, not have more than 20 sleeping rooms offering
complimentary alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises and only
by overnight guests, and shall not serve alcoholic beverages by the drink and
shall not serve alcoholic beverages for more than four hours in any one day.
      (2)   Filing of application. The applicant has filed with the Local
Licensing Authority on forms provided by the Department of Revenue a completed
application for a bed and breakfast permit.
      (3)   Multiple permits allowed. Applicant may hold more than one bed and
breakfast permit.
      (4)   State fee. Twenty five dollars shall be paid to the Colorado
Department of Revenue annually in advance for each bed and breakfast permit.
      (5)   Local fee. Twenty five dollars shall be paid to the town annually
in advance for each bed and breakfast permit.
   (D)   Issuance process. The bed and breakfast permit set forth in this
section may be granted by the approval of the Local Licensing Authority. A bed
and breakfast permit issued in accordance with this section shall be valid for
a period of one year, and may be renewed annually.
   (E)   Cancellation. A bed and breakfast permit may be suspended or revoked
in accordance with C.R.S. § 44-3-412, as amended, if the permittee violates any
provision of C.R.S. Title 44, Article, or any rule adopted pursuant to said
C.R.S. Title 44, Article 3, or fails truthfully to furnish any required
information in connection with a permit application.
(Ord. 32(1994) § 1; Ord. 5(2022) §6)
§ 4-2-4  TASTINGS.
Pursuant to C.R.S. § 44-3-301(10), as amended, the Town hereby authorizes
alcoholic beverage tastings for licensed retail liquor stores, liquor licensed
drugstores and fermented malt beverage and wine retailers in the Town, subject
to the limitations in C.R.S. § 44-3-301(10), and subject to the approval by the
Local Licensing Authority of a tastings permit application in a form approved
by the Town Clerk.
(Ord. 8(2023) § 1)
§ 4-2-5 SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS.
   (A)   Pursuant to C.R.S. § 44-5-107(5)(a), the Local Licensing Authority
(“authority”) elects not to notify the state licensing authority to obtain the
state licensing authority’s approval or disapproval of applications for special
event permits.
   (B)   The authority shall report to the Colorado Liquor Enforcement
Division, within ten days after the authority issues a special event permit,
the name of the organization to which the permit was issued, the address of the
permitted location and the permitted dates of alcohol beverage service.
   (C)   Upon receipt of an application for a special event permit, the
authority shall, as required by C.R.S. § 44-5-107(5)(c), access information
made available on the state licensing authority’s website to determine the
statewide permitting activity of the organization applying for the permit. The
authority shall consider compliance with C.R.S. § 44-5-105(3), which restricts
the number of permits issued to an organization within a calendar year to 15,
before approving any application.
   (D)   A special event permit may be issued only upon a satisfactory showing
by an organization or a qualified political candidate that:
      (1)   Other existing facilities are not available or are inadequate for
the needs of the organization or political candidate; and
      (2)   Existing licensed facilities are inadequate for the purposes of
serving members or guests of the organization or political candidate and that
additional facilities are necessary by reason of the nature of the special
event being scheduled; or
      (3)   The organization or political candidate is temporarily occupying
premises other than the regular premises of such organization or candidate
during special events such as civic celebrations or county fairs and that
members of the general public will be served during such special events.
   (E)   Each application for a special event permit shall be accompanied by an
application fee in an amount equal to the maximum local licensing fee
established by C.R.S. § 44-5-107(2)(c).
(Ord. 16(2011) § 1; Ord. 5(2022) §8)
§ 4-2-6 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   The consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in those public
places in the town designated in writing by the Town Manager from time to time,
other than public rights-of-way. The Town Manager shall cause appropriate
signage to be erected in such public places.
(Ord. 6(2020) § 1)
§ 4-2-7 ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is for the town to exercise its
local option to allow common consumption areas in the town by establishing
entertainment districts. The regulations in this section are in addition to all
other applicable regulations in the Colorado Liquor Code, Colorado Beer Code
and this code.
   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings.
      COMMON CONSUMPTION AREA. An area designed as a common area located within
a designated entertainment district and approved by the Local Licensing
Authority that uses physical barriers to close the area to motor vehicle
traffic and limit pedestrian access.
      ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT. As defined in C.R.S. § 44-3-103, as amended.
      LOCAL LICENSING AUTHORITY. The authority created by Chapter 5 of Title 3
of the Vail town code.
      PROMOTIONAL ASSOCIATION. An association that is incorporated in Colorado
that organizes and promotes entertainment activities within a common
consumption area and is organized or authorized by two or more people who own
or lease property within an entertainment district.
   (C)   Creation. Entertainment districts shall be approved by resolution of
the Town Council. Following approval of an entertainment district, the Local
Licensing Authority may certify promotional associations to operate common
consumption areas within the entertainment district in which alcohol beverages
may be sold, served and consumed subject to the requirements of this code, the
Colorado Liquor Code and the Colorado Beer Code, and conditions set forth in
the resolution approving the entertainment district.
   (D)   Delegation of authority. The Local Licensing Authority hereby
delegates to the Town Clerk the authority to: certify and decertify promotional
associations; designate the location, size, security and hours of operation of
common consumption areas; and allow attachment of licensed premises to common
consumption areas consistent with this section. The Town Clerk may impose
reasonable conditions on common consumption areas, the certification of
promotional associations and the attachment of licensed premises to common
consumption areas.
   (E)   Certification of a promotional association.
      (1)   An application to certify a promotional association shall include
the following minimum information:
         (a)   A copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws and a list of
all directors and officers of the promotional association. A member of each
licensed premises shall serve as one of the directors on the board of the
promotional association which shall have at least two licensed premises
attached to the common consumption area;
         (b)   A detailed map of the proposed common consumption area,
including without limitation, the location of physical barriers, entrances and
exits, the location of attached licensed premises, and identification of
licensed premises that are adjacent, but not to be attached to the common
consumption area;
         (c)   A security plan, including evidence of training and approval of
personnel, a detailed description of security arrangements and the approximate
location of security personnel within the common consumption area during
operating hours;
         (d)   A list of dates and proposed hours of operation of the common
consumption area;
         (e)   Documentation showing possession of the common consumption area
by the promotional association;
         (f)   A list of the attached licensees, of which there shall be a
minimum of two, listing the following information: liquor license number; any
past liquor violations; and a copy of any operational agreements;
         (g)   An insurance certificate of general liability and liquor
liability insurance naming the town as an additional insured in a minimum
amount of $2,000,000;
         (h)   Documentation of the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood
and the desires of the adult inhabitants for a common consumption area, as
evidenced by petitions, written testimony or otherwise; and
         (i)   The application fee established pursuant to §
3-5-9 of this code.
      (2)   Upon certification of a promotional association, the terms and
conditions of the approval shall remain effective until and unless a revised or
amended application is submitted and approved using the same procedures under
which the original application was approved.
      (3)   A certified promotional association shall file an application for
recertification by January 31 of each year, which shall include the following:
all of the information in the original application, plus a copy of any changes
to the articles of incorporation, bylaws or the directors and officers of the
promotional association. Failure to submit a complete application shall be
grounds for the denial of the recertification.
      (4)   An application by a liquor licensee to attach to an existing common
consumption area of a certified promotional association shall include without
limitation:
         (a)   Authorization for attachment from the certified promotional
association;
         (b)   The name of the licensee’s designee to sit on the board of
directors of the certified promotional association;
         (c)   Detailed map of the common consumption area showing the addition
of the new licensee including location of physical barriers, entrances and
exits, location of attached licensed premises, identification of licensed
premises that are adjacent but not to be attached to the common consumption
area, approximate location of security personnel; and
         (d)   An application fee as set by resolution of the Town Council.
   (F)   Review of applications.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for certification or recertification
of a promotional association, or attachment of a liquor licensee to an existing
common consumption area, the Local Licensing Authority shall review the
application for compliance with this code, the Colorado Liquor Code, and the
Colorado Beer Code, and may either approve the application, with or without
conditions, or may deny the application.
      (2)   The Local Licensing Authority has the power to decertify a
promotional association as authorized by C.R.S. § 44-3-301(11)(c)(III), as
amended.
   (G)   Operational requirements.
      (1)   The size of the common consumption area shall not exceed the area
approved as the entertainment district within which the common consumption area
is located, but may, with approval of the Local Licensing Authority, be a
smaller area within the entertainment district, provided that the common
consumption area is clearly delineated using physical barriers to close the
area to motor vehicle traffic and to limit pedestrian access.
      (2)   The promotional association shall provide an appropriate amount of
security, as determined by the Local Licensing Authority, to ensure compliance
with the Colorado Liquor Code, the Colorado Beer Code, and to prevent a safety
risk to the neighborhood.
(Ord. 7(2021) § 1)
§ 4-2-8 DUTIES OF TOWN CLERK.
   (A)   The Town Clerk shall receive all applications for licenses and shall
issue all licenses granted by the Local Licensing Authority upon payment of
fees required and upon approval of the State Licensing Authority.
   (B)   The Town Clerk shall serve as the secretary of the Local Licensing
Authority, and shall provide the necessary notice of meetings and keep the
electronic recordings of all meetings.
   (C)   The Town Clerk is authorized to administratively approve the following
applications:
      (1)   Temporary permit during the time in which a transfer application is
pending;
      (2)   Modification to premises;
      (3)   Takeout or delivery permit;
      (4)   Open container or private event permit;
      (5)   Communal outdoor dining area application; and
      (6)   Festival permit.
   (D)   If there have been no violations of the Colorado Liquor or Beer Code,
or any other applicable Town ordinance, during the preceding year, and there is
no other derogatory information regarding the licensee, its partners, officers,
directors, managers, or shareholders, then the Town Clerk may administratively
approve the following applications:
      (1)   Renewal;
      (2)   Transfer of ownership;
      (3)   Change of corporate status;
      (4)   Change of location;
      (5)   Merger and conversion of retail liquor store licenses into a single
liquor-licensed drugstore license;
      (6)   Manager registration or change of manager; and
      (7)   Change of trade name.
   (E)   The Town Clerk is also authorized to administratively approve an
application for a special event permit pursuant to C.R.S. § 44-5-101, et seq.,
provided that the following conditions are satisfied, and further provided that
the Town Clerk may refer any special event permit application to the Authority
in the Town Clerk's sole discretion:
      (1)   The event is a repeat of an event for which the applicant has
previously received approval from the authority in the past 12 months;
      (2)   The applicant has no pending liquor licensing violations, and has
had no liquor licensing violations within the preceding year; and
      (3)   No person has filed a written objection to said permit.
(Ord. 13(2023) § 1)
§ 4-2-9 HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Local Licensing Authority may, at the Town Council's discretion,
consist of a sole hearing officer who shall serve at the pleasure of the Town
Council.
   (B)   The hearing officer shall be appointed by the Town Council and may be
removed with or without cause by a majority vote of the Town Council. The Town
Council shall establish the hearing officer's compensation.
   (C)   The hearing officer shall be an individual over the age of 21 years
and with sufficient knowledge and expertise to apply and enforce the State of
Colorado Beer Code, Liquor Code, Special Events Code, and related Code of
Regulations. The hearing officer shall not hold any other Town office,
appointment or position, except that the Town Council may appoint the municipal
court judge as the hearing officer. Additionally, the hearing officer shall not
have any financial interest in the operation of any business located or
operating in the city that holds a license pursuant to C.R.S. §§ 44-4-101, et
seq., or C.R.S. §§ 44-3-101, et seq.
   (D)   The hearing officer is authorized to adopt rules of procedure and
regulations concerning the application and renewal processes, procedures for
hearings before it, and the presentation of evidence at such hearings, subject
to applicable law.
   (E)   The term "hearing officer" shall be synonymous with "Local Licensing
Authority" as used throughout this Chapter.
(Ord. 13(2023) § 1)
CHAPTER 3: SALES TAX
Section
4-3-1 General provisions
4-3-1-1 Short title
4-3-1-2 Definitions
4-3-1-3 Confidential nature of returns
4-3-1-4 Tax cannot be absorbed
4-3-1-5 Excess tax; remittance
4-3-1-6 License and tax additional
4-3-1-7 Duty to keep records
4-3-1-8 Administration
4-3-1-9 Receipts; disposition
4-3-1-10 Applicability to banks
4-3-1-11 Statute of limitations
4-3-2 Licensing requirements
4-3-3 Sales tax collection and regulation
4-3-3-1 Property and services taxed
4-3-3-2 Collection of sales tax
4-3-3-3 Sales tax base; schedule of sales tax
4-3-3-4 Credit sales
4-3-3-5 Bad debt charge-offs
4-3-3-6 Exemptions
4-3-3-7 Map or location guide of town boundaries
4-3-4 Refunds
4-3-5 Enforcement
4-3-5-1 Recovery of taxes, penalty and interest
4-3-5-2 Tax lien
4-3-5-3 Interest on tax payments
4-3-5-4 Other remedies
4-3-5-5 Jeopardy assessment and demands
4-3-6 Hearings and appeals
4-3-6-1 Hearings by Finance Director
4-3-6-2 Review by District Court
4-3-6-3 Alternate review by Department of Revenue
4-3-6-4 Amendments
4-3-6-5 Violation; penalty
4-3-7 Miscellaneous provisions
4-3-7-1 Coordinated audit
4-3-7-2 Intercity claims for recovery
4-3-7-3 Notice of sales tax ordinance amendment
4-3-7-4 Participation in simplification meetings
§ 4-3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 4-3-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the TOWN SALES TAX ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following terms shall have the following meanings.
   ACQUISITION CHARGES OR COSTS. Includes “purchase price” as defined in this
section.
   APARTMENT HOTEL. A building containing apartments that may be rented to
paying guests.
   AUCTION. Any sale where tangible personal property is sold by an auctioneer
who is either the agent for the owner of such property or is in fact the owner
thereof.
   AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLE. Any vehicle or device in, upon, or by which any person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, or any
device used or designed for aviation or flight in the air. AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLE
includes, but is not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers or
mobile homes. AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLE shall not include devices moved by human power
or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   BUSINESS. All activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the
object of gain, benefit or advantage, direct or indirect.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. Any entity that:
      (1)   Has been certified as a nonprofit organization under § 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code; and
      (2)   Is an organization which exclusively, and in a manner consistent
with existing laws and for the benefit of an indefinite number of persons or
animals, freely and voluntarily ministers to the physical, mental or spiritual
needs of persons or animals, and thereby lessens the burden of government.
   COMMERCIAL PACKAGING MATERIALS. Containers, labels and/or cases, that become
part of the finished product to the purchaser, used by or sold to a person
engaged in manufacturing, compounding, wholesaling, jobbing, retailing,
packaging, distributing or bottling for sale, profit or use, and is not
returnable to said person for reuse. COMMERCIAL PACKAGING MATERIALS does not
include commercial shipping materials.
   COMMERCIAL SHIPPING MATERIALS. Materials that do not become part of the
finished product to the purchaser which are used exclusively in the shipping
process. COMMERCIAL SHIPPING MATERIALS include, but are not limited to,
containers, labels, pallets, banding material and fasteners, shipping cases,
shrink wrap, bubble wrap or other forms of binding, padding or protection.
   CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING MATERIALS. Tangible personal property which, when
combined with other tangible personal property, loses its identity to become an
integral and inseparable part of a completed structure or project. Construction
materials include, but are not limited to, such things as asphalt, bricks,
builders’ hardware, caulking material, cement, concrete, conduit, electric
wiring and connections, fireplace inserts, electrical heating and cooling
equipment, flooring, glass, gravel, insulation, lath, lead, lime, lumber,
macadam, millwork, mortar, oil, paint, piping, pipe valves and pipe fittings,
plaster, plumbing fixtures, putty, reinforcing mesh, road base, roofing, sand,
sanitary sewer pipe, sheet metal, site lighting, steel, stone, stucco, tile,
trees, shrubs and other landscaping materials, wallboard, wall coping,
wallpaper, weather stripping, wire netting and screen, water mains and meters,
and wood preserver. The above materials, when used for forms, or other items
which do not remain as an integral or inseparable part of a complete structure
or project, are not CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING MATERIALS.
   CONSUMER. Any person in the town who purchases, uses, stores, distributes or
otherwise consumes tangible personal property or taxable services, purchased
from sources inside or outside the town.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person who shall build, construct, reconstruct, alter,
expand, modify or improve any building, dwelling, structure, infrastructure or
other improvement to real property for another party pursuant to an agreement.
For purposes of this definition, CONTRACTOR also includes subcontractor.
   COUNTY. Eagle County, Colorado.
   COUNTY CLERK AND RECORDER. The County Clerk and Recorder for the County.
   COVER CHARGE. A charge paid to a club or similar entertainment establishment
which may, or may not, entitle the patron paying such charge to receive
tangible personal property, such as food and/or beverages.
   DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE. The Department of Revenue of the state.
   DIGITAL PRODUCT. An electronic product including without limitation:
      (1)   DIGITAL IMAGES which means works that include, but are not limited
to, the following that are generally recognized in the ordinary and usual sense
as “photographs”, “logos”, “cartoons” or “drawings”;
      (2)   DIGITAL AUDIO-VISUAL WORKS which means a series of related images
which, when shown in succession, impart an impression of motion, together with
accompanying sounds, if any;
      (3)   DIGITAL AUDIO WORKS which means works that result from the fixation
of a series of musical, spoken or other sounds, including ringtones. For
purposes of the definition of digital audio works, RINGTONES means digitized
sound files that are downloaded onto a device and that may be used to alert the
customer with respect to a communication; and
      (4)   DIGITAL BOOKS which means works that are generally recognized in
the ordinary and usual sense as “books”.
   DISTRICT COURT. The District Court in and for Eagle County, Colorado.
   DRUGS DISPENSED IN ACCORDANCE WITH A PRESCRIPTION. Drugs dispensed in
accordance with any order in writing, dated and signed by a licensed
practitioner of the healing arts, or given orally by a practitioner, and
immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist, assistant pharmacist or
pharmacy intern, specifying the name and address of the person for whom the
medicine or drug is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label.
   ECONOMIC NEXUS.
      (1)   The connection between the town and a person not having a physical
nexus in the State of Colorado, which connection is established when the person
or marketplace facilitator makes retail sales into the town, and:
         (a)   In the previous calendar year, the person, which includes a
marketplace facilitator, has made retail sales into the state exceeding the
amount specified in C.R.S. § 39-26-102(3)(c), as amended; or
         (b)   In the current calendar year, 90 days has passed following the
month in which the person, which includes a marketplace facilitator, has made
retail sales into the state exceeding the amount specified in C.R.S. § 39-26-
102(3)(c), as amended.
      (2)   This definition does not apply to any person who is doing business
in this state but otherwise applies to any other person.
   ENGAGED IN BUSINESS IN THE TOWN. Performing or providing services or
selling, leasing, renting, delivering or installing tangible personal property
for storage, use or consumption within the town. ENGAGED IN BUSINESS IN THE
TOWN includes, but is not limited to, any one of the following activities by a
person:
      (1)   Directly, indirectly or by a subsidiary maintains a building,
store, office, salesroom, warehouse or other place of business within the
taxing jurisdiction;
      (2)   Sends one or more employees, agents or commissioned salespersons
into the taxing jurisdiction to solicit business or to install, assemble,
repair, service or assist in the use of its products, or for demonstration or
other reasons;
      (3)   Maintains one or more employees, agents or commissioned
salespersons on duty at a location within the taxing jurisdiction;
      (4)   Owns, leases, rents or otherwise exercises control over real or
personal property within the taxing jurisdiction; or
      (5)   Retailer or vendor in the State of Colorado that makes more than
one delivery into the taxing jurisdiction within a 12-month period; and
      (6)   Makes retail sales sufficient to meet the definitional requirements
of economic nexus as set forth herein.
   EXEMPT COMMERCIAL PACKAGING MATERIALS. Containers, labels and shipping cases
sold to a person engaged in manufacturing, compounding, wholesaling, jobbing,
retailing, packaging, distributing or bottling for sale, profit or use that
meets all of the following conditions:
      (1)   Is used by the manufacturer, compounder, wholesaler, jobber,
retailer, packager, distributor or bottler to contain or label the finished
product;
      (2)   Is transferred by said person along with and as a part of the
finished product to the purchaser; and
      (3)   Is not returnable to said person for reuse.
   FINANCE DEPARTMENT. The Finance Department of the town.
   FINANCE DIRECTOR. The Finance Director of the Town of Vail or such other
person designated by the town; FINANCE DIRECTOR shall also include such
person’s designee.
   FOOD FOR HOME CONSUMPTION. Food for domestic home consumption as defined in
7 U.S.C. § 2012(k), except that “food” does not include carbonated water
marketed in containers, chewing gum, seeds and plants to grow foods, prepared
salads and salad bars; packaged and unpackaged cold sandwiches, deli trays and
hot or cold beverages served in unsealed containers or cups that are vended by
or through machines or non-coin-operated coin-collecting food and snack devices
on behalf of a vendor.
   GARAGE SALES. Sales of tangible personal property, except automotive
vehicles, occurring at the residence of the seller, where the property to be
sold was originally purchased for use by members of the household where such
sale is being conducted. The term includes, but is not limited to, yard sales,
estate sales and block sales.
   GROSS SALES. The total amount received in money, credit, property or other
consideration valued in money for all sales, leases, or rentals of tangible
personal property or services.
   GROSS TAXABLE SALES. The total amount received in money, credits or
property, excluding the fair market value of exchanged property which is to be
sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer’s business, or other
consideration valued in money from sales and purchases at retail within the
town and embraced within the provisions of this chapter. The taxpayer may take
credit in his or her report of gross sales for an amount equal to the sale
price of property returned by the purchaser when the full sale price thereof is
refunded whether in cash or by credit. The fair market value of any exchanged
property which is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer’s
business, if included in the full price of a new article, shall be excluded
from the gross sales. On all sales at retail that are valued in money, when
such sales are made under conditional sales contract, or under other forms of
sale where the payment of the principal sum thereunder is extended over a
period longer than 60 days from the date of sale thereof, only such portion of
the sale amount thereof may be counted for the purpose of imposition of the tax
imposed by this chapter as has actually been received in cash by the taxpayer
during the period for which the tax imposed by this chapter is due and payable.
   GUEST RANCH. A resort patterned after a western ranch, where overnight
accommodations are offered to paying guests.
   GUESTHOUSE. A private single-family home, townhome or condominium that may
be rented in its entirety to paying guests.
   INCONTINENCE PRODUCTS AND DIAPERS. Absorbent cloth or disposable products
worn by humans who are incapable of, or have difficulty, controlling their
bladder or bowel movements.
   INTERNET SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE. Software programs, systems, data and
applications available online through rental, lease or subscription, that
provide information and services including, but not limited to, data linking,
data research, data analysis, data filtering or record compiling.
   LICENSE. A sales tax license.
   LINEN SERVICES. Services involving the provision and cleaning of linens,
including but not limited to rags, uniforms, coveralls and diapers.
   LODGING HOUSE. A private single-family home, townhome or condominium with
individual rooms that may be rented to paying guests.
   LODGING SERVICES. The furnishing of rooms or accommodations by any person,
partnership, association, corporation, estate, representative capacity or any
other combination of individuals by whatever name known to a person who for a
consideration uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a
hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch,
trailer coach, mobile home, auto camp, or trailer court and park, for a period
of less than 30 consecutive days under any concession, permit, right of access,
license to use, or other agreement, or otherwise.
   MANUFACTURING. The operation or performance of an integrated series of
operations which places a product, article, substance, commodity or other
tangible personal property in a form, composition or character different from
that in which it was acquired whether for sale or for use by a manufacturer.
The change in form, composition or character must result in a different product
having a distinctive name, character or use from the raw or prepared materials.
   MARKETPLACE. A physical or electronic forum, including, but not limited to,
a store, a booth, an internet website, a catalog or a dedicated sales software
application, where tangible personal property, taxable products, or taxable
services are offered for sale.
   MARKETPLACE FACILITATOR.
      (1)   A person who:
         (a)   Contracts with a marketplace seller or multichannel seller to
facilitate for consideration, regardless of whether or not the consideration is
deducted as fees from the transaction, the sale of the marketplace seller’s
tangible personal property, products or services through the person’s
marketplace;
         (b)   Engages directly or indirectly, through one or more affiliated
persons, in transmitting or otherwise communicating the offer or acceptance
between a purchaser and the marketplace seller or multichannel seller; and
         (c)   Either directly or indirectly, through agreements or
arrangements with third parties, collects payment from the purchaser on behalf
of the seller.
      (2)   This definition does not include a person that exclusively provides
internet advertising services or lists products for sale, and that does not
otherwise meet this definition.
   MARKETPLACE SELLER. A person, regardless of whether or not the person is
engaged in business in the town, which has an agreement with a marketplace
facilitator and offers for sale tangible personal property, products, or
services through a marketplace owned, operated or controlled by a marketplace
facilitator.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the town.
   MODIFIED COMPUTER SOFTWARE PROGRAMS. One of the following elements must be
present:
      (1)   The preparation or selection of the program for the customer’s uses
requires an analysis of the customer’s requirement by the vendor; or
      (2)   The program requires adaptation by the vendor to be used in a
specific output device.
   MULTICHANNEL SELLER. A retailer that offers for sale tangible personal
property, commodities or services through a marketplace owned, operated or
controlled by a marketplace facilitator, and through other means.
   NEWSPAPER. A publication, printed on newsprint, intended for general
circulation, and published regularly at short intervals, containing information
and editorials on current events and news of general interest. The term
NEWSPAPER does not include: magazines, trade publications or journals, credit
bulletins, advertising inserts, circulars, directories, maps, racing programs,
reprints, newspaper clipping and mailing services or listings, publications
that include an updating or revision service, or books or pocket editions of
books.
   PAY TELEVISION. Shall include, but not be limited to, cable, microwave or
other television service for which a charge is imposed, except for cable or
subscription television fees which are not charged on a pay per view basis.
   PERIOD PRODUCTS. Consumer products used to manage menstruation.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
limited liability company, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee
or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether
appointed by court or otherwise, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
   PRESCRIPTION DRUGS FOR ANIMALS. A drug which, prior to being dispensed or
delivered, is required by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C.
§§ 301 et seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol “Rx Only”, and is
dispensed in accordance with any order in writing, dated and signed by a
licensed veterinarian specifying the animal for which the medicine or drug is
offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label.
   PRESCRIPTION DRUGS FOR HUMANS. A drug which, prior to being dispensed or
delivered, is required by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C.
§§ 301 et seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol “Rx Only”, and is
dispensed in accordance with any written or electronic order dated and signed
by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, or given orally by a
practitioner and immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist, assistant
pharmacist or pharmacy intern, specifying the name and any required information
of the patient for whom the medicine, drug or poison is offered and directions,
if any, to be placed on the label.
   PRICE or PURCHASE PRICE.
      (1)   PRICE or PURCHASE PRICE includes:
         (a)   The amount of money received or due in cash and credits;
         (b)   Property at fair market value taken in exchange but not for
resale in the usual course of the retailer’s business;
         (c)   Any consideration valued in money, such as trading stamps or
coupons whereby the manufacturer or someone else reimburses the retailer for
part of the purchase price and other media of exchange;
         (d)   The total price charged on credit sales including finance
charges which are not separately stated. An amount charged as interest on the
unpaid balance of the purchase price is not part of the purchase price unless
the amount added to the purchase price is included in the principal amount of a
promissory note; except the interest or carrying charge set out separately from
the unpaid balance of the purchase price on the face of the note is not part of
the purchase price. An amount charged for insurance on the property sold and
separately stated is not part of the purchase price;
         (e)   Installation, delivery and wheeling in charges included in the
purchase price and not separately stated;
         (f)   Transportation and other charges to effect delivery of tangible
personal property to the purchaser;
         (g)   Indirect federal manufacturers’ excise taxes, such as taxes on
automobiles, tires and floor stock; and
         (h)   The gross purchase price of articles sold after manufacturing or
after having been made to order, including the gross value of all the materials
used, labor and service performed and profit thereon.
      (2)   PRICE or PURCHASE PRICE shall not include:
         (a)   Any sales or use tax imposed by the State of Colorado or by any
political subdivision thereof;
         (b)   The fair market value of property exchanged if such property is
to be sold thereafter in the retailers’ usual course of business. This is not
limited to exchanges in Colorado. Out of state trade- ins are an allowable
adjustment to the purchase price; and
         (c)   Discounts from the original price if such discount and the
corresponding decrease in sales tax due is actually passed on to the purchaser.
An anticipated discount to be allowed for payment on or before a given date is
not an allowable adjustment to the price in reporting gross sales.
   PROSTHETIC DEVICES FOR HUMANS. Any artificial limb, part, device or
appliance for human use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily
function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular
patient; and is prescribed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts.
PROSTHETIC DEVICES include, but are not limited to, prescribed auditory,
ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental or orthopedic devices or appliances, and
oxygen concentrators with related accessories.
   PURCHASE or SALE.
      (1)   The acquisition for any consideration by any person of tangible
personal property or taxable services that are purchased, leased, rented, sold,
used, stored, distributed or consumed, but excludes a bona fide gift of
property or services. These terms include capital leases, installment and
credit sales, and property and services acquired by:
         (a)   Transfer, either conditionally or absolutely, of title or
possession or both to tangible personal property;
         (b)   A lease, lease purchase agreement, rental or grant of a license,
including royalty agreements, to use tangible personal property or taxable
services; the utilization of coin operated devices, except coin operated
telephones, which do not vend articles of tangible personal property shall be
considered short term rentals of tangible personal property;
         (c)   Performance of taxable services; or
         (d)   Barter or exchange for other property or services including
coupons.
      (2)   SALE or SALE AND PURCHASE excludes:
         (a)   A division of partnership assets among the partners according to
their interests in the partnership;
         (b)   The formation of a corporation by the owners of a business and
the transfer of their business assets to the corporation in exchange for all of
the corporation’s outstanding stock, except qualifying shares, in proportion to
the assets contributed;
         (c)   The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation or
dissolution of professional corporations;
         (d)   The dissolution and the pro rata distribution of the
corporation’s assets to its stockholders;
         (e)   The transfer of assets from a parent corporation to a subsidiary
corporation or corporations which are owned at least 80% by the parent
corporation, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of
the subsidiary corporation;
         (f)   The transfer of assets from a subsidiary corporation or
corporations which are owned at least 80% by the parent corporation to a parent
corporation, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of
the parent corporation or the subsidiary which received the assets;
         (g)   A transfer of a partnership interest;
         (h)   The transfer in a reorganization qualifying under § 368(a)(1) of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended;
         (i)   The formation of a partnership by the transfer of assets to the
partnership or transfers to a partnership in exchange for proportionate
interests in the partnership;
         (j)   The repossession of personal property by a chattel mortgage
holder or foreclosure by a lien holder; and
         (k)   The transfer of assets between parent and closely held
subsidiary corporations, or between subsidiary corporations closely held by the
same parent corporation, or between corporations which are owned by the same
shareholders in identical percentage of stock ownership amounts, computed on a
share by share basis, when a tax imposed by this chapter was paid by the
transferor corporation at the time it acquired such assets, except to the
extent that there is an increase in the fair market value of such assets
resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating, or physical changing of the
assets by the transferor corporation. To such an extent any transfer referred
to in this definition shall constitute a sale provided by §
4-3-3-3(A) of this chapter. For the purposes of this definition, a closely held
subsidiary corporation is one in which the parent corporation owns stock
possessing at least 80% of the total combined voting power of all classes of
stock entitled to vote and owns at least 80% of the total number of shares of
all other classes of stock.
   PURCHASE PRICE. The price to the consumer, exclusive of any direct tax
imposed by the federal or state government or by this chapter and, in the case
of all retail sales involving the exchange of property, also exclusive of the
fair market value of the property exchanged at the same time and place of the
exchange if:
      (1)   Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual
course of the retailer’s business; and
      (2)   Such exchanged property is an automotive vehicle and is exchanged
for another automotive vehicle and both vehicles are subject to licensing,
registration or certification under the laws of this state, including, but not
limited to, automotive vehicles operating upon public highways, off highway
recreation vehicles, watercraft and aircraft. Any money or other consideration
paid over and above the value of exchanged property is subject to tax.
   RETAIL SALES. All sales except wholesale sales.
   RETAILER OR VENDOR. Any person selling, leasing, renting or granting a
license to use tangible personal property or services at retail. RETAILER shall
include, but is not limited to, any:
      (1)   Auctioneer;
      (2)   Salesperson, representative, peddler or canvasser, who makes sales
as a direct or indirect agent of or obtains such property or services sold from
a dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer;
      (3)   Charitable organization or governmental entity which makes sales of
tangible personal property to the public, notwithstanding the fact that the
merchandise sold may have been acquired by gift or donation or that the
proceeds are to be used for charitable or governmental purposes;
      (4)   Retailer-contractor, when acting in the capacity of a seller of
building supplies, construction materials and other tangible personal property;
and
      (5)   Marketplace facilitator, marketplace seller or multichannel seller.
   RETAILER-CONTRACTOR. A contractor who is also a retailer of building
supplies, construction materials or other tangible personal property, and
purchases, manufactures or fabricates such property for sale (which may include
installation), repair work, time and materials jobs, and/or lump sum contracts.
   RETURN. Any form prescribed by town administration for computing and
reporting a total tax liability.
   SALES TAX. The tax that is collected or required to be collected and
remitted by a retailer on sales taxed under this code.
   SCHOOL. A public or nonpublic school for students in kindergarten through
twelfth grade or any portion thereof.
   SPECIAL FUEL. Kerosene oil, kerosene distillate, diesel fuel, all liquefied
petroleum gases, and all combustible gases and liquids for use in the
generation of power for propulsion of automotive vehicles upon the public
highways. The term does not include fuel used for the propulsion or drawing of
aircraft, railroad cars or railroad locomotives.
   SPECIAL SALES EVENT. Any sales event which includes more than three vendors
taking place at a single location for a limited period of time not to exceed
seven consecutive days.
   STATE. The State of Colorado.
   STORAGE. Any keeping or retention of, or exercise dominion or control over,
or possession of, for any length of time, tangible personal property not while
in transit but on a stand still basis for future use when leased, rented or
purchased at retail from sources either within or without the town from any
person or vendor.
   TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY. Personal property that can be one or more of the
following: seen; weighed; measured; felt; touched; stored; transported;
exchanged; or that is in any other manner perceptible to the senses.
   TAX DEFICIENCY or DEFICIENCY. Any amount of tax, penalty, interest or other
fee that is not reported and/or not paid on or before the date that any return
or payment of the tax is required under the terms of this code.
   TAXABLE SALES. Gross sales less any exemptions and deductions specified in
this code.
   TAXPAYER. Any person obligated to collect and/or pay tax under the terms of
this code.
   TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE. Service of which the object is the transmission
of any two-way interactive electronic or electromagnetic communications
including, but not limited to, voice, image, data and any other information, by
the use of any means, but not limited to, wire, cable, fiber optical cable,
microwave, radio wave, voice over internet protocol (VoIP), or any combinations
of such media, including any form of mobile two-way communication.
   TEMPORARY SALE. A sale by any person who engages in a temporary business of
selling and delivering goods within the town for a period of no more than seven
consecutive days.
   TEMPORARY VENDOR. Any person who engages in the business of temporary sales.
   TOWN. The Municipality of Town of Vail.
   TOWN CLERK. The Clerk of the town.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The Council of the town.
   TOWN MANAGER. The Manager of the town.
   WHOLESALE SALES. A sale by wholesalers to retailers, jobbers, dealers or
other wholesalers for resale and does not include a sale by wholesalers to
users or consumers not for resale; latter types of sales shall be deemed to be
retail sales and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   WHOLESALER. Any person selling to retailers, jobbers, dealers or other
wholesalers, for resale, and not for storage, use, consumption or distribution.
(Ord. 2(2019) § 1; Ord. 9(2020) § 1; Ord. 26(2021) § 1; Ord. 22(2024) § 1)
§ 4-3-1-3 CONFIDENTIAL NATURE OF RETURNS.
   (A)   Right of privacy protected. Except in accordance with judicial order
or as otherwise provided herein, the Town Manager, the Finance Director, and
their agents, clerks and employees shall not divulge any information gained
from any return filed under the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Limited disclosure required. The town officials charged with the
custody of returns filed pursuant to this chapter shall not be required to
produce such returns or evidence of any matters contained therein in any action
or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the Finance Director in an
action under the provisions of this chapter to which the Finance Director is a
party, or on behalf of any party to an action or proceeding under the
provisions of this chapter or to punish a violator thereof or pursuant to any
judicial order in which event the court may require the production of and may
admit in evidence so much of such returns or of the facts shown thereby as are
pertinent to the action or proceeding and no more.
   (C)   Access to information. No provision of this section shall be construed
to prohibit the delivery to a taxpayer or to such person’s duly authorized
representative of a copy of any return or report filed in connection with his
or her tax, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to
prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and the information
contained therein, nor to prohibit the inspection of the Town Attorney or any
other legal representative of the town of the report or return of any taxpayer
who shall bring an action to set aside or review the tax based thereon or
against whom an action or proceeding is contemplated or has been instituted
under this chapter.
   (D)   Authorized disclosure; liability. The provisions of this section shall
not preclude the Town Manager, the Finance Director and their agents, clerks
and employees from divulging any information gained from any return or audit to
the federal government, the state, the Department of Revenue, the town or any
other municipality, the Town Attorney, the Town Manager, the Finance Director;
nor shall the Town Manager, the Finance Director, and their agents, clerks or
employees be liable to any person, firm or corporation for such disclosure made
for the purpose of computing or collecting the tax due and owing from any
person, firm or corporation, or for the purpose of verifying compliance with
this chapter or for the purpose of investigating any criminal or illegal
activity.
   (E)   Violation of confidentiality standards. Any town officer or employee,
or any agent thereof, who shall divulge any information classified by this
chapter as confidential in any manner except in accordance with proper judicial
order or as otherwise provided herein or by other law shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter and shall be punished in the manner provided by state
law.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-1-4 TAX CANNOT BE ABSORBED.
   It is unlawful for any retailer to advertise or hold out or state to the
public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof imposed by this chapter shall be assumed or absorbed by the retailer or
that it shall not be added to the selling price of the property sold or the
services tendered, or if added, that it or any part thereof shall be refunded.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-1-5 EXCESS TAX; REMITTANCE.
   If any vendor, during any reporting period, collects as a tax an amount in
excess of 4.5% of such vendor’s total taxable sales, then such vendor shall
remit to the Finance Director the full net amount of the tax imposed in this
chapter and also such excess amount. The retention by the retailer or vendor of
any excess amount of tax collections over the 4.5% of the total taxable sales
of such retailer or vendor or the intentional failure to remit punctually to
the Finance Director the full amount required to be remitted by this chapter is
declared to be a violation of this chapter and shall be recovered, together
with interest, penalties and costs as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1; Ord. 32(2002) § 3; Ord. 27(2005) § 3; Ord. 26(2021) §2)
Editor’s note:
   The effective date of Ordinance 27(2005) is January 1, 2006.
§ 4-3-1-6 LICENSE AND TAX ADDITIONAL.
   The license and tax imposed by this chapter shall be in addition to all
other licenses and taxes imposed by law, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-1-7 DUTY TO KEEP RECORDS.
   It is the duty of every taxpayer to keep and preserve suitable records and
such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax
for the collection of which such taxpayer is liable under this chapter. It is
the duty of every such taxpayer to keep and preserve for a period of three
years all invoices of goods and merchandise purchased. All such books, invoices
and other records shall be open for examination and audit at any time by the
Finance Director or duly authorized agent.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-1-8 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Town Manager may adopt rules and regulations in conformity with this
chapter for the proper administration and enforcement of this chapter. The
administration of this chapter is vested in and shall be exercised by the Town
Manager. The Finance Director shall assist the Town Manager in the
administration of this chapter to the extent provided herein and of the rules
and regulations promulgated hereunder.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-1-9 RECEIPTS; DISPOSITION.
   The monies received by the Finance Director from the tax imposed and
collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the General Fund and
Capital Projects Fund of the town.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1; Ord. 32(2002) § 4; Ord. 27(2005) § 4)
Editor’s note:
   The effective date of Ordinance 27(2005) is January 1, 2006.
§ 4-3-1-10 APPLICABILITY TO BANKS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to national banking associations
and to banks organized and chartered under state law.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-1-11 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   The taxes for any period, together with interest thereon and penalties with
respect thereto, imposed by this chapter shall not be assessed, nor shall any
notice of lien be filed, or distraint warrant issued, or suit for collection be
instituted, nor any other action to collect the same be commenced, more than
three years after the date on which the tax was or is payable, nor shall any
lien continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the
expiration of such period, notice of lien with respect to which has been filed
prior to the expiration of such period, in which cases such lien shall continue
after the filing of notice thereof. The commencement of collection proceedings,
including the mailing of a notice of audit, shall toll the running of the
statute of limitations. In the case of mailing of a notice of audit, any such
audit shall be diligently pursued by the town. For purposes of this section,
TOLL is defined as an interruption of the running or continuation of the
statute of limitations. The statute of limitations period as set forth
hereinabove in this section shall not apply if:
   (A)   A taxpayer files a false or fraudulent return with the intent to evade
the tax imposed by this chapter; or
   (B)   If a taxpayer fails to file a return as required by §
4-3-3-2 of this chapter. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with the
intent to evade the tax imposed by this chapter, the tax, together with
interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed, or proceedings for the
collection of such taxes may be begun at any time. In the case of failure to
file a return, the tax, together with interest and penalties thereon, may be
assessed and collected at any time. Before the expiration of such period of
limitation, the taxpayer and the Finance Director may agree in writing to an
extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent
agreements in writing.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1; Ord. 13(2010) § 1)
§ 4-3-2 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   License required. A sales tax license shall be required for any person
who is engaged in business in the town and selling at retail in the town
tangible personal property or services that are taxable hereunder which are
purchased in the town and are subject to sales tax pursuant to this chapter. A
tax license shall be granted and issued by the Finance Director and shall be in
force and effect until the earlier of:
      (1)   Revocation of such license; or
      (2)   Sale or termination of the business, if any, relating to such
license. Such licenses shall be granted only upon application stating the name
and address of the person desiring such license, the name of such business, if
any, and the location, including the street number of such business, if any,
and such other facts as the Finance Director may require. No license issued
pursuant to this section shall be transferable.
   (B)   Separate licenses. If engaged in business at two or more separate
places by one person, a separate license for each place of business shall be
required.
   (C)   Contents; posting. Each license shall be numbered with a Town of Vail
sales tax account number and shall show the name of the licensee and the place
of business of the licensee and shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the
place of business for which it is issued. If the licensee does not have a place
of business, then the license shall show the mailing address of such licensee.
   (D)   License revocation. The Finance Director, after reasonable notice and
a full hearing, may revoke the license of any person found by such person to
have violated any provision of this chapter.
   (E)   Review of findings. Any findings and order of the Finance Director
revoking the license of any person shall be subject to review by the District
Court upon application of the aggrieved party. The procedure for review shall
be, as nearly as possible, the same as provided for the review of findings as
provided by proceedings in the nature of certiorari.
   (F)   Exception. No license shall be required for any person engaged
exclusively in the business of selling commodities which are exempt from
taxation under this chapter.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1; Ord. 1(2015) § 4; Ord. 2(2019) § 2)
§ 4-3-3 SALES TAX COLLECTION AND REGULATION.
§ 4-3-3-1 PROPERTY AND SERVICES TAXED.
   There is levied, and there shall be collected and paid a sales tax in the
amount stated in §
4-3-3-3 of this §
4-3-3 as follows.
   (A)   Tangible personal property. On the purchase price paid or charged upon
all sales, purchases, rentals and leases of tangible personal property at
retail, including without limitation, on the purchase price paid or charged for
“digital products” and “internet subscription services” as those terms are
defined in §
4-3-1-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Exchange of property. In the case of retail sales involving the
exchange of property, on the purchase price paid or charged, including the fair
market value of the property exchanged at the time and place of the exchange,
excluding, however, from the consideration of the purchase price, the fair
market value of the exchanged property, provided that such exchanged property
is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer’s business.
   (C)   Telephone, telegraph, telecommunications. Upon telephone and telegraph
services, whether furnished by public or private corporations or enterprises,
for all intrastate telecommunication services originating from or received on
telecommunication equipment in the town if the charge for the service is billed
to a person in the town or billed to an affiliate or division of such person in
the town on behalf of a person in the town. As used herein, “telecommunication
service” does not include separately stated non-transmission services which
constitute computer processing applications used to act on the information to
be transmitted.
   (D)   Gas and electric service. For gas and electric service, whether
furnished by municipal, public or private corporations or enterprises, for gas
and electricity furnished and sold for commercial consumption and not for
resale, upon steam when consumed or used by the purchaser and not resold in
original form whether furnished or sold by municipal, public or private
corporations or enterprises.
   (E)   Food and drink.
      (1)   Upon all sales of food, except that the sale of food for home
consumption, as defined herein, shall be taxed at the rate of 4% of the amount
of the sale; and
      (2)   Upon the amount paid for food or drink served or furnished in or by
restaurants, cafés, lunch counters, cafeterias, hotels, drugstores, social
clubs, nightclubs, cabarets, resorts, snack bars, caterers, carryout shops, and
other like places of business at which prepared food or drink is regularly
sold, including sales from pushcarts, automotive vehicles, and other mobile
facilities. Cover charges shall be taxable only when the amount includes food
or drink. The amount paid for sales of meals by any of the employees of the
above listed establishments, whether at full price or at reduced price, shall
be included herein.
   (F)   Lodging services. “Lodging services” as defined in §
4-3-1-2 of this chapter.
   (G)   Pay television. “Pay television” as defined in §
4-3-1-2 of this chapter.
   (H)   Prescription drugs for animals. “Prescription drugs for animals” as
defined in §
4-3-1-2 of this chapter.
   (I)   Linen services. “Linen services” as defined in section
4-3-1-2 of this chapter.
   (J)   Marketplace sales.
      (1)   A marketplace facilitator engaged in business in the town is
required to collect and remit sales tax on all taxable sales made by the
marketplace facilitator, or facilitated by it for marketplace sellers or
multichannel sellers to customers in the town, whether or not the marketplace
seller for whom sales are facilitated would have been required to collect sales
tax had the sale not been facilitated by the marketplace facilitator.
      (2)   A marketplace facilitator shall assume all the duties,
responsibilities and liabilities of a vendor under this chapter. Marketplace
facilitators shall be liable for the taxes collected from marketplace sellers
or multichannel sellers. The town may recover any unpaid taxes, penalties and
interest from the marketplace facilitator that is responsible for collecting on
behalf of marketplace sellers or multichannel sellers.
      (3)   The liabilities, obligations and rights set forth under this
subsection (J) are in addition to any duties and responsibilities of the
marketplace facilitator has under this chapter if it also offers for sale
tangible personal property, products, or services through other means.
      (4)   A marketplace seller, with respect to sales of tangible personal
property, products or services made in or through a marketplace facilitator’s
marketplace, does not have the liabilities, obligations or rights of a retailer
under this chapter if the marketplace seller can show that such sale was
facilitated by a marketplace facilitator:
         (a)   With whom the marketplace seller has a contract that explicitly
provides that the marketplace facilitator will collect and remit sales tax on
all sales subject to tax under this chapter; or
         (b)   From whom the marketplace seller requested and received in good
faith a certification that the marketplace facilitator is registered to collect
sales tax and will collect sales tax on all sales subject to tax under this
chapter made in or through the marketplace facilitator’s marketplace.
      (5)   If a marketplace seller makes a sale that is not facilitated by a
licensed marketplace facilitator in a marketplace, the marketplace seller is
subject to all of the same licensing, collection, remittance, filing and
recordkeeping requirements as any other retailer.
      (6)   With respect to any marketplace sale, the town shall solely audit
the marketplace facilitator for sales made by marketplace sellers or
multichannel sellers but facilitated by the marketplace. The town will not
audit or otherwise assess tax against marketplace sellers or multichannel
sellers for sales facilitated by a marketplace facilitator.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1; Ord. 32(2002) § 6; Ord. 27(2005) § 5; Ord. 2(2019) § 3;
Ord. 9(2020) § 2; Ord. 26(2021) §3)
Editor’s note:
   The effective date of Ordinance 27(2005) is January 1, 2006.
§ 4-3-3-2 COLLECTION OF SALES TAX.
   (A)   When due and payable. Every retailer, also in this chapter called
“vendor”, engaged in business in the town shall, irrespective of the provisions
of §
4-3-3-3, be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equal to 4.5%
of all sales made by such retailer of commodities or services as specified in §
4-3-3-1 and shall before the twentieth day of each month make a return to the
Finance Director for the preceding calendar month and remit an amount equal to
said 4.5% on such sales to said Finance Director. For the purposes of this
subsection (A), all such returns and remittance shall be considered made to the
Finance Director on or before the twentieth day of each month if they are sent
via the United States mail and are postmarked on or before the twentieth day of
each month. If the twentieth day of any month falls on a weekend or holiday,
said return and remittance may be postmarked the following business day. Such
returns of the taxpayer or duly authorized agent shall be furnished by the
Finance Department. The town shall use the standard municipal sales tax
reporting form and any subsequent revisions thereto adopted by the Executive
Director of the Department of Revenue by the first month commencing 120 days
after the effective date of the regulation adopting or revising such standard
form.
   (B)   Quarterly payments negotiable.
      (1)   If the accounting methods regularly employed by the vendor in the
transaction of such business or other conditions are such that the returns of
sales made on a calendar month basis shall impose unnecessary hardship, the
Finance Director, upon written request of the vendor, may accept returns at
such intervals as shall, in his or her opinion, better suit the convenience of
the taxpayer, and shall not jeopardize the collection of the tax.
      (2)   The Finance Director may permit taxpayers whose monthly collective
tax is less than $150 to make returns and pay taxes at intervals not greater
than three months.
   (C)   Maximum allowable grace period. The Finance Director may extend the
date for making a return and paying the taxes due under such reasonable rules
and regulations as may be prescribed therefor but no such extension shall be
for a greater period than as provided in subsection (B) of this section.
   (D)   Proof of exemption by taxpayer. The burden of proving that any
retailer is exempt from collecting the tax on any goods or services sold and
paying the same to the Finance Director, or from making such returns, shall be
on the retailer or vendor under such reasonable requirements of proof as set
forth in the rules and regulations prescribed therefor.
   (E)   Payment proceeds exemption ruling. If a dispute arises between the
purchaser and seller as to whether or not any sale, service or commodity is
exempt from taxation under §
4-3-3-6 of this §
4-3-3, nevertheless the seller shall collect, and the purchaser shall pay the
tax, and the seller shall thereupon issue to the purchaser a receipt or
certification, on forms furnished by the Finance Department, showing the names
of the seller and the purchaser, the items purchased, the date, price, amount
of tax paid, and a brief statement of the claim of exemption. The purchaser
thereafter may apply to the Finance Director for a refund of such taxes, and it
is then the duty of the Finance Director to determine the question of
exemption. The purchaser may request a hearing pursuant to this chapter, and
the final determination of the Finance Director may either be appealed to the
District Court pursuant to this chapter or the Department of Revenue pursuant
to this chapter.
   (F)   Double taxation prohibited. The town’s sales tax shall not apply to
the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services
if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully
imposed on the purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule municipality
equal to or in excess of the sales tax required to be paid pursuant to §
4-3-3-3 of this §
4-3-3. A credit shall be granted against the town’s sales tax with respect to
such transaction equal in amount to the lawfully imposed local sales or use tax
previously paid by the purchaser or user to the previous statutory or home rule
municipality. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the amount of the sales
tax required to be paid pursuant to §
4-3-3-3 of this §
4-3-3.
   (G)   Special sales tax on tobacco and nicotine products. Every retailer or
vendor engaged in the business of selling nicotine products or tobacco products
in the town, as those terms are defined in C.R.S. §§ 39-28-202 and 18-13-121,
shall be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equal to $0.15 per
cigarette sold or $3 per pack of 20 cigarettes sold, and 40% on the price paid
for all other nicotine products and tobacco products, and shall before the
twentieth day of each month make a return to the Finance Director for the
preceding calendar month, together with remittance of all amounts due
hereunder. For purposes of this subsection (G), all such returns and remittance
shall be considered timely made to the Finance Director if they are submitted-
on or before the twentieth day of the month. If the twentieth day of any month
falls on a weekend or holiday, said return and remittance may be submitted the
following business day. The special sales tax levied by this section shall be
subject to all other provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1; Ord. 32(2002) § 5; Ord. 27(2005) § 6; Ord. 22(2019) § 1;
Ord. 26(2021) §4)
Editor’s note:
   The effective date of Ordinance 27(2005) is January 1, 2006.
§ 4-3-3-3 SALES TAX BASE; SCHEDULE OF SALES TAX.
   (A)   Full purchase price taxable. Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection, the sales tax is imposed on the full purchase price of articles
sold after manufacture or after having been made to order, and includes the
full purchase price for material used and the service performed in connection
therewith, excluding, however, such articles as are otherwise exempted in this
chapter. In connection with the transaction referred to in §
4-3-1-2 of this chapter, definition of “purchase or sale”, the sales tax is
imposed only on the amount of any increase in the fair market value of such
assets resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating or physical changing of
the assets by the transferor corporation. Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection (A), the sales price is the gross value of all materials, labor and
service, and the profit thereon, included in the price charged to the user or
consumer.
   (B)   Percentage of tax. There is imposed upon all sales of commodities and
services specified in §
4-3-3-1, a tax at the rate of 4.5% of the amount of the sale, to be computed in
accordance with the schedules or system set forth in the rules and regulations
prescribed therefor. Said schedules or systems shall be designed so that no
such tax is charged on any sale of $0.24 or less.
   (C)   Tax distinct from price; exceptions. Except as provided in subsection
(C)(1) of this section, retailers shall add the tax imposed, or the average
equivalent thereof, to the sale price or charge, showing such tax as a separate
and distinct item, and when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such
price or charge and shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the retailer
until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts.
      (1)   Any retailer selling malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by the
drink may include in his or her sales price the tax levied under this chapter,
except that no retailer shall advertise or hold out to the public in any
manner, directly or indirectly, that such tax is not included as a part of the
sales price to the consumer. The schedule referred to in subsection (B) of this
section shall be used by such retailer in determining amounts to be included in
such sales price. No such retailer shall gain any benefit from the collection
or payment of such tax, nor shall the use of the schedule referred to in
subsection (B) of this section relieve such retailer from liability for payment
of the full amount of the tax imposed pursuant to §
4-3-3-1 of this §
4-3-3.
      (2)   Any retailer of food may include in such sales price the tax levied
under this chapter, except that no retailer shall advertise or hold out to the
public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that such tax is not included as
a part of the sales price to the consumer. All menus or menu boards shall state
“Sales Tax included”.
   (D)   Charitable organization exempted; special accounting sales by
charitable organizations. Charitable organizations selling taxable “tangible
personal property” or services as defined by this code must collect sales tax
and purchasers must pay sales tax on such sales, subject to the conditions set
forth below. It is the desire of the Town Council that the taxes collected by
charitable organizations be retained by that organization as a contribution of
additional funds to be used in the course of that organization’s charitable
service to the community. Therefore, organizations are not required to remit or
report sales tax collections to the town provided that the organization meets
the following criteria:
      (1)   The organization has been authorized in writing by the Internal
Revenue Service as a § 501(c)(3) organization or has been approved in writing
by the Finance Director as being a voluntary, not for profit organization whose
fundraising activities are primarily for the providing of services in Vail;
      (2)   The town sales tax shall be included in the stated selling price
and the total proceeds of the sale of taxable tangible personal property or
services shall be retained and expended by the qualifying organization to
provide charitable services;
      (3)   The activity at which taxable tangible property or service is being
sold is an occasional business activity specifically held for fundraising; and
      (4)   The organization applies to the Town Finance Director on an annual
basis for a special license to be conspicuously displayed at all eligible
fundraising events and provides access to any financial records or documents
necessary to determine compliance with this subsection.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1; Ord. 32(2002) § 7; Ord. 27(2005) § 7; Ord. 2(2019) § 4:
Ord. 26(2021) §5)
Editor’s note:
   The effective date of Ordinance 27(2005) is January 1, 2006.
§ 4-3-3-4 CREDIT SALES.
   (A)   Tax computed per payment. In the case of a sale upon credit or a
contract for sale where the price is paid in installments, and title does not
pass until a future date, or a sale secured by a chattel mortgage or a
conditional sale, there shall be paid upon each payment that portion of the
total tax which the amount paid bears in relation to the total purchase price.
   (B)   Sale of accounts receivable; exception to tax. If the retailer
transfers, sells, assigns or otherwise disposes of an account receivable, then
the retailer shall be deemed to have received the full balance of the
consideration for the original sale and shall be liable for the remittance of
the sales tax on the balance of the total sale price not previously reported,
except that such transfer, sale, assignment or other disposition of an account
receivable by a retailer to a “closely held subsidiary”, as defined in §
4-3-1-2 of this chapter, definition of “purchase or sale”, shall not be deemed
to require the retailer to pay the sales tax on the credit sale represented by
the account transferred prior to the time that the customer makes payment on
said account.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-3-5 BAD DEBT CHARGE-OFFS.
   Taxes paid on gross taxable sales represented by accounts found to be
worthless and actually charged off for income tax purposes may be credited upon
a subsequent payment of the tax provided in this chapter, but if any such
accounts are thereafter collected by the taxpayer, then a tax shall be paid
upon the amounts so collected.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-3-6 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following goods and services shall be exempt from sales tax under the
provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   All sales to the United States government and to the state, its
departments and institutions and the political subdivisions thereof in their
governmental capacities only;
   (B)   All sales made to charitable organizations in the conduct of their
regular charitable functions and activities;
   (C)   All sales which the town is prohibited from taxing under the
constitutional laws of the United States, the state or the town’s Charter;
   (D)   All sales of cigarettes;
   (E)   Prescription drugs for humans; glucose usable for treatment of insulin
reactions; urine and blood testing kits and materials; insulin measuring and
injecting devices, including hypodermic syringes and needles; oxygen, oxygen
concentrators and oxygen-related accessories for medical use; prosthetic
devices; wheelchairs and hospital beds; drugs or materials when furnished by a
doctor as part of professional services provided to a patient; and corrective
eyeglasses, contact lenses or hearing aids;
   (F)   All sales made to schools, including post-secondary schools, other
than schools or post-secondary schools held or conducted for private or
corporate profit. For purposes of this exemption, post-secondary schools are
schools for enrollment after twelfth grade;
   (G)   All sales of construction and building materials, as such term is used
in C.R.S. § 29-2-109, if such materials are picked up by the purchaser or if
the purchaser of such materials gives to the retailer a building permit number;
   (H)   The transfer of tangible personal property without consideration
(other than the purchase, sales or promotion of the transferor’s product) to a
vendee located outside the town for use outside the town in selling products
normally sold by wholesale sales by the transferor;
   (I)   All commodities which are taxed under the provisions of C.R.S. Title
39, Article 27, and all commodities which are taxed under such provisions and
for which the tax is refunded, the sale of special fuel, and the sale of fuel
used for the operation of farm vehicles being used on farms and ranches;
   (J)   “Exempt commercial packaging materials” as defined in §
4-3-1-2 of this chapter;
   (K)   (1)   All sales of construction and building materials to contractors
and subcontractors for use in the building, erection, alteration or repair of
structures, highways, roads, streets and other public works owned or used by:
         (a)   The United States government, the state, its departments and
institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof in their governmental
capacities only;
         (b)   Charitable organizations in the conduct of their regular
charitable functions and activities; or
         (c)   Schools, other than schools held or conducted for private or
corporate profit.
      (2)   On application by a purchaser or seller, the Finance Director shall
issue to a contractor or subcontractor a certificate or certificates of
exemption indicating that the contractor’s or subcontractor’s purchase of
construction or building materials is for a purpose stated in subsection (K)(1)
of this section and is, therefore, free from sales tax. The Finance Director
shall provide forms for such application and for such certificate and shall
have the authority to verify that the contractor or subcontractor is, in fact,
entitled to the issuance of such certificate prior to such issuance.
   (L)   (1)   Sales to and purchases of tangible personal property, including
without limitation sales and purchases of commercial packaging materials,
commercial shipping materials, containers, labels or the furnished shipping
cases thereof, by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing,
compounding for sale, profit or use, any article, substance, or commodity, when
the tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an
ingredient or component part of the product or service that is manufactured,
compounded or furnished.
      (2)   As used in subsection (L)(1) of this section with regard to food
products, tangible personal property enters into the processing of such
products and, therefore, is exempt from taxation when:
         (a)   It is intended that such property become an integral or
constituent part of a food product which is intended to be sold ultimately at
retail for human consumption; or
         (b)   Such property, whether or not it becomes an integral or
constituent part of a food product, is a chemical, solvent, agent, mold skin
casing, or other material, is used for the purpose of producing or inducing a
chemical or physical change in a food product or is used for the purpose, of
placing a food product in a more marketable condition and is directly utilized
and consumed, dissipated or destroyed, to the extent it is rendered unfit for
further use, in the processing of a food product which is intended to be sold
ultimately at retail for human consumption.
   (M)   All sales and purchases of electricity, coal, gas, fuel oil, coke or
nuclear fuel, for use in processing, manufacturing, mining, refining,
irrigation, construction, telecommunication services and street and railroad
transportation services and all industrial uses;
   (N)   In any case in which a sales tax has been imposed under this chapter
on lubricating oil used other than in automotive vehicles, the purchaser
thereof shall be entitled to a refund equal to the amount of the sales tax paid
on that portion of the sales tax price thereof which is attributable to the
federal excise tax imposed on the sale of such lubricating oil. The refund
allowed under this subsection (N) shall be paid by the Finance Director upon
receiving under § 6425 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, a
refund of the federal excise tax paid on the sale of such lubricating oil. The
claim for a refund shall be made upon forms furnished by the Finance
Department;
   (O)   All sales and purchases of refectory materials and carbon electrodes
used by a person manufacturing iron and steel for sale or profit and all sales
and purchases of inorganic chemicals used in the processing of vanadium-uranium
ores;
   (P)   All sales and purchases of newsprint and printer’s ink for use by
publishers of newspapers and all sales and purchases of newspapers;
   (Q)   All sales of tangible personal property purchased or sold within the
town if delivered outside the town to the purchaser;
   (R)   “Modified computer software programs” as defined in §
4-3-1-2 of this chapter;
   (S)   The “sale of food” as defined in 7 U.S.C. § 2012(g), as of, and as it
may be amended after, October 1, 1987, that is purchased by the medium of
exchange commonly known as “food stamps”, and the “sale of food” as defined in
or pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1786, as of, and as it may be amended after October
1, 1987, that is purchased with vouchers, checks or similar certificates of
exchange for the special supplemental food program for women, infants and
children;
   (T)   Garage or yard sales but only when the sales are conducted in a
residential area; the sales do not exceed a consecutive three- day period nor a
total of six days per calendar year; the sales are not conducted by a
professional or compensated agent of the owner of the items to be sold; and the
items for sale are not also held out for sale in a commercial establishment.
   (U)   Incontinence products and diapers; and
   (V)   Period products.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1; Ord. 24(1993) § 1; Ord. 6(1998) § 2; Ord. 32(2002) § 8;
Ord. 27(2005) § 8; Ord. 2(2019) § 5; Ord. 22(2024) § 2)
Editor’s note:
   The effective date of Ordinance 27(2005) is January 1, 2006.
§ 4-3-3-7 MAP OR LOCATION GUIDE OF TOWN BOUNDARIES.
   The Finance Department shall make available to any requesting vendor a map
or location guide showing the boundaries of the town. The requesting vendor may
rely on such map or location guide and any update thereof available to such
vendor in determining whether to collect a sales tax. No penalty shall be
imposed or action for deficiency maintained against a vendor who in good faith
complies with the most recent map or location guide available to such vendor.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-4 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Claim of exemption. A refund shall be made, or credit allowed, for the
sales tax so paid under dispute by any purchaser or user who claims an
exemption pursuant to §
4-3-3-6 of this chapter. Such refund shall be made by the Finance Director
after compliance with the following conditions precedent: applications for
refund shall be made within 60 days after the purchase of the goods or services
whereon an exemption is claimed and must be supported by the affidavit of the
purchaser accompanied by the original paid invoice or sales receipt and
certificate issued by the seller and shall be made upon such forms as shall be
prescribed therefor.
   (B)   Decision; hearing. Upon receipt of an application, the Finance
Director shall examine the same with due speed and shall give notice to the
applicant by order in writing of the Finance Director’s decision thereon.
Aggrieved applicants, within 30 days after such decision is mailed to them, may
petition the Finance Director for a hearing on the claim in the manner provided
in §
4-3-6-1 of this chapter and may either appeal to the District Court in the
manner provided in §
4-3-6-2 of this chapter or to the Department of Revenue in the manner provided
in §
4-3-6-3 of this chapter. The right of any person to a refund under this chapter
shall not be assignable, except as provided in subsection (C) of this section,
such application for refund must be made by the same person who purchased the
goods or services and paid the tax thereon as shown in the invoice of the sale
thereof.
   (C)   Burden of proof on claimant.
      (1)   A refund shall be made or a credit allowed by the Finance Director
to any person entitled to an exemption where such person establishes that:
         (a)   A tax was paid by another person, the purchaser, on a purchase
made on behalf of the person entitled to an exemption;
         (b)   A refund has not been granted to such purchaser; and
         (c)   The person entitled to the exemption paid or reimbursed such
purchaser for such tax.
      (2)   The burden of proving that sales, services, and commodities on
which tax refunds are claimed are exempt from taxation under this chapter or
were not at retail shall be on the person making such claim under such
reasonable requirements of proof as set forth in the rules and regulations
prescribed therefor. No such refund shall be made or credit allowed in an
amount greater than the tax paid.
   (D)   Notice of decision; appeal. Such application for refund under
subsection (C) of this section shall be made on forms furnished by the Finance
Department. Upon receipt of such application and proof of the matters contained
therein, the Finance Director shall give notice to the applicant by order in
writing of the Finance Director’s decision thereon. Aggrieved applicants,
within 20 days after such decision is mailed to them, may petition the Finance
Director for a hearing on the claim in the manner provided in §
4-3-6-1 of this chapter and may either appeal to the District Court in the
manner provided in §
4-3-6-2 of this chapter or to the Department of Revenue in the manner provided
in §
4-3-6-3 of this chapter. Any applicant for a refund under the provisions of
this subsection (D) or any other person who makes any false statements in
connection with an application for a refund of any taxes is guilty of a
violation of this chapter and shall be punished in the manner provided by state
law.
   (E)   Refund applied to tax deficiencies. Claims for tax monies paid in
error or by mistake shall be made within three years after the date of
purchase, storage, use or consumption of the goods or services for which the
refund is claimed and shall be processed for refund in accordance with the
rules and regulations prescribed therefor under subsection (D) of this section,
except that the proceeds of any such claim for a refund shall first be applied
by the Finance Department to any tax deficiencies or liabilities existing
against the claimant before allowance of such claim by the Finance Department,
and further, except that if such excess payment of tax monies in any period is
discovered as a result of an audit by the Finance Department, and deficiencies
are discovered and assessed against the taxpayer as a result of such audit,
then such excess monies shall be first applied against any deficiencies
outstanding to the date of the assessment but shall not be applied to any
future tax liabilities.
   (F)   Recovery of refund received erroneously. If any person is convicted
under the provisions of this section, such conviction shall be prima facie
evidence that all refunds received by such person during the current year were
obtained unlawfully, and the Finance Director is empowered to bring appropriate
action for recovery of such refunds. A brief summary statement of the above
described penalties shall be printed on each form for a refund.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1; Ord. 13(2010) § 2)
§ 4-3-5 ENFORCEMENT.
§ 4-3-5-1 RECOVERY OF TAXES, PENALTY AND INTEREST.
   (A) Retailer collects, holds tax monies. All sums of money paid by the
purchaser to the retailer as taxes imposed by this chapter shall be and remain
public money, the property of the town, in the hands of such retailer, and he
or she shall hold the same in trust for the sole use and benefit of the town
until paid to the Finance Director, and for failure to so pay to the Finance
Director, such retailer shall be punished as provided herein.
   (B)   Failure to make return; penalty.
      (1)   If a person neglects or refuses to make a return in payment of the
sales tax or to pay any sales tax as required by this chapter within five
business days after the same are due, then the Finance Director shall make an
estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of
taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent and shall add
thereto a penalty equal to the sum of $15 for such failure or 10% thereof,
whichever is greater, and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate of 1%
per month from the time the return was due. If any part of the deficiency is
due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added 100%
of the total amount deficiency and in such case, the whole amount of the tax
unpaid, including the additions, shall become due and payable ten days after
written notice and demand by the Finance Director, and an additional 3% per
month on said amount shall be added from the date that the return was due until
paid.
      (2)   Promptly thereafter, the Finance Director shall give to the
delinquent taxpayer written notice of such estimated taxes, penalty and
interest, which notice of assessment shall be sent by first class mail directed
to the last address of such person on file with the Finance Department. Such
estimate shall thereupon become a notice of deficiency. Within 30 days after
the notice of deficiency is mailed, the taxpayer may petition the Finance
Director for a hearing in the manner provided in §
4-3-6-1 of this chapter and either may appeal to the District Court as provided
in §
4-3-6-2 of this chapter or to the Department of Revenue as provided in §
4-3-6-3 of this chapter.
   (C)   Delinquent tax a lien.
      (1)   If any taxes, penalty or interest imposed by this chapter and shown
due by returns filed by the taxpayer or as shown by assessments duly made as
provided in this section are not paid within five days after the same are due,
then the Finance Director shall issue a notice, setting forth the name of the
taxpayer, the amount of the tax, penalties and interest, and the date of the
accrual thereof, and the town claims a first and prior lien therefor on the
real and tangible personal property of the taxpayer except as to preexisting
claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor or
purchaser whose rights have attached prior to the filing of the notice as
provided in this section on property of the taxpayer, other than the goods,
stock in trade, and business fixtures of such taxpayer.
      (2)   Said notice shall be on forms furnished by the Finance Department
and shall be verified by the Town Manager or by the Finance Director or any
duly qualified agent of the Town Manager or the Finance Director, whose duties
are the collection of such tax, and may be filed in the office of the County
Clerk and Recorder in which the taxpayer owns real or tangible personal
property, and the filing of such notice shall create a lien on such property in
that county and constitute notice thereof. After said notice has been filed, or
concurrently therewith, or at any time when taxes due are unpaid, whether such
notice shall have been filed or not, the Finance Director may issue a warrant
directed to any duly authorized revenue collector, or the sheriff of the county
commanding him or her to levy upon, seize, and sell sufficient of the real and
personal property of the amount due together with interests, penalties and
costs, as may be provided by law, subject to valid preexisting claims or liens.
   (D)   Recovery of costs by county. Such revenue collector or the sheriff
shall forthwith levy upon sufficient of the property of the taxpayer or any
property used by such taxpayer in conducting such taxpayer’s retail business,
and said property so levied upon shall be sold in all aspects to with like
effect and in the same manner as is prescribed by law with respect to
executions against property upon judgment of a court of record, and the
remedies of garnishment shall apply. The sheriff shall be entitled to such fee
in executing such warrants as are allowed by law for similar services.
   (E)   Lien released by county. Any lien for taxes as shown on the records of
the County Clerks and Recorders as provided in this section, upon payment of
all taxes, penalties and interest covered thereby shall be released by the
Finance Director in the same manner as mortgages and judgments are released.
   (F)   Costs recovered by town.
      (1)   The Finance Director may also treat any such taxes, penalties or
interest due and unpaid as debt due to the town from the vendor. The return of
the taxpayer or the assessment made by the Finance Director, as provided in
this chapter, shall be prima facie proof of the amount due.
      (2)   To recover such taxes, penalties or interest due, the Finance
Director may bring an action in attachment, and a writ of attachment may be
issued to the sheriff. In any such proceedings, no bond shall be required of
the Finance Director, nor shall any sheriff require of the Finance Director an
indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of execution
upon any judgment entered in such proceedings. The Finance Director may
prosecute appeals in such cases without the necessity of providing bond
thereof. It is the duty of the Town Attorney, when requested by the Finance
Director, to commence action for the recovery of taxes due under this chapter,
and this remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies or remedies
provided in this chapter.
   (G)   Town is defendant. In any action affecting the title to real estate or
the ownership or rights to possession of personal property, the town may be
made a party defendant for the purpose of obtaining an adjudication or
determination of its lien upon the property involved therein. In any such
action, service of summons upon the Finance Director or any person of the
office of the Finance Director shall be sufficient service and shall be binding
upon the town.
   (H)   Waiver. The Finance Director is authorized to waive, for good cause
shown, any penalty and interest assessed as provided in this chapter.
   (I)   Payment by insufficient funds check. If a taxpayer pays for any tax
imposed pursuant to this chapter by check for which there are insufficient
funds to cover such check, then the Finance Director may assess a penalty
against such taxpayer as follows:
      (1)   Fifteen dollars for the first violation;
      (2)   Thirty dollars for the second violation; and
      (3)   Seventy five dollars for each additional violation. If a penalty of
$35 or more has been assessed against a taxpayer by the Finance Director, then
the Finance Director may require such taxpayer to pay all tax payments, whether
due or to be due in the future by certified funds, cashier’s check or cash. The
penalty imposed by this subsection is in addition to all other penalties
imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   (J)   Enforce collection. If any person, firm or corporation liable for the
payment of any tax covered by this chapter has repeatedly failed, neglected or
refused to pay the same within the time specified for such payment, and the
town has been required to issue distraint warrants to enforce the collection of
any taxes due from such taxpayer, the Finance Director is hereby authorized to
assess and collect the amount of such taxes due, together with all interest and
penalties provided therefor by law, and also, the following additional
penalties for recurring distraint warrants:
      (1)   Three, four or five consecutive distraint warrants issued: 15% of
the delinquent taxes, interest and penalties due or the sum of $25, whichever
is greater; and
      (2)   Six or more consecutive distraint warrants: 30% of the delinquent
taxes, interest, and penalties due or the sum of $50, whichever is greater.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1; Ord. 13(2010) § 3)
§ 4-3-5-2 TAX LIEN.
   (A)   Tax procedure when business sold or closed.
      (1)   The sales tax imposed pursuant to §
4-3-3 of this chapter, shall be a first and prior lien upon the tangible
personal property and business fixtures of or used by any retailer under lease,
title retaining contract or other contract arrangement, excepting stock of
goods sold or for sale in the ordinary course of business, and shall take
precedence on all such property over other liens or claims of whatsoever kind
or nature.
      (2)   Any retailer who sells out his or her business or stock of goods,
or quits business, shall be required to make out the return as provided in this
chapter within ten days after the date such person sold his or her business or
stock of goods, or quit business, and his or her successor in business shall be
required to withhold sufficient purchase money to cover the amount of said
taxes due and unpaid until such time as the former owner produces a receipt
from the Finance Director showing that the taxes have been paid or a
certificate that no taxes are due.
      (3)   If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods fails to withhold
the purchase money as provided in subsection (A)(2) of this section and the
taxes are due and unpaid after the ten-day period allowed, such person, as well
as the vendor, shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes unpaid
by the former owner. Likewise, anyone who takes any stock of goods or business
fixtures of or used by any retailer under lease, title retaining contract or
other contract arrangement, by purchase, foreclosure sale, or otherwise, takes
the same subject to the lien for any delinquent sales taxes owned by such
retailer and shall be liable for payment of all delinquent sales taxes of such
prior owner, not, however, exceeding the value of property so taken or
acquired.
   (B)   Tax procedure for bankruptcy, receivership, assignment. Whenever the
business or property owner of any taxpayer subject to this chapter shall be
placed in receivership, bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of creditors,
or seized under distraint for property taxes, all taxes, penalties and interest
imposed by this chapter and for which said retailer is in any way liable under
the terms of this chapter shall be a prior and preferred claim against all the
property of said taxpayer, except as to preexisting claims or liens of a bona
fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor or purchaser whose rights shall have
attached prior to the filing of the notice as provided in §
4-3-5-1(C)(2) of this chapter on the property of the taxpayer, other than the
goods, stock in trade, and business fixtures of such taxpayer. No sheriff,
receiver, assignee or other officer shall sell the property of any person
subject to this chapter under process or order of any court without first
ascertaining from the Finance Director the amount of any taxes due and payable
under this chapter, and if there are any such taxes due, owing, or unpaid, it
is the duty of such officer to first pay the amount of said taxes out of the
proceeds of said sale before making payment of any monies to any judgment
creditor or other claims of whatsoever kind or nature, except the costs of the
proceedings and other preexisting claims or liens as provided in this section.
For the purposes of this subsection, “taxpayer” includes “retailer”.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-3-5-3 INTEREST ON TAX PAYMENTS.
   (A)   Commencement of interest. If any amount of sales tax is not paid on or
before the last date prescribed for payment, then interest on such amount at
the rate of 1% per month shall be paid for the period from such last date to
the date paid. The last date prescribed for payment shall be determined without
regard to any extension of time for payment and shall be determined without
regard to any notice and demand for payment issued, by reason of jeopardy,
prior to the last date otherwise prescribed for such payment. In the case of a
tax in which the last date for payment shall be deemed to be the date that the
liability for the tax arises, and in no event shall such date be later than the
date that notice and demand for the tax is made by the Finance Director.
   (B)   Interest due with tax. Interest prescribed under this section and §
4-3-5-1(B) of this chapter shall be paid upon notice and demand and shall be
assessed, collected, and paid in the same manner as the tax to which such
interest is applicable.
   (C)   Overpayment interest recovery. If any portion of a tax is satisfied by
credit of an overpayment, then no interest shall be imposed under this section
on the portion of the tax so satisfied for any period, during which, if the
credit has not been made, interest would have been allowed with respect to such
overpayment.
   (D)   Collection of interest. Interest prescribed under this section and §
4-3-5-1(B) of this chapter on any sales tax may be assessed and collected at
any time during the period within which the tax to which such interest relates
may be assessed and collected.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-5-4 OTHER REMEDIES.
   No provisions of this chapter shall preclude the town from utilizing any
other lawful penalties or other remedies applicable to the collection of sales
taxes.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-5-5 JEOPARDY ASSESSMENT AND DEMANDS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, if the Finance Director
finds that collection of the tax will be jeopardized by delay, in the Finance
Director’s discretion, the Finance Director may declare the taxable period
immediately terminated, determine the tax, and issue notice and demand for
payment thereof; and, having done so, the tax shall be due and payable
forthwith, and the Finance Director may proceed immediately to collect such tax
by distraint, levy and sale. Collection may be stayed if the taxpayer gives
such security for payment as shall be satisfactory to the Finance Director.
(Ord. 5(2004) § 1)
§ 4-3-6 HEARINGS AND APPEALS.
§ 4-3-6-1 HEARINGS BY FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Appeal assessed tax amount. An appeal of a notice of assessment issued
to a vendor or taxpayer for failure to file a return, underpayment of tax owed
or as a result of an audit shall be submitted in writing to the Finance
Director within 30 calendar days from the date of the notice of assessment. Any
such appeal shall identify the amount of tax disputed and the basis for the
appeal.
   (B)   Appeal denial of refund. An appeal of a denial of a refund shall be
submitted in writing to the Finance Director within 20 calendar days from the
date of the denial of the refund and shall identify the amount of the refund
requested and the basis for the appeal by a vendor or taxpayer.
   (C)   Appeal of decision. An appeal of a decision of the Finance Director in
a hearing held pursuant to §§
4-3-6-2 and
4-3-6-3 of this chapter shall be commenced within 30 days of such decision.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1; Ord. 13(2010) § 4)
§ 4-3-6-2 REVIEW BY DISTRICT COURT.
   (A)   Authority. If the petitioner or if an applicant for a refund is
aggrieved at the final decision of the Finance Director then he or she may
proceed to have same reviewed by the District Court. The procedure of review
shall be in accordance with Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil
Procedure.
   (B)   Bond required. Within 15 days after filing a notice of appeal as
provided in this section, the taxpayer shall file with the District Court a
surety bond in twice the amount of the taxes, and other charges stated in the
final decision by the Finance Director that are contested on appeal. The
taxpayer may, at such taxpayer’s option, satisfy the surety bond requirement by
a savings account or deposit in or a certificate of deposit issued by a state
or national bank or by a state or federal savings and loan association, in
accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. § 11-35-101(1), equal to twice the
amount of the taxes, interest and other charges stated in the final decision by
the Finance Director. The taxpayer may, at his or her option, deposit the
disputed amount with the Finance Director in lieu of posting a surety bond. If
such amount is so deposited, no further interest shall accrue on the deficiency
contested during the pendency of the action. At the conclusion of the action,
after appeal to the Supreme Court or the Court of Appeals of the state or after
the time for such appeal has expired, the funds deposited shall be, at the
direction of the District Court, either retained by the Finance Director and
applied against the deficiency or returned in whole or part to the taxpayer
with interest at the rate imposed pursuant to §
4-3-5-3 of this chapter. No claim for refund of amounts deposited with the
Finance Director need be made by the taxpayer in order for such amounts to be
repaid in accordance with the direction of the District Court.
   (C)   Writ issuance. The District Court shall have original jurisdiction in
proceedings to review all questions of law and fact determined by the Finance
Director in administering the provisions of this chapter by writ under Rule 106
(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. Any writ issued pursuant to
this subsection (C) shall be issued by the Clerk of the District Court upon a
verified petition of the taxpayer filed within 20 days after notice of the
decision of the Finance Director in any such matter. Such writ shall be served
within five days after its issuance and shall be returnable at such time as the
District Court may determine, not less than ten days nor more than 20 days
after the date of issuance of such writ. The Finance Director shall certify the
record of his or her proceedings to the District Court.
   (D)   Appeal of Court decision. The decision of the District Court may be
reviewed in the Supreme Court of the state upon writ of error by any party
thereto.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-6-3 ALTERNATE REVIEW BY DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.
   In lieu of the procedure provided for in §
4-3-6-2 of this chapter, the taxpayer may elect a hearing on the Finance
Director’s final decision on a deficiency notice or claim for refund pursuant
to procedure set forth in this section.
   (A)   State hearing defined. As used in this section, STATE HEARING means a
hearing before the Executive Director of the Department of Revenue or a
delegate thereof as provided in C.R.S. § 29-2-106.1(3).
   (B)   Deficiency notice. When the Finance Director asserts that sales tax is
due in an amount greater than the amount paid by a taxpayer, then the Finance
Director shall mail a deficiency notice to the taxpayer by certified mail. The
deficiency notice shall state that additional sales tax is due. The deficiency
notice shall contain notification, in clear and conspicuous type, of the time
limit to file a protest to the notice and that the taxpayer has the right to
elect a state hearing on the deficiency pursuant to C.R.S. § 29-2-106.1(3). Any
protest to the deficiency notice shall be filed with the Finance Director
within 30 days after the date of notice. The taxpayer shall also have the right
to elect a state hearing on the Finance Director’s denial of such taxpayer’s
claim for a refund of sales tax paid.
   (C)   Local remedies unsatisfactory. The taxpayer shall request the state
hearing within 30 days after the taxpayer’s exhaustion of local remedies. The
taxpayer shall have no right to such hearing if such taxpayer has not exhausted
local remedies or if he or she fails to request such hearing within the time
period of this subsection. For purposes of this subsection (C), EXHAUSTION OF
LOCAL REMEDIES means:
      (1)   The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the
Finance Director, and the Finance Director has held such hearing and issued a
final decision thereon. Such hearing shall be informal, and no transcript,
rules of evidence or filing of briefs shall be required, but the taxpayer may
elect to submit a brief, in which case the Finance Director may submit a brief.
The Finance Director shall hold such hearing and issue the final decision
thereon within 90 days after the Finance Director’s receipt of the taxpayer’s
written request therefor, except that the town may extend such period if the
delay in holding the hearing or issuing the decision thereon was occasioned by
the taxpayer, but, in any such event, the Finance Director shall hold such
hearing and issue the decision thereon within 180 days of the taxpayer’s
request in writing therefor; or
      (2)   The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the
Finance Director, and the Finance Director has failed to hold such hearing or
has failed to issue a final decision thereon within the time periods prescribed
in this subsection.
   (D)   State hearing procedure. If a taxpayer has exhausted his or her local
remedies as provided in subsection (C)(1) of this section, then the taxpayer
may request a state hearing on such deficiency notice or claim for refund, and
such hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as set forth in C.R.S. § 29-
2-106.1(3) through (7), inclusive.
   (E)   Appeal to District Court. If the deficiency notice or claim for refund
involves only the Finance Director, then in lieu of requesting a state hearing,
the taxpayer may appeal such deficiency or denial of a claim for refund to the
District Court as provided in C.R.S. § 29-2-106.1(8), if the taxpayer complies
with the procedures set forth in subsection (C) of this section.
   (F)   Judicial review. No provision of this section shall prohibit the
taxpayer from pursuing judicial review of a final decision of the Finance
Director as otherwise provided in §
4-3-6-2 of this chapter.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1; Ord. 13(2010) § 5)
§ 4-3-6-4 AMENDMENTS.
   The Town Council may amend, alter or change this chapter, subsequent to
adoption by a majority vote of the Town Council and such amendment, alteration
or change need not be submitted to the electors of the town for their approval
except to the extent required by the Town Charter or the Colorado Constitution.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1; Ord. 32(2002) § 9)
§ 4-3-6-5 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to penalty as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-3-7 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
§ 4-3-7-1 COORDINATED AUDIT.
   (A)   Combine records. Any taxpayer licensed in the town pursuant to §
4-3-2 of this chapter and holding a similar sales tax license in at least four
other Colorado municipalities that administer their own sales tax collection,
may request a coordinated audit as provided herein.
   (B)   Time limitation stayed. Within 14 days of receipt of notice of an
intended audit by any municipality that administers its own sales tax
collection, the taxpayer may provide to the Finance Director of this town, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a written request for a coordinated
audit indicating the municipality from which the notice of intended audit was
received and the name of the official who issued such notice. Such request
shall include a list of those Colorado municipalities utilizing local
collection of their sales tax in which the taxpayer holds a current sales tax
license and a declaration that the taxpayer will sign a waiver of any passage
of time based limitation upon this town’s right to recover tax owed by the
vendor for the audit period.
   (C)   One year time frame. Except as provided in subsection (G) of this
section, any taxpayer that submits a complete request for a coordinated audit
and promptly signs a waiver of the town’s statute of limitations found in §
4-3-1-11 of this chapter, may be audited by the town during the 12 months after
such request is submitted only through a coordinated audit involving all
municipalities electing to participate in such an audit.
   (D)   Cooperation between municipalities. If this town desires to
participate in the audit of a taxpayer that submits a complete request for a
coordinated audit pursuant to subsection (C )of this section, the Finance
Director shall so notify the Finance Director of the municipality whose notice
of audit prompted the taxpayer’s request within ten days after receipt of the
taxpayer’s request for a coordinated audit. The Finance Director shall then
cooperate with other participating municipalities in the development of
arrangements for the coordinated audit, including arrangement of the time
during which the coordinated audit will be conducted, the period of time to be
covered by the audit, and a coordinated notice to the taxpayer of those records
most likely to be required for completion of the coordinated audit.
   (E)   Municipality calling audit responsible. If the taxpayer’s request for
a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by this town,
this town’s Finance Director shall facilitate arrangements between this town
and other municipalities participating in the coordinated audit unless and
until an official from some other participating municipality agrees to assume
this responsibility. The Finance Director shall cooperate with other
participating municipalities to, whenever practicable, minimize the number of
auditors that will be present on the taxpayer’s premises to conduct the
coordinated audit on behalf of the participating municipalities. Information
obtained by or on behalf of those municipalities participating in the
coordinated audit may be shared only among such participating municipalities.
   (F)   Taxpayer notified. If the taxpayer’s request for a coordinated audit
was in response to a notice of audit issued by this town, this town’s Finance
Director shall, once arrangements for the coordinated audit between the town
and other participating municipalities are completed, provide written notice to
the taxpayer of which municipalities will be participating, the period to be
audited and the records most likely to be required by participating
municipalities for completion of the coordinated audit. The Finance Director
shall also propose a schedule for the coordinated audit.
   (G)   Exception to audit procedure. The coordinated audit procedure set
forth in this section shall not apply:
      (1)   When the proposed audit is a jeopardy audit;
      (2)   To audits for which a notice of audit was given prior to the
effective date hereof;
      (3)   When a taxpayer refuses to promptly sign a waiver of the town’s
statute of limitations found in §
4-3-1-11 of this chapter; and
      (4)   When a taxpayer fails to provide a timely and complete request for
a coordinated audit as provided in subsection (B) of this section.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-7-2 INTERCITY CLAIMS FOR RECOVERY.
   The intent of this section is to streamline and standardize procedures
related to situations where tax has been remitted to the incorrect
municipality. It is not intended to reduce or eliminate the responsibilities of
the taxpayer or vendor to correctly pay, collect, and remit sales taxes to the
town.
   (A)   Definition. As used herein, CLAIM FOR RECOVERY means a claim for
reimbursement of sales taxes paid to the wrong taxing jurisdiction.
   (B)   Notice of error. When it is determined by the Director of Finance of
the town that sales tax owed to the town has been reported and paid to another
municipality, the town shall promptly notify the vendor that taxes are being
improperly collected and remitted, and that as of the date of the notice the
vendor must cease improper tax collections and remittances.
   (C)   Claim for recovery; content; extension. The town may make a written
claim for recovery directly to the municipality that received tax and/or
penalty and interest owed to the town, or, in the alternative, may institute
procedures for collection of the tax from the taxpayer or vendor. The decision
to make a claim for a recovery lies in the sole discretion of the town. Any
claim for recovery shall include a properly executed release of claim from the
taxpayer and/or vendor releasing its claim to the taxes paid to the wrong
municipality, evidence to substantiate the claim, and a request that the
municipality approve or deny in whole or in part, the claim within 90 days of
its receipt. The municipality to which the town submits a claim for recovery
may, for good cause, request an extension of time to investigate the claim, and
approval of such extension by the town shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   (D)   Verification of claim. Within 90 days after receipt of a claim for
recovery, the town shall verify to its satisfaction whether or not all or a
portion of the tax claimed was improperly received, and shall notify the
municipality submitting the claim in writing that the claim is either approved
or denied in whole or in part, including the reasons for the decision. If the
claim is approved in whole or in part, the town shall remit the undisputed
amount to the municipality submitting the claim within 30 days of approval. If
a claim is submitted jointly by a municipality and a vendor or taxpayer, the
check shall be made to the parties jointly. Denial of a claim for recovery may
only be made for good cause.
   (E)   Denial. The town may deny a claim on the grounds that it has
previously paid a claim for recovery arising out of an audit of the same
taxpayer.
   (F)   Limitation. The period subject to a claim for recovery shall be
limited to the 36-month period prior to the date the municipality that was
wrongly paid the tax receives the claim for recovery.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-7-3 NOTICE OF SALES TAX ORDINANCE AMENDMENT.
   (A)   Central register. In order to initiate a central register of sales and
use tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales tax
collection, the Finance Director of the town shall file with the Colorado
Municipal League prior to the effective date hereof a copy of the town sales
tax ordinance reflecting all provisions in effect on the effective date hereof.
   (B)   Update responsibility. In order to keep current the central register
of sales tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales tax
collection, the Finance Director of the town shall file with the Colorado
Municipal League prior to the effective date of any amendment a copy of each
sales tax ordinance amendment enacted by the town.
   (C)   Failure to file. Failure of the town to file such ordinance or
ordinance amendment pursuant to this section shall not invalidate any provision
of the sales tax ordinance or any amendment thereto.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
§ 4-3-7-4 PARTICIPATION IN SIMPLIFICATION MEETINGS.
   The Finance Director shall cooperate with and participate on an as needed
basis with a permanent statewide Sales and Use Tax Committee convened by the
Colorado Municipal League which is composed of state and municipal sales and
use tax and business officials. Said committee will meet for the purpose of
discussing and seeking resolution to sales and use tax problems which may
arise.
(Ord. 45(1991) § 1)
CHAPTER 4: TIMESHARE UNITS
ARTICLE 4A: DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
(Rep. by Ord. 24 (2005) § 2)
ARTICLE 4B: PROJECT REGISTRATION
(Rep. by Ord. 24 (2005) § 2)
CHAPTER 5: SKI AREA LIFT TICKET ADMISSIONS TAX
Section
4-5-1 Purpose; legislative intent
4-5-2 Definitions
4-5-3 Tax levied
4-5-4 Failure to collect
4-5-5 Exempt transactions
4-5-6 Administration
4-5-7 Licenses and reporting procedures
4-5-8 Collection of tax by vendor; liability
4-5-9 Duty to keep books and records
4-5-10 Trust status of tax in possession of vendors
4-5-11 Examination of returns; remedial action
4-5-12 Interest on late payments; penalty
4-5-13 Penalty for deficiency caused by fraud
4-5-14 Investigation of vendor’s books
4-5-15 Recovery of taxes, penalty and interest
4-5-16 Hearings, subpoenas and witness fees
4-5-17 Judge to compel attendance
4-5-18 Depositions
4-5-19 Decisions of Finance Director; notice
4-5-20 Review of decision in District Court
4-5-21 Jeopardy assessments and demands
4-5-22 Methods of enforcing collections
4-5-23 Tax lien
4-5-24 Status of unpaid tax in bankruptcy and receivership
4-5-25 Violation; penalty
§ 4-5-1 PURPOSE; LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (A)   Justification. The Town Council finds, determines, and declares that
considering the nature of the business of operating ski lifts and ski tows and
the relation of such business to the municipal welfare as well as the relation
thereof to the expenditures required of the town, and a proper, just and
equitable distribution of tax burdens within the town, and all other matters
proper to be considered in regard thereto, that the imposition of an admission
tax on such places of business is reasonable, proper and nondiscriminatory and
that the amount of the tax imposed by this chapter for exercising the taxable
privilege of purchasing admission is reasonable, proper, uniform and
nondiscriminatory and necessary for a just and proper distribution of tax
burdens within the town.
   (B)   Tax upon users. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of
the Town Council that, for the purposes of this chapter, every person who
purchases an admission to a ski lift or ski tow is exercising a taxable
privilege.
   (C)   Agent for town. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of
the Town Council that on and after the effective date of this chapter every
person who pays to purchase a ski lift ticket to be admitted to a ski lift or
ski tow shall pay, and every person whether owner, lessee or operator who
charges for the purchase of a ski lift ticket for the admission to a ski lift
or ski tow shall collect, as agent for the town, the tax imposed by this
chapter.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMISSION. The right to an occupancy of a seat or position of a person, who,
for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess an
occupancy of a seat or position to any ski lift or ski tow operated in the
town.
   FINANCE DIRECTOR. The Director of Finance of the Town of Vail.
   LIFT TICKET. Any certificate, card, slip, token, badge, patch or other
signification that a fee has been paid entitling the holder of such
signification or another to be admitted to a ski lift or ski tow.
   PERSON. Means and includes a natural person, corporation, trust,
partnership, association, joint venture, two or more persons having a joint or
common interest, any other legal or commercial entity, or a receiver, executor,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by any order of any
court.
   PURCHASE or SALE. Contract for sale and includes any transaction for the
furnishing by any ski area to any person of the taxable privilege of admission
to a ski lift or ski tow.
   PURCHASER. Any person to whom the taxable privilege of admission is, or has
been, rendered.
   SKI AREA. Any place or business which operates ski lifts which are open to
the public upon the purchase of a lift ticket.
   SKI AREA OPERATOR. Any person who owns, leases or operates a ski area.
   SKI LIFT. Any gondola lift, poma lift, chair lift, T-bar tows, trams or any
other facility designed to be used or operated in connection with the
transporting of an individual or individuals up or down a slope, hillside or
mountainside for the purposes of skiing, snowboarding, sightseeing or other
recreational activity.
   TAX. Either the tax payable by the purchaser or the aggregate amount of
taxes due from a vendor.
   TAXPAYER. Any person obligated to account to the Finance Director for taxes
collected or to be collected, or from whom a tax is due, under the terms of
this chapter.
   VENDOR. A person making a sale to a purchaser of the taxable privilege of
admission.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-3 TAX LEVIED.
   (A)   Authority. On and after the effective date of this chapter, there is
levied and there shall be paid and collected, an admission tax by every person
exercising the taxable privilege of this chapter for the exercise of such
privilege.
   (B)   Tax amount. The amount of tax hereby levied is 4% on the price paid
for each admission.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-4 FAILURE TO COLLECT.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person who pays to purchase
an admission in the town to fail to pay, or for any vendor who sells
admissions, to fail to collect, as agent for the town, the tax levied by this
chapter.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-5 EXEMPT TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   Refunds. In the event that a lift ticket fee is refunded for any
reason, the admissions tax is no longer applicable and shall be refunded along
with the admission price.
   (B)   Free admission. The providing of admission, where no lift ticket price
is charged or paid shall exempt said person from the payment of the admission
tax; however, in the event that a reduced charge for admission is made, the tax
imposed in this chapter is applicable to the amount of such charge.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-6 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Finance Director is hereby authorized to adopt such rules and
regulations for the administration of this chapter as he or she deems
necessary, and the payment of the taxes and of making and filing of statements
or returns as prescribed in this chapter shall be done in the manner and on the
forms prescribed by the Finance Director.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-7 LICENSES AND REPORTING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Authority of Finance Director. The Finance Director may require any
person to make such return, render such statement or keep and furnish such
records as the Director of Finance may deem sufficient and reasonable to show
whether or not such person is liable under this chapter for the payment or
collection of the tax imposed herein.
   (B)   License required; payment due. Every vendor must obtain, without
charge, a license to collect the tax, and must report on forms prescribed by
the Director of Finance for such taxes, and remit to the town the collected
taxes on or before the fifteenth day of the month for the preceding month or
months.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-5-8 COLLECTION OF TAX BY VENDOR; LIABILITY.
   (A)   Vendor responsibility. Every vendor making a sale to a purchaser which
is taxable under the provisions of this chapter is required at the time of
making such sale to collect the tax imposed by this chapter from the purchaser.
   (B)   Tax due upon purchase. Whenever admissions are sold under an
installment purchase plan, or a purchase plan allowing deferred payment, the
tax levied by this chapter shall be based on the total purchase price. Such tax
shall be collected at the time of the initial payment.
   (C)   Tax clearly stated on ticket. The tax to be collected as provided
herein shall be conspicuously, indelibly, and separately stated and charged
from the sale price on the ticket or card evidencing the sale, and shown
separately from the sale price on any record made thereof at the time of the
sale or at the time when evidence of the sale is first issued or employed by
the vendor; provided, however, that when added, such tax shall constitute a
part of such purchase price or charge and shall be a debt from the purchaser to
the vendor until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as
other debts. The tax shall be paid by the purchaser to the vendor, who, as
trustee for and on account of the town, shall be liable to the town for the
collection and return thereof.
   (D)   Tax in addition to purchase price. Every vendor shall add the tax
imposed by this chapter to the purchase price, charge or other consideration
paid for the taxable privilege of admissions; provided, however, that the
vendor shall be liable and responsible to the town for the payment of an amount
equivalent to said tax on each such admission based on his or her gross taxable
sales of lift tickets irrespective of the provision of §
4-5-1 of this chapter.
   (E)   Due date. The vendor shall prepare and file returns showing taxes due
hereunder in such manner and upon such forms as the Finance Director may
prescribe; provided, that returns must be filed and the tax paid on or before
the fifteenth day of the month next following the month of sale, unless the
Finance Director prescribes a different time.
   (F)   Vendor credited. A credit will be allowed the vendor in the return of
sales of admissions for admissions that have been surrendered by the purchaser;
provided, that the full sale price thereof and the full tax due and paid
thereon have been refunded by the vendor to the purchaser.
   (G)   Treatment of bad debts. Taxes paid hereunder on admissions represented
by accounts that are unsecured by conditional sales contracts or security
agreements, that are found to be worthless, and that are actually and properly
charged off as bad debts for the purpose of income tax reporting under the laws
of the United States, may be credited upon subsequent returns of the tax, but
if any such accounts are thereafter collected by the vendor, a tax shall be
paid in accordance with the terms of this chapter upon the amount so collected.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-9 DUTY TO KEEP BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   It shall be the duty of every vendor to keep and preserve suitable records
of all sales made by such vendor and such other books or accounts as may be
necessary to determine the amount of the tax for the collection or payment of
which such vendor is liable under this chapter. It shall be the duty of every
such vendor to keep and preserve for a period of three years following the due
date of the return or the payment of the tax all such books, invoices and other
records necessary to determine the tax, and the same shall be open for
examination by the Finance Director. Upon demand by the Finance Director such
vendor shall make the books, invoices, accounts or other records it maintains
available at the office of the Finance Director or some other place designated
by the Finance Director, for examination, inspection and audit by the Finance
Director. The Finance Director, in the his or her discretion, may make, permit
or cause to be made, the examination, inspection or audit of books, invoices,
accounts and other records so kept or maintained by such vendor. When such
vendor shall have entered into a binding agreement with the town to reimburse
it for all costs and expenses incurred by the town in order to have such
examination, inspection or audit at a place other than the place designated by
the Finance Director, then such examination, inspection or audit shall be made
where such records are kept or maintained by the vendor or as otherwise
designated in the agreement.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-10 TRUST STATUS OF TAX IN POSSESSION OF VENDORS.
   All sums of money paid by the purchaser to the vendor as a tax imposed by
this chapter shall be and remain public money, the property of the town, in the
hands of such vendor, and the vendor shall hold the same in trust for the sole
use and benefit of the town until paid to the Finance Director as provided in
this chapter, and for failure so to pay the Finance Director, such vendor shall
be punished for a violation hereof.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-11 EXAMINATION OF RETURNS; REMEDIAL ACTION.
   As soon as practicable after the return is filed under this chapter, the
Finance Director shall examine it and:
   (A)   Discrepancy of amounts. If it then appears that the correct amount of
tax to be remitted is greater or less than that shown in the return, the tax
shall be recomputed;
   (B)   Excess payments. If the amount paid exceeds that which is due, the
excess shall be refunded or credited against any subsequent remittance from the
same person; and
   (C)   Underpayments. If the amount paid is less than the amount due, the
difference, together with interest thereon at the rate of 0.5% per month from
the time the return was due, shall be paid by the taxpayer within 30 days after
written notice and demand to the taxpayer from the Finance Director, subject to
the taxpayer’s exercising within such 30-day period the right to administrative
and legal remedies available under §§
4-5-15 and
4-5-20 of this chapter.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-12 INTEREST ON LATE PAYMENTS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Unintentional late payment. In any case in which a vendor fails to
file a return or pay over the tax within the time required by this chapter, but
without the intent to defraud, there shall be added as a penalty, 10% of the
total amount of the deficiency, but not less than $10, and interest in such
cases shall be collected at the rate of 1% each month, or fraction thereof, on
the amount due on the deficiency from the time the return was due to the date
the tax is paid, which interest and addition shall become due and payable
within 20 days after the written notice and demand by the Finance Director, and
such interest shall be assessed, collected and paid in the same manner as the
tax itself.
   (B)   Penalty and interest satisfied first. Payments of part but less than
all of a deficiency, including interest, or interest and penalty, shall be
first applied to penalty, if any, secondly to accrued interest, and, lastly, to
the tax itself.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-13 PENALTY FOR DEFICIENCY CAUSED BY FRAUD.
   If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the
tax, then there shall be added 50% of the total amount of the deficiency, and
in such case the whole amount of the tax unpaid, including the addition, shall
become due and payable 30 days after written notice and demand by the Finance
Director, subject to review as provided in §§
4-5-15 and
4-5-20 of this chapter, and an additional 1% per month on such amount shall be
added from the date the return was due until paid.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-14 INVESTIGATION OF VENDOR’S BOOKS.
   For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return, or for the
purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any person, the Finance
Director may issue subpoenas, subpoenas duces tecum, hold investigations and
hearings concerning any matters covered by this chapter, and may examine any
relevant books, papers, records or memoranda, of any such person and may
require the attendance of such person, or any officer or employee of such
person, or of any person having knowledge of such sales, and may take testimony
and require proof for his or her information. The Finance Director shall have
power to administer oaths to such persons.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-15 RECOVERY OF TAXES, PENALTY AND INTEREST.
   All sums of money paid by any person purchasing a lift ticket from any
vendor shall be and remain public money, the property of the town in the hands
of such vendor, and such vendor shall hold the same in trust for the sole use
and benefit of the town until paid to the Finance Director, and for failure to
so pay to the Finance Director, such vendor shall be punished as provided
herein:
   (A)   Make estimate on tax due and owing. If a vendor neglects or refuses to
make a return in payment of the tax required by this chapter, the Finance
Director shall estimate the amount of taxes due, based upon such information as
may be available, for the period or periods which the vendor is delinquent; and
upon the basis of such estimated amount compute and assess in addition thereto
a penalty equal to 10% thereof, together with interest on such delinquent taxes
at the rate of 1% per month from the date when due.
   (B)   Notice of tax due to vendor. Promptly thereafter the Finance Director
shall give to the delinquent vendor notice of such estimated taxes, penalty,
and interest.
   (C)   Estimate becomes assessment; petition for hearing. Such estimates
shall thereupon become an assessment, and such assessment shall be final and
due and payable from the vendor to the town 30 days from the date of the
mailing of the notice by first class mail directed to the last known address of
such person on file with the Finance Department. Within 30 days after the
notice of deficiency is mailed, the vendor may petition the Finance Director
for a hearing on a revision or modification of such assessment. The filing of a
petition shall not toll the accrual of interest on the amount of taxes due.
   (D)   Petition form. Such petition shall be in writing, and the facts and
figures submitted shall be submitted under oath either in writing or orally at
a hearing scheduled by the Director of Finance. The hearing shall take place in
the office of the Director of Finance, and notice thereof, and the proceedings
shall be in substantial conformity with C.R.S. § 24-4-105 except as modified by
regulations issued by the Director of Finance.
   (E)   Final determination; possible review. Thereupon, the Director of
Finance shall make a final determination and, if appropriate, modify such
assessment in accordance with the facts submitted, which facts the Director of
Finance deems correct. Such assessment, as modified, shall be considered a
final order of assessment of the Director of Finance and may be reviewed under
Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure; provided, that the
taxpayer has given written notice to the Town Manager of such intention to
petition for review under Rule 106(a)(4) within ten calendar days after notice
of the final order of assessment.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-16 HEARINGS, SUBPOENAS AND WITNESS FEES.
   All subpoenas issued under the terms of this chapter may be served by any
person aged 18 years or older. The fees of witnesses for attendance and travel
shall be the same as the fees of witnesses before the District Courts of the
state, such fees to be paid when the witness is excused from further
attendance. When a witness is subpoenaed at the instance of any party other
than the Finance Director to any such proceeding, the Finance Director may
require that the cost of service of the subpoena and the fee of the witness be
borne by the party at whose instance the witness is summoned. In such case, the
Finance Director, in his or her discretion, may require a deposit to cover the
cost of such service and witness fees. A subpoena issued as aforesaid shall be
served in the same manner as a subpoena issued out of a court of record.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-17 JUDGE TO COMPEL ATTENDANCE.
   Any Judge of the District Court of the Fifth Judicial District of the state,
upon the application of the Finance Director, may compel the attendance of
witnesses, the production of books, papers, records or memoranda, and the
giving of testimony before the Town Manager, by citation or capias, for
contempt, or otherwise, in the same manner as production of evidence may be
compelled before the Court.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-18 DEPOSITIONS.
   The Finance Director or any party in an investigation or hearing before the
Finance Director may cause the deposition of witnesses residing within or
without the state to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for like
deposition in civil actions in courts of this state and to that end compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records or
memoranda.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-19 DECISIONS OF FINANCE DIRECTOR; NOTICE.
   Decisions of the Finance Director shall be final upon their entry and shall
be mailed to the taxpayer forthwith. All notices or other information required
to be given to the taxpayer in writing under the provisions of this chapter if
mailed postpaid to the last known address of the taxpayer, after reasonable
inquiry of such address, shall be deemed complete and effective upon and as of
the posting of the same in the mails of the United States Postal Service unless
returned within ten days by the United States Postal Service to the Town
Manager. Filing by the taxpayer shall be deemed complete upon mailing to or
personal service on the Finance Director.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-20 REVIEW OF DECISION IN DISTRICT COURT.
   (A)   Jurisdiction. The District Court of the Fifth Judicial District of the
state shall have original jurisdiction in proceedings to review all questions
of law and fact determined by the Finance Director in administering the
provisions of this chapter by order or writ under Rule 106(a)(4) of the
Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure.
   (B)   Bond. Before making application to the District Court under Rule 106
(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, the party making such
application shall file with the Finance Director a bond in twice the amount of
the taxes, interest and other charges stated in the determination and decision
of the Finance Director with surety as is now provided in cases of attachment
under the Rules of Civil Procedure, or at the party’s option may deposit lawful
money of the United States in the same manner.
   (C)   Issuance. Such writs or orders shall be issued by the Clerk of the
Court upon a verified petition or complaint of the taxpayer, filed within 30
days after notice of the decision of the Finance Director.
   (D)   Conformance. The procedure thereunder shall be in conformity with the
Rules of Civil Procedure of the state.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-21 JEOPARDY ASSESSMENTS AND DEMANDS.
   If the Finance Director finds that collection of the tax will be jeopardized
by delay, in the Finance Director’s discretion, the Finance Director may
declare the taxable period immediately terminated, determine the tax, and issue
notice and demand for payment thereof; and, having done so, the tax shall be
due and payable forthwith, and the Finance Director may proceed immediately to
collect such tax by distraint, levy and sale. Collection may be stayed if the
taxpayer gives such security for payment as shall be satisfactory to the
Finance Director.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-22 METHODS OF ENFORCING COLLECTIONS.
   (A)   Attach lien to properties. If any taxes, penalty or interest proposed
by this chapter and shown due by returns filed by the taxpayer or shown by
assessments duly made as provided herein are not paid within 30 days after the
same are due, the Director of Finance shall issue a notice setting forth the
name of the taxpayer, the amount of the tax, penalties and interest, the date
of the accrual thereof and that the town claims a first and prior lien therefor
on the real and tangible property of the taxpayer, except as to preexisting
perfected liens of a mortgagee, pledgee, judgement creditor or claims of a bona
fide purchaser whose rights shall have attached tax prior to the filing of
notice as herein provided on property of the taxpayer other than the goods,
stock and trade and business fixtures of such taxpayer. Said notice shall be on
forms furnished by the Finance Department and shall be verified by the Town
Manager or by the Finance Director or any duly qualified agent of the Town
Manager or the Finance Director, whose duties are the collection of such tax,
and may be filed in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder of any county
in the state in which the taxpayer owns real or tangible personal property, or,
in the case of personalty, with the Secretary of State, and the filing of such
notice shall create a lien on such property and constitute notice thereof.
After such notice has been filed, or concurrently therewith, or at any time
when taxes due are unpaid, whether such notice shall have been filed or not,
the Finance Director may issue a warrant directed to any duly authorized
revenue collector, or the sheriff of the county commanding such person to levy
upon, distrain, seize and sell sufficient of the real and personal property of
the taxpayer found within the country for the payment of the amount due,
together with interest, penalties and costs as may be provided by law, subject
to valid preexisting claims or liens.
   (B)   Fix levy. Such revenue collector or the sheriff shall forthwith
distrain and levy upon sufficient of the property of the taxpayer, or any
property used by such taxpayer in conducting his or her business, and said
property so levied upon shall be sold in all respects to and with like effect
and in the same manner as is prescribed by law with respect to executions
against property upon judgement of a court of record, and the remedies of
garnishment shall apply. The sheriff shall be entitled to such fees in
executing such warrants as are allowed by law for similar services.
   (C)   Lien released upon payment. Any lien for taxes as shown on the records
of the County Clerk and Recorder as provided in this section, upon payment of
all taxes, penalties and interest covered thereby, shall be released by the
Finance Director in the same manner as mortgages and judgements are released.
   (D)   Treat as debt to town. The Finance Director may also treat any such
taxes, penalties or interest due and unpaid as debt due to the town from the
vendor or taxpayer. The return of the vendor or taxpayer or the assessment made
by the Finance Director as provided in this chapter shall be prima facie proof
of the amount due. To recover such taxes, penalties or interest due the Finance
Director may bring an action and a writ of attachment may be issued to the
sheriff. At any such proceedings, no bond shall be required of the Finance
Director, nor shall any sheriff require of the Finance Director an indemnifying
bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of execution upon any
judgement entered in such proceedings. The Finance Director may prosecute
appeals in such cases without the necessity of providing bond thereof. It is
the duty of the Town Attorney, when requested by the Finance Director to
commence action for the recovery of taxes due under this chapter and this
remedy shall be in addition to all existing remedies provided in this chapter.
   (E)   Town is party defendant. In any action affecting the title to real
estate or the ownership of rights to possession of personal property, the town
may be made a party defendant for the purposes of obtaining an adjudication or
determination of its lien upon the property involved therein. In any such
action, service of summons upon the Finance Director or any person in the
office of the Finance Director shall be sufficient service and shall be binding
upon the town.
   (F)   Possible waiver. The Finance Director is authorized to waive for good
cause shown any penalty assessed as provided in this chapter and any interest
imposed in excess of 10% per annum.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-23 TAX LIEN.
   (A)   First and prior lien. The tax imposed by this chapter shall be a first
and prior lien upon the goods and business fixtures of or used by any ski area
operator or vendor, excepting stock of goods sold or for sale in the ordinary
course of business, and shall take precedence on all such property over other
liens or claims of any kind or nature whatsoever.
   (B)   Business sold; discontinued. Any ski area operator or vendor who sells
his or her business or quits business shall be required to make out such
person’s tax return as provided for in this chapter within ten days after the
date the business is sold or the operator quits business, and such person’s
successor in business shall be required to withhold sufficient purchase money
to cover the amount of said taxes due and unpaid until such time as the former
owner produces a receipt from the Finance Director showing that the taxes have
been paid or a certificate that no taxes are due.
   (C)   Seller or new owner equally liable. If the purchaser of a ski area
fails to withhold the purchase money as provided in this section and the taxes
are due and unpaid after the ten-day period, he or she as well as the seller
shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes unpaid by the former
owner.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-24 STATUS OF UNPAID TAX IN BANKRUPTCY AND RECEIVERSHIP.
   Whenever any vendor or taxpayer subject to this chapter shall be placed in
receivership, bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of creditors, or seized
under distraint for property taxes, all taxes, penalties, and interest imposed
by this chapter and for which the vendor or taxpayer is in any way liable under
the terms of this chapter shall be a prior and preferred claim against all the
property of said taxpayer, except as to preexisting claims or liens of a bona
fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgement creditor or purchaser whose rights shall
have attached prior to the filing of the notice as provided for in §
4-5-22 of this chapter on the property of the taxpayer other than goods, stock
and trade and business fixtures of such taxpayer. No sheriff, receiver,
assignee or other officer shall sell the property of any person subject to this
chapter under process or order of any court without first ascertaining from the
Finance Director the amount of any taxes due and payable under this chapter,
and if there are any such taxes due, owing or unpaid it is the duty of such
officer to first pay the amount of said taxes out of the proceeds of said sale
before making payment of any monies to any judgment creditor or other claims of
whatsoever kind or nature except the cost of the proceedings and other
preexisting claims for liens as provided in this section.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1)
§ 4-5-25 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to penalty as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 14(1992) § 1; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 6: TELEPHONE UTILITY BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX
Section
4-6-1 Tax levy
4-6-2 Payment of tax
4-6-3 Inspection of records
4-6-4 Local purpose
4-6-5 Failure to pay or file
4-6-6 Tax in lieu of other occupation taxes
§ 4-6-1 TAX LEVY.
   There is levied against every telephone utility which is engaged in the
business of furnishing local exchange telephone service within the town, a tax
on the privilege of engaging in such business. The amount of such tax shall be
$5.60 for each telephone account for which local exchange telephone service is
provided within the town.
(Ord. 31(1976) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-6-2 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (A)   Date due and payable. The tax levied by this chapter shall be due on
January 1 of each year. The tax shall be payable in 12 equal monthly
installments, each installment to be payable on the last business day of each
calendar month.
   (B)   Utility submit number of accounts. Within 15 days after January 1,
each telephone utility subject to the tax imposed in this chapter shall file
with the Finance Director of the town, in such form as the Finance Director may
require, a statement showing the total number of telephone accounts for which
local exchange telephone service was provided within the town on January 1 of
the reporting year.
(Ord. 31(1976) § 2; 1997 Code)
§ 4-6-3 INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   The town, its officers, agents or representatives, shall have the right, at
any reasonable time, to examine the books and records of any telephone utility
which is subject to the tax imposed by this chapter, and to make copies of the
entries or contents thereof.
(Ord. 31(1976) § 3)
§ 4-6-4 LOCAL PURPOSE.
   The tax provided in this chapter is upon the affected occupations and
businesses in their performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those
functions relating to interstate commerce.
(Ord. 31(1976) § 4)
§ 4-6-5 FAILURE TO PAY OR FILE.
   (A)   Delinquency; penalty. If any telephone utility subject to this chapter
fails to pay the taxes as provided in this chapter, the full amount thereof
shall be due and collected from each company, and the same together with an
addition of 10% of the amount of taxes due, shall be and is declared to be a
debt due and owing from such utility to the town.
   (B)   General penalty applies. If any officer, agent or manager of a
telephone utility which is subject to the provisions of this chapter fails,
neglects or refuses to file any statement required by this chapter within the
time prescribed in this chapter, such officer, agent or manager shall be
punished, on conviction thereof, as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code; provided, that each day after such statement becomes
delinquent during which said officer, agent or manager so fails, neglects or
refuses to file such statement shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 31(1976) § 5; 1997 Code)
§ 4-6-6 TAX IN LIEU OF OTHER OCCUPATION TAXES.
   The tax provided in this chapter shall be in lieu of all other occupation
taxes or taxes on the privilege of doing business within the town, on any
telephone utility subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 31(1976) § 7)
CHAPTER 7: CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION
Section
4-7-1 Definitions
4-7-2 Registration
4-7-3 Classification
4-7-4 Application and registration
4-7-5 Insurance
4-7-6 Certification and training requirements
4-7-7 Suspension or revocation
4-7-8 Violation and penalty
§ 4-7-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
   BOARD. The Building and Fire Code Appeals Board or Board of Appeals as
defined in the International Building Code, as adopted by the town.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official as defined in the current version
of the Building Code adopted by the town, or designee.
   CONSTRUCTION WORK. Any new construction, additions, repairs, alterations,
installations, demolition, removal, conversions, replacements or renovations of
any building or structure, or excavation in the town that requires a permit.
   CONTRACTOR. A person that undertakes or offers to undertake for another
construction work, including without limitation a general contractor, plumbing
contractor, mechanical contractor, electrical contractor, excavation
contractor, demolition contractor, fire protection contractor, roofing
contractor or subcontractor.
   PERMIT. A building permit or other permit authorizing construction work in
the town.
(Ord. 12(2020) § 1)
§ 4-7-2 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Every contractor performing construction work in the town shall be
registered under this chapter prior to undertaking any construction work or
applying for a permit.
   (B)   A contractor will be considered to be registered under this chapter if
the contractor is employed by a company, corporation or organization in which
at least one person also employed by that company, corporation organization is
registered. If the sole person registered as a contractor in any company,
corporation or organization leaves the employment of that company, corporation
or organization, the company, corporation or organization shall register a
different employee under this chapter within 90 days.
   (C)   Any contractor holding a current, valid registration as of the date of
the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be required to comply with
this chapter until the existing registration is required to be renewed.
   (D)   The registration of a contractor under this chapter does not express
or imply any level of qualification, competency or other assessment of the
contractor’s ability to perform construction work.
(Ord. 12(2020) § 1)
§ 4-7-3 CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   Each contractor shall be classified according to the type of work they
perform and shall register under such classification. A list of contractor
classification types shall be maintained by the Community Development
Department.
   (B)   A list of the type of construction work that may be performed by each
class of contractor shall be maintained by the Community Development
Department. Each contractor shall perform only the type of work so authorized.
   (C)   Any person may make an application for registration as a homeowner
contractor without a license or certification provided that the construction
work is specifically for the dwelling unit solely owned by the applicant, being
performed solely by the applicant, and the construction work does not alter or
affect the structural integrity, means of egress, electrical systems or
plumbing systems of the unit, building or structure.
(Ord. 12(2020) § 1)
§ 4-7-4 APPLICATION AND REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Application. Applications for contractor registration shall be
completed at www.vail.onlinegovt.com, or a successor location designated by the
town. At a minimum, the application shall include:
      (1)   The business name, name of the principal party/business owner/
certification holder;
      (2)   A current mailing address, valid electronic mail address and valid
phone number;
      (3)   The applicable application fee, as set by resolution of the Town
Council;
      (4)   Proof of insurance as required by §
4-7-5;
      (5)   Proof of certification/licensing and training as required by §
4-7-6;
      (6)   For electrical contractors and plumbing contractors, a copy of
their license or current license number as provided by the state of Colorado
Department of Regulatory Agencies; and
      (7)   For fire suppression contractors and fire alarm contractors, a copy
of their license or current license number as provided by the state of Colorado
Department of Fire Prevention and Control.
   (B)   Registration. Upon receipt of a complete application and the
applicable fee, the Building Official shall register the contractor.
   (C)   Expiration. Each registration shall be valid until April 30 of the
third year following the year of registration.
(Ord. 12(2020) § 1)
§ 4-7-5 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Each contractor shall always be covered by the following insurance
while performing construction work in the town, at a minimum:
      (1)   Worker’s compensation insurance as required by law; and
      (2)   Commercial general liability insurance with minimum combined single
limits of $1,000,000 each occurrence and $2,000,000 general aggregate,
applicable to all premises and operations, and shall include coverage for
bodily injury, broad form property damage, personal injury (including coverage
for contractual and employee acts), blanket contractual, products and completed
operations.
   (B)   Proof of insurance shall be provided to the town upon each application
for registration, and upon request at any other time.
(Ord. 12(2020) § 1)
§ 4-7-6 CERTIFICATION AND TRAINING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each registered contractor shall maintain current certification(s).
The current certification requirements for each classification of contractor
shall be maintained by the Community Development Department.
   (B)   Each contractor shall observe the training requirements of the town.
The current training requirements for each classification of contractor shall
be maintained by the Community Development Department.
   (C)   A homeowner contractor shall be exempt from the training and
certification requirements of this section.
   (D)   While performing construction work in the town, all registered
contractors shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations.
(Ord. 12(2020) § 1)
§ 4-7-7 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Building Official may, for unskillfulness, carelessness, willful
violation of any lawful directions or orders by the Building Official, or any
violation of law, order the temporary suspension or permanent revocation of a
contractor’s registration, following notice and a hearing as provided in this
section.
   (B)   Written notice of the hearing shall be given to the contractor at
least seven days before the hearing. The notice shall contain a brief statement
of the reason for the proposed suspension or revocation. Such notice shall be
given either personally or by certified first class U.S. mail to the address on
file with the town.
   (C)   At the hearing, the Building Official shall hear and consider such
statements and such evidence as deemed relevant to the violation alleged in the
notice. The contractor may appear to contest the suspension or revocation of
the license.
   (D)   Within ten days of the hearing, the Building Official shall issue a
written order, including findings of fact. A copy of the order shall be mailed
to or served on the contractor at the address on file with the town.
(Ord. 12(2020) § 1)
§ 4-7-8 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter. Any person
who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to the penalty set forth
in §
1-4-1 of this code.
   (B)   In addition to any other applicable penalty, if the Building Official
determines that a person has undertaken construction work in the town without a
valid registration as required by this chapter, and such person wishes to
continue such construction work, such person shall first register as a
contractor under this chapter, but the application fee shall be twice the
amount otherwise due.
(Ord. 12(2020) § 1)
CHAPTER 8: SOLICITATION
Section
4-8-1 Definitions
4-8-2 Solicitation
4-8-3 Door hangers
4-8-4 Violation and penalty
§ 4-8-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
   CRIMES OR ACTS OF VIOLENCE AGAINST THE PERSON. Homicide, attempted homicide,
rape, attempted rape, sexual assault, assault, battery and other similar
felonies involving moral turpitude.
   CRIMES OR ACTS OF VIOLENCE AGAINST THE PROPERTY OF ANOTHER. Theft, burglary,
breaking and entering, larceny and other similar felonies involving moral
turpitude.
   SOLICITATION. To enter or remain upon any private property in the town, not
having been requested or invited by the occupants thereof for the purpose of
contacting said occupants to solicit the immediate or future purchase or sale
of goods, services or any other thing of value, or to solicit a gift or
donation of any kind; or to occupy public property for the purpose of
contacting passersby to solicit the immediate or future purchase or sale of
goods, services or any other thing of value, or to solicit a gift or donation
of any time; provided, however, that solicitation does not include political
canvassing, political advocacy or religious proselytizing.
(Ord. 10(2019) §1)
§ 4-8-2 SOLICITATION.
   (A)   Permit required. No person may engage in solicitation in the town
without first obtaining a solicitation permit. Each permittee shall carry the
solicitation permit and his or her personal identification at all times while
engaging in solicitation and shall present such identification and permit upon
request of any person. Permits may not be transferred from person to person.
   (B)   Application. Each applicant for a solicitation permit shall file with
the Town Clerk an application including the following information, in addition
to the application fee established by resolution of the Town Council:
      (1)   The full name, residence address, mailing address and telephone
number of the applicant;
      (2)   A description of the applicant, including height, weight, eye color
and hair color;
      (3)   The number and state of issuance of any state-issued identification
card issued to applicant, including a state motor vehicle operator’s license or
chauffeur’s license;
      (4)   A brief explanation of the nature of the merchandise to be sold or
other activity requiring a solicitation permit under this article; and
      (5)   An authorization for the Town Clerk to conduct a background check
of the applicant.
   (C)   Grounds for denial. Unless the Town Clerk finds grounds for denial,
the Town Clerk shall issue the solicitation permit within seven days of receipt
of a complete application. The Town Clerk may deny the application for the
following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to comply with any provision of this code;
      (2)   Felony convictions for crimes against the person or property of
another, or institutionalizations for mental illness which caused acts of
violence against the person or property of another; provided, however, that
such felony convictions or institutionalizations occurred within five years
preceding the date of application; or
      (3)   Convictions of any crime committed while engaged in solicitation in
the town.
   (D)   Notice and appeal. If the Town Clerk denies the application, the Town
Clerk shall notify the applicant in writing, stating the reasons for the
denial, and shall mail such notice by regular United States mail to the address
provided on the application. Within seven days of the date of mailing such
notice, the applicant may file a written request for an appeal to the Town
Manager. The Town Manager shall hear and decide such appeal within 30 days of
receipt of the appeal request. At the appeal, the applicant shall be entitled
to be heard and present evidence. The Town Manager’s decision on the appeal
shall be final, subject to judicial review.
   (E)   Expiration. Each permit shall expire one year from the date of
issuance.
   (F)   Revocation. If after issuance of a permit, the Town Clerk finds that
any of the grounds stated in subsection (C) of this section exist, the Town
Clerk shall revoke the permit and provide written notice to the permittee of
such action. The permittee may appeal the Town Clerk’s decision in the manner
set forth in subsection (D) of this section.
   (G)   Permissible times. Solicitation is prohibited before 8:00 a.m. or
after the later of 8:00 p.m. or sunset, as announced and published by the
National Weather Service daily.
   (H)   Signage. Any person may post a sign on his or her property indicating
that the owners or occupants do not wish to be disturbed by solicitation. Such
sign shall state, “No Trespassing”, “No Solicitors” or other similar message
indicating that door-to-door solicitation is not authorized, and shall not
exceed two and one-half square feet in area. Such sign shall be allowed in
addition to the number and types of signs permitted by Title 11 of the Vail
town code. Solicitation at any property at which such a sign is posted is a
violation of this chapter.
   (I)   Public streets and rights-of-way. No person shall conduct any
solicitation on or in any public street or right-of-way in the town, provided
that this subsection (I) shall not apply to persons selling taxicab or pedicab
services or horse drawn conveyance rentals on the streets or rights-of-way in
the town where such vehicles are permitted to operate.
(Ord. 10(2019) § 1)
§ 4-8-3 DOOR HANGERS.
   No person other than a town employee shall fasten or deposit in any manner
any notice, poster or other advertising or promotional material upon private
property, including personal property, without having permission to do so from
the owners or occupants of such property. Permission to so fasten or deposit
such materials shall be implied from the presence of an improved walkway,
including a driveway, connecting such property directly to a public right-of-
way, unless:
   (A)   Access to such walkway is physically restricted by a fence, gate or
other permanent structure; or
   (B)   A “No Trespassing” or “No Solicitors” sign or a sign conveying a
similar message is posted on the property at a visible location.
(Ord. 10(2019) § 1)
§ 4-8-4 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   It is unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter. Violations of this
chapter shall be punished as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 10(2019) § 1)
CHAPTER 9: FALSE ALARMS
Section
4-9-1 Title; purpose
4-9-2 Definitions
4-9-3 Performance standards
4-9-4 Letter of certification required
4-9-5 Violations
§ 4-9-1 TITLE; PURPOSE.
   (A)   Short title. This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the
FALSE ALARM ORDINANCE.
   (B)   Obligation, compliance. This chapter imposes or creates no duties on
the part of the town or any of its departments. The obligation of complying
with the requirements of this chapter and the liability for failing to do so,
is placed upon the owners, operators and parties responsible for operating and/
or maintaining alarm systems.
   (C)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to:
      (1)   Promote and establish minimum standards for installation,
maintenance, service, inspection and certification of fire alarm systems;
      (2)   Reduce the number and frequency of false alarms and endangerment
faced by emergency response personnel while responding to false alarms;
      (3)   Provide for greater efficiency of emergency personnel by reducing
the amount of time spent dealing with false alarms; and
      (4)   Provide for penalties and remedies for false alarms.
(Ord. 15(1999) § 2)
§ 4-9-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM AGENT. Any individual who is employed by an alarm vendor to install,
monitor, maintain, test or service alarm systems in any manner, or who
supervises individuals who perform such work.
   ALARM COMPANY. Any person operating as an alarm installer, an alarm
monitoring facility, an alarm service agency.
   ALARM CONFIRMATION. A situation in which an alarm signal is transmitted and
supported by a subsequent and separate signal, which corroborates the validity
of the original signal, indicating that an emergency exists. Confirmation may
be provided by a second sensor, transmitting “listen-in” microphones,
transmitted video images, direct communication via 911, the use of other
technologies that provide the intended results or by direct communication
between Vail Public Safety Communications and an alarm agent or reporting party
at the alarm system site. Multiple activations of the same sensor that caused
the initial alarm are not considered CONFIRMATION.
   ALARM MONITORING FACILITY. A facility that receives signals from monitored
alarm systems indicating emergencies such as fire, burglary, robbery and
medical problems may exist.
   ALARM SYSTEM. An electronic, detection and signaling system, combining
interrelated signal initiating devices, signal transmitting devices, signal
indicating devices, control equipment and interconnecting wiring, installed for
a particular application, in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications,
nationally recognized standards, the National Fire Protection Association,
Underwriter’s Laboratories, Inc., Factory Mutual, Inc. or other nationally
recognized testing laboratories.
   ALARM SYSTEM OWNER. A person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind, in possession or control of any building,
structure, facility or portion thereof, where an alarm system exists, whether
such alarm system is owned or leased.
   ALARM VERIFICATION PROCEDURE. The procedures established by an alarm
monitoring facility to contact an authorized representative of the alarm system
owner, to validate or deny that the alarm signal received, was due to any
condition the alarm system is designed to detect and report.
   COMPREHENSIVE TEST. A test of an alarm system that includes:
      (1)   An inspection of the installation;
      (2)   A test to verify that all devices, including sensors, controls,
communication equipment and associated devices, function properly;
      (3)   Confirmation that the system can function under designed-for fault
conditions;
      (4)   Verification that batteries are suitable;
      (5)   Manufacturer’s specifications, applicable codes, and standards are
adhered to; and
      (6)   Changes to the original installation are operable and comply with
this chapter.
   DAY. A calendar day.
   FALSE ALARM. The activation of a device or transmission of an alarm signal,
indicating an emergency exists and/or necessitating response by the Vail Police
Department or Vail Fire Department, where no emergency exists. FALSE ALARMS
shall be classified as follows:
      (1)   MALICIOUS FALSE ALARMS. Alarm system activation or alarm signal
transmission by a person knowingly, willingly or recklessly causing or
permitting an alarm, when no emergency exists. This category shall include, but
is not limited to: the activation of manual alarm pull stations, holdup, panic
alarms, and similar alarms; intentional discharge of monitored fire
extinguishing equipment or appliances.
      (2)   ALARM MALFUNCTION. An activation of a device or transmission of an
alarm signal due to abnormal electrical activity, short circuit, device
failure, electrical fault or other factor not within the intended or normal
operational parameters of the system or components. The activation of a device,
sounding of an audible alarm or signal, or the transmission of an alarm signal,
without annunciation of a specific zone, device or circuit; the activation of
multiple signals, zones, circuits, and/or devices without apparent cause;
activation due to apparent radio frequency, electrical surge, power failure or
similar event; or the inability to silence, reset, restore or otherwise return
the system to normal operation using normal procedures.
      (3)   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN. The activation of a device, system, or
transmission of a signal, due to failure to maintain the system and/or
components thereof, according to manufacturer’s recommendations, applicable
codes, standards or recommendations, the presence of contaminated detectors,
loose wiring or electrical/mechanical connections, low batteries, failure to
replace recalled or obsolete equipment, or devices; or failure to replace
components subject to periodic replacement.
      (4)   ACCIDENTAL ALARM. The activation of a device, system, or
transmission of a signal, that could not reasonably be prevented or anticipated
by technically competent alarm technicians, knowledgeable maintenance
personnel, by the appropriate selection and installation of detection device
(s); or by following normal operating procedures.
      (5)   Building operations. The activation of a device, a system, or
transmission of an alarm signal, due to factors including, but not limited to,
housekeeping functions, construction activities, including, but not restricted
to, maintenance, repair, replacement or installation of building features,
equipment, and furnishings; functions related to welding, plumbing, painting,
changing light bulbs, cleaning, misuse of equipment, and similar building
operations, either directly by or under the supervision of the property owner
or management, including work by subcontractors.
      (6)   Construction related alarm. The activation of a device, a system or
transmission of an alarm signal due to factors and operations including, but
not limited to, demolition and/or construction cleanup, preparation or
housekeeping functions; construction activities, including, but not restricted
to, demolition, removal, maintenance, repair, replacement or installation of
building features, equipment, and furnishings; functions related to welding,
plumbing, painting, changing light bulbs, cleaning and similar building
operations, either directly by or under the supervision of a general
contractor, with or without a Town of Vail building, electrical or mechanical
permit, or by subcontractors of the same.
      (7)   Nuisance alarms. Alarms caused by factors which the alarm system is
not intended to detect, respond or be activated by, or are caused by factors
other than accidental false alarms. This category shall include, but is not
limited to, alarms caused by cooking smoke, fireplace smoke, downdrafts, steam,
heat or moisture from saunas, water leaks, and similar causes.
      (8)   Undetermined cause. An alarm system activation or transmission of
an alarm signal for which the cause cannot or has not been determined by
responding personnel, and for which there is no apparent cause.
      (9)   Good intent. This category shall include, but is not limited to,
alarms transmitted by an individual believing an emergency condition exists.
Alarms under this category shall not be held to constitute a violation of this
chapter.
   INSPECTION. A technical and functional test and inspection of an alarm
system by a licensed fire alarm contractor. Such problems include, but are not
limited to: loose or frayed wiring, loose doors or windows that may cause false
alarms, loose, improperly installed, or improperly located sensors; items that
may cause motion detectors, glass-break detectors or other sensors to cause
false alarms; violations of current codes, standards, manufacturer’s
specifications and recommendations, deviation from approved plans or other
deficiencies.
   LETTER OF CERTIFICATION. A letter stating that the alarm system has been
inspected and conforms to minimum installation, construction and operation
standards as set forth in this chapter.
   LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system that is not a monitored alarm system,
and that triggers a sounding device that can be heard outside of the protected
premises.
   MAINTENANCE CONTRACT. A written agreement with a licensed alarm company to
perform repair, service and maintenance. MAINTENANCE CONTRACTS may be required
at the discretion of the Fire Chief for alarm systems shown to be subject to
repeated false alarms. Such contract may, at the discretion of the Fire Chief,
include inspection, testing, installation and/or relocation of equipment as
necessary.
   MODIFIED CENTRAL RECEIVING STATION. An office, facility or portion thereof,
which does not meet the requirements for a “listed central station”, as defined
by Underwriter’s Laboratory, to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling
devices are connected and where operators supervise the circuits and monitor
alarm signals.
   MONITORED ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system that sends its signals to an alarm
monitoring facility, central station or modified central receiving station,
which, upon receipt and acceptance of a detected alarm condition, sends a
request for response to the Vail Public Safety Communications center.
   NOTICE. Written notice served upon a person, firm, corporation or place of
business, by hand delivery, or by placing such notice in the possession of the
United States Postal Service, return receipt requested, addressed to the entity
at the address of record.
   PERMITTEE. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or
business, granted a permit under the provisions of this chapter.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
   REQUEST FOR RESPONSE. The notification by an alarm monitoring facility,
central receiving station or modified central receiving station, to the Vail
Public Safety Communications center, information about an alarm event for which
response by police, fire or emergency medical personnel is requested.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. A responsible party, for the purpose of this chapter,
shall include the owner of the property or business, the manager or authorized
agent, and/or an employee of a licensed alarm company under contract.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation, who
purchases, subscribes, leases or otherwise contracts for or obtains an alarm
system, an inspection, maintenance contract, or monitoring service, for an
alarm system.
   TAMPERING. The unauthorized removal, manipulation, alteration, adjustment,
operation, service, maintenance, installation or other action, involving an
alarm system or components thereof, including, but not limited to, wiring,
devices, equipment, control panels, switches and other appurtenances, by any
individual, person, corporation or other entity, who is not in possession of a
valid and current Town of Vail contractor’s license, as required by Town of
Vail regulations.
   TOWN. The Town of Vail.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Vail.
   UNAUTHORIZED. Not having received direct and explicit permission from the
Town of Vail Fire Chief, the Building Official or their designates, and not
under a current and duly issued permit.
   VAIL PUBLIC SAFETY COMMUNICATIONS. A division of the municipal government of
the Town of Vail that receives emergency and/or general information from the
public, or other agencies, and which dispatches police, fire, and emergency
medical personnel for the Town of Vail.
(Ord. 15(1999) § 2)
§ 4-9-3 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Performance standards.
      (1)   The owner of an alarm system transmitting a false alarm, upon the
issuance of a written order from the Fire Department or agent thereof, may be
required to have the alarm system recertified.
      (2)   False alarms of any type, are subject to the issuance of a summons
and complaint to Municipal Court. Upon a finding of guilty, penalties may be
assessed in accordance with applicable law.
      (3)   The Fire Department may require alarm confirmation and/or alarm
verification, and then notification to the Vail communication center (dispatch)
by telephone via the emergency notification system (911), prior to initiating
emergency response. Verbal communication of an actual or suspected emergency
condition to proper authorities shall not constitute grounds for reduced or
restricted response status, or the requirement to confirm an emergency exists,
as well as other restrictions, to be imposed.
      (4)   (a)   If there is reason to believe that any alarm system is not
being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and
suppresses false alarms, the Fire Department, the Police Department or the
Building Department, may require a conference with an alarm agent, an alarm
company, an alarm system owner and/or a responsible party and any other
individual or association responsible for maintenance of the alarm system to
review the circumstances of each false alarm, to identify the cause of the
false alarms, and identify, initiate and complete mitigation steps to assure
the future compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
         (b)   Repeated alarms from the same cause may not be subject to any
mitigating credits and are as such, subject to the issuance of a summons and
complaint.
      (5)   (a)   The Fire Department may take into consideration, the cause of
the false alarm, the size of the structure, the number and frequency of false
alarms for a particular location, and the property’s ability to respond to and
mitigate the causes of the false alarms, when deciding whether or not to issue
a citation.
         (b)   False alarms caused by deficiencies in existing fire alarm
system(s) shall be remedied by the building owner(s). Contractors shall not be
assessed penalties resulting from problems with existing systems, provided the
contractor is not directly responsible for the alarm.
   (B)   Maintenance standards.
      (1)   An annual inspection of every alarm system within the town shall be
performed by a licensed alarm company. Said inspection shall be performed to
determine that the operation of the alarm system is in accordance with the
manufacturer’s specificities, design and performance criteria. Tests shall be
conducted to determine whether or not the system is free from ground faults,
dead or intermittent shorts, and to determine that all peripheral devices are
operational and that all self-diagnostic functions are operable.
      (2)   Fire alarm systems shall be tested in accordance with testing
procedures adopted by the National Fire Protection Agency. Any alarm system
which is shown by such test not to be 100% operational, shall be repaired as
indicated by the test results.
      (3)   A copy of such test(s), inspection reports and the required letter
of certification shall be maintained on the premises and available for review.
It is the responsibility of the licensed alarm company to forward a copy of
both test(s) and inspection report(s), and the letter of certification, to the
Town Fire Department.
      (4)   Trouble calls or service calls regarding an alarm system shall be
made to a licensed alarm company. Trouble or service calls shall be responded
to within a reasonable time period. If the response for fire alarm repair does
not occur within a time period acceptable to the Fire Chief, he or she may
require a change in operation, or place specific restrictions or conditions on
the owner including restrictions relating to the use of the building until such
time as repairs are completed. Such restrictions shall be made with
consideration of the relative degree of hazard imposed by the nature of the
alarm system’s condition, and with respect to the nature of the building and
its use.
      (5)   Upon request of the Vail Fire Department, a responsible party shall
respond to the premises for the purpose of permitting access to determine the
cause of the alarm, secure the property, or reset the alarm system. Failure of
a responsible party to respond as requested, shall constitute a violation of
this chapter by the alarm system owner.
      (6)   It shall be the responsibility of the alarm system owner to provide
for the required response in accordance with the above subsection, and to
ensure that current information is provided to the Vail public safety
communications center or their respective central receiving station, including
a list of responsible parties, phone numbers and current street and mailing
addresses. The street address shall be visibly posted on the street side of the
exterior of the protected premises.
   (C)   Notification. Any central receiving station or modified central
receiving station monitoring alarm systems in the town, whether the central
receiving station or modified central receiving station is located in Vail or
not, upon receipt of an alarm signal indicating that a fire or other emergency
condition exists, shall notify the Vail public safety communications center
immediately. All central receiving station or modified central receiving
station operators shall furnish such information as requested.
(Ord. 15(1999) § 2)
§ 4-9-4 LETTER OF CERTIFICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Letter of certification.
      (1)   No person shall use an alarm or an “alarm system”, as defined by
this chapter, unless the alarm or alarm system has been inspected by a licensed
alarm company; and a letter of certification, stating that the alarm system has
been inspected and conforms to minimum installation, construction and operation
standards as set forth in this chapter has been issued by the inspecting alarm
company.
      (2)   A letter of certification shall not be renewed unless the alarm
system has been tested to ensure operations of the main control panel and 100%
of peripheral equipment are in compliance with this chapter. The letter of
certification shall be kept on the premises and shall be available for
inspection. A copy of such letter for fire alarm and detection systems shall be
forwarded to the Vail Fire Department by the alarm company. Letters of
certification are required annually and shall be credited as meeting the
requirements of this section as of the date repairs are complete.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   Any decision of the Fire Chief or designate, any order of
suspension or revocation made pursuant to this chapter, the issuance of a
summons and complaint, or levy of a fine, shall be served upon the licensee or
permittee either personally or by mailing a copy of such order by certified
mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the licensee or permittee
at the last known address. The failure of any person to receive such notice
shall not affect the validity of any decision or order of the Fire Chief
pursuant to this chapter. Service by certified mail in the manner herein
provided shall be effective on the date of the mailing.
      (2)   Any order of the Fire Chief except the issuance of a summons and
complaint made pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the Town Manager,
provided a written notice of appeal is filed with the Town Clerk within 15 days
of the date of service of such decision or order.
      (3)   Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the Town
Manager shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal. Written
notice of the time of the hearing of the appeal shall be given at least ten
days prior to the date of the hearing to the appellant, either by causing a
copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a
copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant.
(Ord. 15(1999) § 2)
§ 4-9-5 VIOLATIONS.
   The conviction of any person for a violation of any provision of this
chapter, or the conviction of any person for the installation or operation of
any alarm system in violation of any provision of this chapter shall not
relieve such person from paying any license or permit fee required by this
chapter. Each violation of any provision of this chapter shall be held to be a
separate offense each day.
(Ord. 15(1999) § 2)
CHAPTER 10: SNOWPLOW OPERATORS
Section
4-10-1 Permit required
4-10-2 Application for permit
4-10-3 Permit requirements; fee
4-10-4 Period of validity
4-10-5 Insurance
4-10-6 Identification number
4-10-7 Requirements of permittee
4-10-8 Suspension or revocation of license
4-10-9 Appeal
4-10-10 Violation; penalty
§ 4-10-1 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, business or corporation to use a vehicle to
plow, remove or strip snow or ice from private property anywhere within the
town for a fee or charge of any kind without first obtaining a permit from the
town for such vehicle.
(Ord. 33(1980) § 1)
§ 4-10-2 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Application for such permits shall be on forms provided by the town. Forms
shall be made available from the office of the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 33(1980) § 1)
§ 4-10-3 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEE.
   (A)   Information required. The following information shall be provided by
applicant for a snowplow operator’s permit:
      (1)   Name (individual, partnership, corporation), home address, business
address, state driver’s license number and telephone number;
      (2)   Make, model year, engine serial number, and state license plate
number of the vehicle(s) or machine(s) to be used for snow plowing; and
      (3)   A street address list of the driveways and/or parking lots which
the applicant services.
   (B)   Fee. The application for a snowplow operator’s permit shall be
accompanied by a fee currently adopted by the Town Council and shall be set
forth on the schedule of fees and stated on the application form located in the
Department of Public Works.
(Ord. 33(1980) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-10-4 PERIOD OF VALIDITY.
   All permits shall be valid for a period of one year, from September to
August. A permit issued for such time period shall not be valid for a
subsequent calendar year.
(Ord. 33(1980) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-10-5 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required kinds and amounts. Every person issued a license under the
provisions of this chapter shall be required to maintain the following types
and amounts of insurance at all times: employees liability, worker’s
compensation and public liability with minimum limits of not less than
$1,000,000 for any one person and any one accident, and public property damage
with a minimum limit of not less than $1,000,000 for any one accident.
   (B)   Certificates of insurance required. At the time the application for a
license is made and before a license can be issued, the applicants shall file
with the Public Works Director, a certificate issued by a qualified insurance
company stating that the insurance policies required by the chapter have been
issued to the applicant, listing the minimum limits of each, effective policy
numbers, the name of the company, the effective date of the policies and the
expiration dates.
(Ord. 33(1980) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-10-6 IDENTIFICATION NUMBER.
   At the time a snowplow operator’s license is issued the permittee shall also
be issued a vehicle identification number provided by the Public Works
Department which shall be placed and kept on a visible portion of the exterior
of the vehicle or machine whenever it is being used to plow snow.
(Ord. 33(1980) § 1)
§ 4-10-7 REQUIREMENTS OF PERMITTEE.
   (A)   Unlawful accumulations. Snowplow operators shall not push, deposit or
leave snow on any public street, way, park or greenbelt area.
   (B)   Impeding vision. Snowplow operators shall not deposit snow in any area
where such deposit would impede the vision of anyone driving a motor vehicle on
a public street or right-of-way.
   (C)   Safety lights. Snowplow operators shall have a flashing yellow or
amber light on the roof of their vehicle where practicable, or shall have
emergency flashing lights on the vehicle in such place as to be visible in all
directions and shall engage such flashing yellow, amber or emergency lights
when engaged in plowing snow approaching, entering or in the public right-of-
way.
   (D)   Snow stored or removed. Snowplow operators shall not deposit snow on
any private property other than that which they have been hired to plow. All
such plowed snow must either be stored on the hiree’s property or removed
therefrom and deposited in an official town snow storage area.
(Ord. 33(1980) § 1; Ord. 10(1983) § 1)
§ 4-10-8 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Criteria. In addition to any other penalties provided in this chapter,
the license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Town
Manager for cause at any time. Such cause shall exist whenever any licensee
fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter which may now or
hereafter be in force. Such shall extend to and include suspension if the
insurance required by this chapter is cancelled for any reason.
   (B)   Notice; hearing. No license shall be suspended or revoked unless the
Public Works Director gives written notice to the license holder and a hearing
before the Town Manager is held not sooner than five days from the mailing or
giving of such notice. Such notice shall be mailed certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the address as shown on the application or delivered
personally to the licensee. Notice shall be deemed given upon mailing or
personal service. The licensee shall be given an opportunity to be heard at
such hearing and to show cause why such person’s license should not be
suspended or revoked. If, after such hearing, the Town Manager finds that the
licensee has failed or refused to comply with the provisions of this chapter,
which may now or hereinafter be in force without having shown good cause
therefor, the Town Manager may either suspend any license for a period not to
exceed 90 days or revoke the same. For such cause, the Town Manager may also
direct the Public Works Director to deny any application for the renewal of
such license for a period not to exceed 90 days. Whenever any license is
suspended or revoked, no part of the fee or fees paid therefor shall be
returned or refunded to the holder of such license.
   (C)   Action taken pending decision. The Town Manager may summarily suspend
any license issued under this chapter pending the outcome of the hearing to be
held as provided in subsection (B) of this section.
   (D)   Appeal of decision. The decision to suspend or revoke or deny the
renewal of any license by the Town Manager may be appealed to the Town Council;
provided, however, that the suspension of any license, pending the outcome of
the hearing before the Manager shall not be appealable to the Town Council.
   (E)   Administrative remedies sought first. The licensee shall not be deemed
to have exhausted administrative remedies unless the licensee first appeals the
decision of the Manager to the Town Council as provided in subsection (D) of
this section.
(Ord. 33(1980) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-10-9 APPEAL.
   Appeal of any action of the Town Manager in connection with the revocation,
suspension or denial of issuance of snowplow operator’s license may be filed
within 30 days following such action with the Town Council which shall hear
such appeal in accordance with its rules of procedures. The Town Council may
confirm, reverse or modify the action of the Town Manager.
(Ord. 33(1980) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-10-10 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   A complaint may be filed in the Municipal Court for the town charging a
violation of this chapter. Upon conviction thereof, the permittee, agent or
representative therefor may be punished as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable as such under
this chapter.
(Ord. 33(1980) § 1; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 11: FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
4-11-1 Definitions
4-11-2 Enforcement of chapter
4-11-3 Certificate of approval required
4-11-4 Application for approval
4-11-5 Inspection for compliance
4-11-6 Inspection fee
4-11-7 Duration; applications for renewal
4-11-8 Sanitary requirements
4-11-9 Rules and regulations to aid enforcement
4-11-10 Periodic inspections
4-11-11 Access to premises; copy of records of food purchased
4-11-12 Inspection report
4-11-13 Procedures upon discovering violations
4-11-14 Suspension or revocation generally
4-11-15 Extended period of suspension; hearing
4-11-16 Appeal Board
4-11-17 Revocation following hearing; authority; procedure
4-11-18 Appeal from hearing
4-11-19 Reinstatement of license
4-11-20 Plans and specifications for construction or remodeling
4-11-21 Samples of food and drink authorized; possible action
4-11-22 Necessity of chapter for health, safety and welfare
§ 4-11-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   APPROVED. Approved by the town’s Environmental Health Officer; or
establishments which are operating under a valid approval issued by the town
and are operating in substantial compliance with local, state and federal laws
and regulations governing such operation.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person working in a food service establishment who transports
food or food containers, who engages in food preparation or service or who
comes in contact with any food, utensils or equipment.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any food service establishment.
   FOOD. Any raw, cooked or processed edible substances, beverage or
ingredient, ice or water, used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in
part for human consumption.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any place which is kept or maintained for the
purpose of preparing or serving food or drink; except that FOOD SERVICE
ESTABLISHMENT does not include:
      (1)   Homes containing what is commonly known as the family unit and its
nonpaying guests;
      (2)   Operations serving food to four or less persons;
      (3)   Hospital and health facility patient feeding operations;
      (4)   Child care centers;
      (5)   Automated food merchandising enterprises which supply only bottled,
canned, cartoned or prepackaged nonperishable food or drink, and those
operations dispensing only chewing gum, salted nuts, nuts in their natural
protective covering or canned bulk candies;
      (6)   Grocery stores and similar establishments where food is not
prepared or sold routinely for immediate consumption; and
      (7)   Food or beverage manufacturing, processing or packaging plants
which are not categorized as food service establishments but are subject to
regulatory controls under state or federal laws or regulations.
   LICENSEE. Means and includes any person who has applied for and been granted
approval as a food service establishment, temporary food service establishment
or mobile food unit as hereinafter prescribed and authorized.
   PERSON. Means and includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. It
also includes an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other personal
representative appointed by law. Whenever the word PERSON is used in any
section of this chapter prescribing a penalty or fine as to partnerships or
associations, the word also includes the partners or members thereof, and as to
corporations includes the officers, agents or members thereof who are
responsible for any violation of such section.
   PERSON IN CHARGE. The individual present in a food service establishment who
is the apparent supervisor of the food service establishment at the time of
inspection. If no individual is the apparent supervisor, then any employed
person present is the person in charge.
   TOWN OF VAIL ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH OFFICER. The Town Manager or the employee
of the town appointed by the Town Manager charged with the enforcement of local
laws and regulations governing food service establishments and of the Colorado
Department of Public Health and Environment.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-11-2 ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.
   The Town Manager and the Environmental Health Officer shall be responsible
for enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1)
§ 4-11-3 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   Certificate of approval. It is unlawful for any person to operate a
food service establishment in the town who does not possess a valid approval
from the town. If approval is granted, a certificate of approval may be issued.
Only persons who comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled
to receive and retain such approval.
   (B)   Separate from state license. The approval herein granted by the town
shall be deemed to be separate and distinct from the state license and said
approval may be suspended or revoked without regard or relation to the license
of the state.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1)
§ 4-11-4 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   Every application for approval prescribed and provided for in this
chapter, or the renewal thereof, shall be made to the Environmental Health
Officer through the Department of Community Development. Application shall be
made by the filing of a fully completed state application for a license to
operate a food service establishment. A photocopy of such application fully
completed shall be satisfactory.
   (B)   Application for renewal of the approval shall be made in a similar
manner.
   (C)   The application shall contain such other and additional information
and be in such form as the Environmental Health Officer may prescribe.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-11-5 INSPECTION FOR COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Environmental Health Officer authority. Upon receipt of an application
for an approval or renewal thereof as provided above, the Environmental Health
Officer will approve or disapprove such application.
   (B)   Inspect or authorize inspection. The Environmental Health Officer may
then either inspect or cause to be inspected the establishment, facilities,
equipment and employees, with respect to compliance by each with the provisions
of this chapter relating to construction, equipment, cleanliness, health,
sanitary conditions and facilities. The inspection by the Environmental Health
Officer may include other appropriate agencies, including, but not limited to,
the Department of Community Development, Police Department and Fire Department.
   (C)   Continued compliance. Once the approval has been issued, the licensee
shall comply at all times with all applicable laws of the town.
   (D)   Temporary, conditional approval. The Environmental Health Officer may
authorize a temporary, conditional approval for any establishment. Any
temporary conditional approval so issued shall include the time limit of said
approval and conditions imposed by the Environmental Health Officer. If the
licensee violates any term or condition imposed on the temporary conditional
approval, the approval may be withdrawn by the Environmental Health Officer
upon written notice to the licensee.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-11-6 INSPECTION FEE.
   (A)   No application fee shall be required.
   (B)   An inspection fee shall be paid by any licensee or operator for
follow-up inspections in accordance with the following.
      (1)   Upon a third inspection within any month period, which is necessary
to ensure compliance with a correction notice issued by the Environmental
Health Officer, the inspection fee shall be as currently adopted by the Town
Council and shall be set forth on the schedule of fees maintained in the
Department of Community Development.
      (2)   All subsequent inspections by the Environmental Health Officer
necessary to correct the violations shall be as currently adopted by Town
Council and shall be set forth on the schedule of fees maintained in the
Department of Community Development.
   (C)   The inspection fees are intended to serve as sanctions against
violation of the laws, rules and regulations relating to health and sanitary
conditions.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any licensee to fail to pay the inspection fees
within 30 days of the inspection.
   (E)   No license shall be used or renewed as herein provided until such fees
have been paid in full.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-11-7 DURATION; APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.
   (A)   Term of approval. The approval issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be valid for one year, from January 1 to December 31 unless
sooner suspended or revoked as provided in this chapter. Applications for
renewal of the approval shall be made on or before December 1, but not earlier
than October 15.
   (B)   Compliance prerequisite to renewal. If the owner or person in charge
of an establishment approved under this chapter is in violation of any
provision of this chapter, or the rules and regulations herein adopted or
subsequent rules and regulations applicable thereto, the approval shall not be
renewed until such violation is corrected.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1)
§ 4-11-8 SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.
   The sanitary requirements for all establishments, shall be in accordance
with the State of Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment Rules
and Regulations Governing Food Service Establishments which by this reference
are adopted herein, and which may be amended from time to time hereafter. Three
copies of said rules and regulations are on file in the office of the
Department of Community Development of the town and are available for
inspection during regular business hours.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-11-9 RULES AND REGULATIONS TO AID ENFORCEMENT.
   The Town Manager is authorized and empowered to adopt rules and regulations
to aid in the enforcement of this chapter which are not inconsistent with the
provisions hereof.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1)
§ 4-11-10 PERIODIC INSPECTIONS.
   At least once every six months the Environmental Health Officer shall
inspect every food service establishment located within the town. In the event
the Environmental Health Officer discovers the violation of any item of
sanitation required by this chapter, the officer shall make a second inspection
after the lapse of such time as specified for the violation to be remedied, and
the third inspection shall be used in determining compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and inspection fees.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1)
§ 4-11-11 ACCESS TO PREMISES; COPY OF RECORDS OF FOOD PURCHASED.
   (A)   Accessibility to records and premises. Any person in charge of an
establishment in the town shall, upon request of the Environmental Health
Officer, permit access to all parts of the establishment for purposes of
inspection and shall permit the Environmental Health Officer to copy any and
all records of food purchases.
   (B)   Interference or obstruction. It is unlawful and a violation of this
chapter for any licensee, person in charge or employee, of any establishment
approved under the provisions of this chapter to, in any way, interfere with or
obstruct the Environmental Health Officer in the performance of any of the
duties of the Environmental Health Officer.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1)
§ 4-11-12 INSPECTION REPORT.
   Upon completion of any inspection made by the Environmental Health Officer,
the Officer shall prepare an inspection report in duplicate which shall be
signed by either the licensee, or person in charge. A copy of the inspection
report shall be filed in the records of the Environmental Health Officer.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1)
§ 4-11-13 PROCEDURES UPON DISCOVERING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   First and second inspections. If upon inspection of an establishment
the Environmental Health Officer discovers a violation of any provision of this
chapter, and the rules and regulations herein adopted or hereinafter adopted,
the Environmental Health Officer may proceed to enforce the provisions of this
chapter by one or more of the means hereinafter provided, or the Environmental
Health Officer may issue a warning to the licensee, with respect to any such
violation discovered. After any such warning, the Environmental Health Officer
shall make a second inspection after such lapse of time as the Officer deems
appropriate or as required by law, rule or regulation. If, at the second
inspection, the Environmental Health Officer finds the violation uncorrected,
the Environmental Health Officer shall then proceed to enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
   (B)   Noncompliance addressed. Enforcement may be by one or all of the
following means:
      (1)   Further inspections and directions for correction;
      (2)   Suspension or revocation of the approval;
      (3)   Issuance of a summons and complaint into Municipal Court;
      (4)   Summary abatement of the nuisance (costs of such abatement may be
collected by an action of law); and/or
      (5)   File an action to abate the nuisance in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (C)   Minimum approval standard. No establishment shall be operated within
the town unless the inspection score is greater than 60. When any establishment
fails to obtain a score of 60, the Environmental Health Officer shall reinspect
the premises within ten days and if the inspection score has not increased
beyond 60, the food service establishment license provided for in this chapter
shall be immediately suspended.
   (D)   Additional remedies. The enforcement measures herein provided are not
mutually exclusive, and equitable, legal and criminal enforcement may be
independently or collectively used.
   (E)   Continuing violation. Each day’s continuance of a violation under this
chapter shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1)
§ 4-11-14 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION GENERALLY.
   (A)   Health hazard. Any approval granted pursuant to this chapter may be
suspended by the Environmental Health Officer for a period not to exceed 72
hours, when, in the opinion of the Environmental Health Officer, the violation
constitutes an immediate and present hazard to the public health.
   (B)   Notice; contents. Notice of such suspension shall be in writing and
either delivered to the licensee or person in charge personally, or shall be
mailed to the licensee or person in charge at the address of the establishment,
postage prepaid, certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice shall
contain an itemized statement of the violations claimed as grounds for such
suspension, and shall be effective upon delivery or mailing of such notice.
   (C)   Failure to correct violations. If at the end of the 72-hour period of
suspension the violation set forth in the notice of suspension has not been
corrected, the Environmental Health Officer may issue and cause to be served
upon the licensee or person in charge in the manner hereinabove provided,
notice of suspension of license for an additional period of 72 hours. The
Environmental Health Officer shall then commence proceedings for the extended
suspension of such license for an additional period as provided in §
4-11-15 of this chapter.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1)
§ 4-11-15 EXTENDED PERIOD OF SUSPENSION; HEARING.
   (A)   Hearing. If the licensee, or person in charge of an approved
establishment, fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter,
the Environmental Health Officer may request a hearing before the Appeals Board
at which time the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to appear and be
heard, to suspend the approval of the establishment. The suspension shall be
for any period not exceeding 30 days, if, in the opinion of the Board, the
violation is of such type as to constitute a persistent continuing hazard to
the public health.
   (B)   Notice. Notice of the hearing shall be in writing and either delivered
personally, or mailed to the licensee or the person in charge at the address of
the establishment, postage prepaid, certified mail, return receipt requested.
Such notice of hearing shall contain an itemized statement of the violations
upon which the proposed suspension is based, the date, time and place of
hearing, with advice that the licensee may be present and heard thereat. No
such hearing shall be scheduled earlier than 48 hours after the service of such
notice upon the licensee or person in charge. In the event such notice is
served by mail, the 48-hour period shall run from the date of the mailing
thereof.
   (C)   When effective. Any extended period of suspension as provided for in
this section shall be effective on the day when the licensee or person in
charge is either served personally with written notice of suspension or said
notice is posted on the licensed premises.
   (D)   Continued operation a violation. It is unlawful and a violation of
this chapter for any licensee or any other person to continue operation of any
establishment during the period of any suspension or revocation of the license.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1)
§ 4-11-16 APPEAL BOARD.
   The Town Council shall appoint a three member Appeal Board comprised of one
member who is the Board representative of the Vail Valley Tourism And
Convention Bureau, one member who is a food establishment licensee and one
member who is the Eagle County Public Health Officer. The member who is a food
establishment licensee shall serve a two-year term. The Board shall select its
own Chairperson and establish its own rules of procedure. The Appeal Board
shall hear appeals from any dispute between a licensee and Environmental Health
Officer relating to the interpretation of any provision hereof, rule or
regulation.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-11-17 REVOCATION FOLLOWING HEARING; AUTHORITY; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Board authority. The Appeal Board may, on the complaint of the
Environmental Health Officer or upon complaint made by any other competent
person, after investigation and hearing thereon at which the licensee shall be
afforded an opportunity to be present and heard, revoke any approval issued
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Flagrant, persistent noncompliance. Such revocation shall be ordered
only for flagrant, persistent failure or refusal by the licensee, person in
charge or employees to comply with this chapter and when, in the discretion of
the Appeal Board, such revocation is necessary to protect and preserve the
public health, safety and welfare.
   (C)   Procedure. Notice and hearing procedures for revocation shall be in
accordance with §
4-11-14 of this chapter.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1)
§ 4-11-18 APPEAL FROM HEARING.
   (A)   Notice; content. Any applicant for any approval provided for in this
chapter whose application for approval or renewal thereof has been disapproved,
or if a dispute arises as to interpretation of any provision, or upon
suspension or revocation of the town’s approval may appeal said decision to the
Town Council. Written notice of appeal shall be delivered to the Town Clerk, by
the appellant, within 15 days from the date of the decision of the
Environmental Health Officer or Appeal Board, and the written notice of appeal
shall state with particularity the grounds for the appeal.
   (B)   Town Council conducts public hearing. In the event of any such appeal,
the Town Council may cause further investigation to be made with respect to any
or all matters relating to such an appeal, and shall conduct a public hearing
thereon at which the applicant or licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to
be present and to be heard. Notice of any such hearing shall be mailed to the
appellant by postage prepaid, certified mail, return receipt requested, at the
address set forth in the notice of appeal. Such notice shall be mailed not less
than 48 hours before the date of such hearing and shall include the date, time
and place of such hearing with advice to the appellant that the appellant may
be present and heard thereat, together with such other information as the Town
Council may prescribe.
   (C)   Decision conclusive. Upon completion of such hearing the Town Council
shall determine whether the decision of the Environmental Health Officer or
Appeal Board should be affirmed, modified or reversed and such decision of the
Town Council shall be conclusive.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1)
§ 4-11-19 REINSTATEMENT OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Application for reinstatement. Any establishment for which the
approval has been suspended, may at any time, make application for
reinstatement of the license.
   (B)   Reinspection. Within one week after the receipt of a satisfactory
application, accompanied by a statement signed by the applicant to the effect
that the violated provision or provisions of this chapter have been conformed
with, the Environmental Health Officer shall make a reinspection and thereafter
as many additional reinspections as deemed necessary to ensure that the
applicant is complying with the chapter, and, in case the findings indicate
compliance, shall recommend to the Town Manager that the approval be
reinstated.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 4-11-20 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION OR REMODELING.
   (A)   Prior approval. Plans and specifications for construction or
remodeling of any establishment shall be submitted to the Environmental Health
Officer in advance of any such construction or remodeling for approval with
respect to:
      (1)   Location and layout of all equipment and facilities;
      (2)   Layout and arrangement of all areas in which operations are to be
conducted;
      (3)   Materials to be used in construction and finishing work of working
areas; and
      (4)   Materials to be used in utensils and equipment.
   (B)   Plan review. The Environmental Health Officer shall complete the
review of the plans and specifications within 14 working days following receipt
thereof. If the review is not completed within the time limit, the
Environmental Health Officer may so notify the applicant and an additional 14
work days shall be allowed. If the review is not completed within the extended
period, the plans and specifications shall be deemed approved.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1)
§ 4-11-21 SAMPLES OF FOOD AND DRINK AUTHORIZED; POSSIBLE ACTION.
   Samples, in sufficient quantity, of food and drink and all other substances
used in connection with the preparation, storage or service of any food or
drink may be taken by the Environmental Health Officer from any food service
establishment without cost when removal is necessary for the inspection and
investigation of unwholesome or adulterated food or drink. The Environmental
Health Officer may condemn and forbid the sale of, or cause to be removed from
the premises of any establishment, or cause to be destroyed, any food or drink
or other substance used in connection with the preparation, storage or service
thereof found to be unwholesome, adulterated or otherwise unfit for human
consumption.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1)
§ 4-11-22 NECESSITY OF CHAPTER FOR HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE.
   The Town Council finds, determines and declares that this chapter is
necessary and proper for the health, safety and welfare of the town and the
inhabitants thereof.
(Ord. 15(1981) § 1)
CHAPTER 12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
4-12-1 Purpose
4-12-2 Definitions
4-12-3 License required
4-12-4 License application
4-12-5 Background investigation
4-12-6 Issuance or denial
4-12-7 Term of license; renewal
4-12-8 License nontransferable
4-12-9 Suspension and revocation
4-12-10 General regulations
4-12-11 Dance and entertainment requirements
4-12-12 Lighting requirements
4-12-13 Hours of operation
4-12-14 Age restrictions
4-12-15 Conduct
4-12-16 Inspection
4-12-17 Employee identification
4-12-18 Exemptions
4-12-19 Regulations not exclusive
4-12-20 Penalties
§ 4-12-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health,
safety and welfare by regulating sexually oriented businesses through the
establishment of reasonable and uniform regulations to reduce the adverse
secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the town. This chapter
is not intended to limit or restrict the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. This chapter is not intended
to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected
by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article II, Section
10 of the Colorado Constitution or to deny access of distributors or exhibitors
of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Finally, this
chapter is not intended to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   ADULT ARCADE. Any commercial establishment in which the public is permitted
or invited where, for any form of consideration, one or more motion picture
projectors, slide projectors, image or virtual reality producing machines or
similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, are used regularly to show films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides, digital images, electronic reproductions or photographs describing,
simulating or depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live
performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical
areas or by the exhibition of specified sexual activities.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment which is
characterized by the showing, for any form of consideration, of films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, compact discs, digital video discs (DVDs),
digital images or other visual representations that have an emphasis on
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   ADULT STORE. Any commercial establishment which, as one of its principal
business purposes, offers for sale or rent for any form of consideration one or
more of the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, compact discs,
digital video discs (DVDs), digital images or other visual representations
which are characterized by their emphasis on the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, auditorium or similar commercial establishment
which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances
which are characterized by an emphasis on exposure of specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities.
   CONVICTED. Having been found guilty by a judge or a jury or entering a
guilty plea or a plea of nolo contendere, and includes deferred judgments,
deferred sentences, deferred adjudications and plea bargains, whether or not an
appeal of such conviction is pending; excluding any conviction overturned or
vacated by appeal or other force of law.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who works or performs work or service in or for a
sexually oriented business on a full time, part time or contract basis, with or
without compensation, regardless of whether such person is designated as an
employee, independent contractor, agent, volunteer or any other status;
excluding any person on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises
or for delivering or removing tangible personal property to or from the
premises.
   LICENSED PREMISES. The building or structure in which a licensed sexually
oriented business is operating.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult store, adult cabaret,
adult motion picture theater or adult theater, except an establishment where a
medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional
licensed by the State of Colorado engages in approved and recognized sexual
therapy.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts
below a point immediately above the top of the areola, which are not completely
and opaquely covered; or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED CRIME. Any of the following crimes committed under the penal or
criminal code of any municipality, county, state or country: sex crimes against
children; sexual abuse; sexual assault; possession or distribution of child
pornography; distribution of an illegal controlled substance; prostitution,
promotion of prostitution or pandering; and organized crime if such organized
crime is committed within the premises of a sexually oriented business in the
town or elsewhere.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:
      (1)   Fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation and sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
      (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; human
excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set
forth in this definition.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-3 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   All sexually oriented businesses in the town shall be licensed as set forth
in this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually
oriented business in the town without a valid license issued pursuant to this
chapter.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-4 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applicants for a sexually oriented business license shall submit a
written application to the Town Clerk which includes the following:
      (1)   The name, address, telephone number and date of birth of the
applicant and, if applicable, each of its officers, partners, directors and
registered agents;
      (2)   The trade name of the applicant and copies of all documents
recording the trade name, including the trade name affidavit;
      (3)   The name of any other sexually oriented business in which any
officer, director or partner has a financial interest;
      (4)   The address of the premises to be licensed;
      (5)   If the applicant is a corporation, copies of the articles of
incorporation, bylaws and last annual report;
      (6)   Copies of documents demonstrating that the applicant has a legal
right to possession of the premises to be licensed;
      (7)   A sketch, drawing or diagram drawn to scale and showing the
configuration of the premises, including total floor area to be occupied by
each sexually oriented business; and
      (8)   A description of the type of sexually oriented business proposed,
such as an adult store, adult cabaret, adult theater or adult motion picture
theater.
   (B)   Each application shall be verified and acknowledged to be true by the
applicant or the managing partner, president or other officer having the
authority to sign for the applicant.
   (C)   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee in accordance with a fee schedule maintained by the Town Clerk.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-5 BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application, the Town Clerk shall perform
a background investigation of the applicant and its officers, directors and
partners, and the information contained in the application.
   (B)   The Town Clerk may investigate any fact related to any of the criteria
set forth in this chapter that may be relevant to determine the eligibility of
the applicant for a sexually oriented business license.
   (C)   The Town Clerk may seek and obtain the assistance of law enforcement
agencies in conducting the background investigation.
   (D)   The background investigation shall be completed within 45 days of
receipt of the completed application.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-6 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   (A)   Within ten days of the completion of the background investigation, the
Town Clerk shall either issue the sexually oriented business license or issue a
written statement of denial. The license or statement of denial shall be sent
via United States mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant at the address
provided on the application. The Town Clerk shall issue the license unless one
or more of the following is true:
      (1)   The applicant has not paid all required fees;
      (2)   The applicant or any of its officers, directors or partners is
under 18 years of age;
      (3)   The applicant is not qualified to conduct business under applicable
state or federal law or town ordinances;
      (4)   The applicant has knowingly provided false information to the town
on an application for a sexually oriented business license;
      (5)   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business does not
comply with the location requirements set forth in the town’s zoning ordinance;
      (6)   The premises in which the sexually oriented business is proposed to
be located does not comply with applicable town ordinances, such as the
building code, electrical code or fire code;
      (7)   The applicant is delinquent in the payment of any taxes, fees or
other payments owed to the town; or
      (8)   The applicant or any of its directors, officers or partners has
been convicted of a specified crime in the two years preceding the date of the
application.
   (B)   Within ten days of the date of a written statement of denial, the
applicant may submit a written request that the Town Clerk schedule a hearing
before the Town Council on the application. The hearing shall be held at the
next regularly scheduled Town Council meeting occurring at least ten days after
receipt of the written request.
   (C)   At the hearing, the applicant may present additional evidence, either
documentary or through witness testimony, which is relevant to the applicant’s
eligibility for a sexually oriented business license.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing or within ten days thereafter, the
Town Council shall either order that the Town Clerk issue the sexually oriented
business license, or issue a written order denying the application for the
sexually oriented business license.
   (E)   If the Town Council denies the application for a sexually oriented
business license, the Town Council’s decision shall be final, subject to
judicial review pursuant to Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil
Procedure.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-7 TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWAL.
   (A)   All sexually oriented business licenses issued under this chapter
shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, unless revoked or
suspended as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Written application for renewal of a sexually oriented business
license shall be filed with the Town Clerk at least 60 days prior to the
expiration of the current license, together with the applicable annual license
fee. If no application for renewal is timely filed, the licensee has waived its
option to renew the license and must reapply for a new license.
   (C)   Applications for renewal shall include the same information as an
original application, except as the Town Clerk deems redundant.
   (D)   The procedures for renewal license applications shall be the same as
the procedures for new license applications.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-8 LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE.
   A sexually oriented business license issued under this chapter is
nontransferable. By way of example, but not limitation, a new sexually oriented
business license shall be required upon: the sale, lease or sublease of the
sexually oriented business or the licensed premises; the transfer by sale,
exchange or similar means of a controlling interest in the sexually oriented
business; or the establishment of a trust, gift or similar legal device which
transfers ownership or control of the sexually oriented business or the
licensed premises, other than transfer by bequest or other operation of law
upon the death of the person possessing ownership or control.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-9 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Town Clerk may suspend or revoke any sexually oriented business
license issued under this chapter if the Town Clerk receives reliable
information to establish that:
      (1)   A nuisance is being maintained on the licensed premises;
      (2)   The licensed premises is unsanitary as certified by the Eagle
County Department of Health;
      (3)   The licensed premises is unsafe as certified by the town’s Building
Official, the Fire Marshal or the Fire Chief;
      (4)   The licensee has knowingly permitted on the licensed premises: the
possession, sale or use of illegal controlled substances; any specified sexual
activity; or prostitution;
      (5)   The licensee or any of its officers, directors, partners or
employees has been convicted of a specified crime during the term of the
license; or
      (6)   The licensee knowingly provided false information on an application
for a sexually oriented business license or renewal of such a license.
   (B)   At least 20 days before the Town Clerk suspends or revokes any
sexually oriented business license, the Town Clerk shall provide written notice
to the licensee, via United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address
provided on the most recent application, of the allegations supporting the
suspension or revocation.
   (C)   During the 20-day period, the licensee may file a written request for
a stay of the suspension or revocation pending a hearing before the Town
Council on the allegations to support the suspension or revocation.
   (D)   The hearing shall be held at the next regularly scheduled Town Council
meeting at least ten days after receipt of the request.
   (E)   At the hearing, the applicant may present additional evidence, either
documentary or through witness testimony, which is relevant to the suspension
or revocation.
   (F)   At the conclusion of the hearing or within ten days thereafter, the
Town Council shall order that the sexually oriented business license be
suspended for a period of time not to exceed 180 days, or that the license be
revoked, or that no action be taken with respect to the license.
   (G)   If the Town Council orders suspension or revocation, the Town
Council’s decision shall be final, subject to judicial review pursuant to Rule
106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-10 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All licensed premises shall comply with all applicable town
regulations and ordinances, including, but not limited to, the Building Code,
Fire Code, Electrical Code, zoning regulations, business licensing and sales
tax collection.
   (B)   Every sexually oriented business license issued under this chapter
shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises in a clear
cover or frame, and shall be available for inspection at all times by the
public.
   (C)   All licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition, and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when
necessary.
   (D)   Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate in any licensed
premises or on the property outside any licensed premises.
   (E)   All materials, devices and novelties offered by a sexually oriented
business which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
shall be displayed so that they cannot be seen by anyone other than customers
who have entered the licensed premises.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-11 DANCE AND ENTERTAINMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   An adult cabaret or adult theater at which employees dance shall have
one or more stages or similar structures specially designed for dancing, which
shall be constructed in accordance with applicable building code regulations,
and located inside the licensed premises. Employees shall dance only upon such
stage or structure.
   (B)   When an employee dances on a structure which is designed to hold not
more than two persons, the structure shall be level, of sturdy construction and
securely fastened to the floor or wall during dance performances. Steps and
handrails shall be required on all such stages and structures where the
platform on which the employee dances is more than eight inches above the
surface upon which the structure rests.
   (C)   Any adult cabaret or adult theater shall have one or more separate
areas designated in the diagram submitted as part of the application as a stage
for the licensee or employees to perform as entertainers. Entertainers shall
perform only upon the stage, and the stage shall be fixed and immovable.
   (D)   No seating for the audience shall be permitted within three feet of
the edge of any stage, and no members of the audience shall be permitted upon
any stage or within three feet of the edge of any stage.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-12 LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   When the occupant capacity of any licensed premises, as determined by
the Fire Department, is at least 50 persons, such licensed premises shall have
electric, battery operated emergency lights using reliable storage batteries
properly maintained and charged.
   (B)   The interior portion of a licensed premises to which patrons are
permitted access shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place at an illumination of not less
than two foot-candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of
the licensee and employees present on the premises to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present on the premises.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-13 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It is unlawful for a sexually oriented business to be open for business or
for the licensee or any employee of a licensee to allow patrons upon the
licensed premises on any Monday through Saturday between 2:00 a.m. and 7:00
a.m.; and on any Sunday between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-14 AGE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of any
person less than 18 years of age into any sexually oriented business.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, barter, give or offer for sale,
barter or gift, to any person under 18 years of age any service, material,
device or thing sold or offered for sale by any adult store or adult motion
picture theater.
   (C)   Employees of any sexually oriented business shall be at least 18 years
of age.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-15 CONDUCT.
   (A)   No licensee or employee shall encourage or knowingly permit any person
on or within the licensed premises to touch, caress or fondle the genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus or breasts of any person.
   (B)   No licensee or employee shall knowingly fail to immediately report to
the Police Department any criminal conduct or violation of any town ordinance
or state or federal law, rule or regulation that occurs on or within the
licensed premises.
   (C)   No person shall engage in specified sexual activities on or within a
licensed premises.
   (D)   No licensee or employee mingling with patrons or serving food or
drinks shall be unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to
expose to view any specified anatomical area.
   (E)   No employee shall receive tips from patrons except as provided herein.
A licensee that desires to provide for tips from its patrons shall establish
one or more boxes or other containers to receive tips. All tips for employees
shall be placed by patrons into the tip box. The licensee shall post one or
more signs to be conspicuously visible to patrons in letters at least one inch
high to read as follows:
   All tips are to be placed in tip box and not handed directly to the
entertainer. Any physical contact between the patron and the entertainer is
strictly prohibited.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-16 INSPECTION.
   Every licensee shall permit law enforcement officers and any other federal,
state, county or town agency in the performance of any function connected with
the enforcement of this chapter and normally and regularly conducted by such
agency, to inspect the licensed premises for the purpose of ensuring compliance
with this chapter, at any time the licensed premises is occupied or open for
business.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-17 EMPLOYEE IDENTIFICATION.
   Each licensee shall provide to the Town Clerk, in writing, the full name,
any aliases, date of birth and the current address and telephone number of
every employee of the licensee within five days of employment.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-18 EXEMPTIONS.
   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the following
businesses and activities shall be exempt from the requirements of this
chapter:
   (A)   Any adult store which derives less than 10% of its gross income from
the sale of materials depicting specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, if such materials are located in a separate room or booth
containing those materials only; and
   (B)   Any college, junior college or university supported, in whole or in
part, by tax revenue and offering educational programs which, for educational
purposes, may include the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-19 REGULATIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall limit the effectiveness or
applicability of any other provision of this code to any sexually oriented
business.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1)
§ 4-12-20 PENALTIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other entity to
violate any provision of this chapter, and any such violation shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in §
1-4-1 of this code. Each and every day of violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a separate offense punishable as such.
   (B)   In the event of violation of any of the terms and regulations set
forth herein, the town may obtain equitable relief, including injunctive
relief, to require compliance with the provisions hereof. If the town is
successful in obtaining injunctive or other equitable relief, the costs and
attorney fees incurred by the town in such action shall be awarded to the town
in addition to any other relief.
   (C)   Nothing contained herein shall preclude the town from enforcing the
suspension and revocation provisions of this chapter in addition to
simultaneously or subsequently prosecuting alleged violations of this chapter
under this section.
(Ord. 11(2008) § 1; Ord. 14(2013) § 2)
CHAPTER 13: MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
4-13-1 Prohibited
4-13-2 Definitions
§ 4-13-1 PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated, or permit to
be operated in the town a marijuana establishment, and marijuana establishments
are hereby prohibited at any location in the town. The town shall not accept or
process any applications for the operation of marijuana establishments in the
town. The operation of a marijuana establishment shall not be eligible for a
determination of similar use pursuant to §
12-3-4 of this code, as amended, or any similar section of this code.
(Ord. 10(2015) § 1)
§ 4-13-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
   MARIJUANA. All parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis whether growing or
not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the
plant, its seeds or its resin, including marijuana concentrate, but excluding
industrial hemp, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to
prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink or other product.
   MARIJUANA CLUB. A place not used for residential purposes where individuals
gather to consume or grow marijuana, regardless of whether such place calls
itself private or public or charges an admission or membership fee.
   MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY. A facility licensed to cultivate, prepare
and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to
marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to other marijuana cultivation
facilities, but not to consumers.
   MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT. Means and includes a marijuana cultivation
facility, a marijuana testing facility, a marijuana product manufacturing
facility, a retail marijuana store and a marijuana club.
   MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURING FACILITY. A facility licensed to purchase
marijuana; manufacture, prepare and package marijuana products; and sell
marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing
facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers.
   MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY. A facility licensed to analyze and certify the
safety and potency of marijuana.
   RETAIL MARIJUANA STORE. A facility licensed to purchase marijuana from
marijuana cultivation facilities or marijuana and marijuana products from
marijuana product manufacturing facilities, or to sell marijuana or marijuana
products to consumers.
(Ord. 10(2015) § 2)
CHAPTER 14: SHORT-TERM RENTALS
Section
4-14-1 Purpose and applicability
4-14-2 Definitions
4-14-3 License required
4-14-4 Insurance
4-14-5 Health and safety standards; insurance
4-14-6 Advertising
4-14-7 Taxes
4-14-8 Initial complaints
4-14-9 Violation and penalty
§ 4-14-1 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a comprehensive licensing
program to safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare by regulating and
controlling the use, occupancy, location, and maintenance of short-term rentals
in the Town.
   (B)   This Chapter shall apply to short-term rentals only, as defined
herein. This Chapter shall not supersede or affect any private conditions,
covenants, or restrictions applicable to short-term rentals.
(Ord. 19(2018) § 1; Ord. 11(2022) § 1)
§ 4-14-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   LEASE: Any agreement, whether verbal or written, by which an owner gives to
a tenant, for valuable consideration, possession and use of property or a
portion thereof for a definite term, at the end of which term the owner has an
absolute right to retake control and use of the property.
   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF RESIDENCE: The home or place in which one's habitation is
fixed and to which one has a present intention of returning after a departure
or absence therefrom. In determining what is a principal place of residence,
the Town shall consider the criteria set forth in C.R.S. § 31-10-201(3), as
amended.
   PROFESSIONALLY MANAGED STR: An STR that is managed, operated or controlled
by a property management firm.
   PROPERTY MANAGEMENT FIRM: An entity comprised of one or more professional
property managers with all required licenses in good standing, or a group of
one or more employees of a lodge or fractional fee club (as those terms are
defined in §
12-2-2  of this Code) who are trained in property management and provide such
services to owners of STRs within the lodge or fractional fee club, which
entity or group is designated by the STR owner to act as the STR owner's agent
regarding the STR.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL (STR): A residential dwelling unit, or any room therein,
available for lease for a term of less than thirty (30) consecutive days, but
excluding bed and breakfasts and accommodation units.
(Ord. 19(2018) § 1; Ord. 11(2022) § 1)
§ 4-14-3 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   General. A current, valid license is required for each STR in the
Town. Each STR license is non-transferable.
   (B)   Application. For new licenses and renewals, the STR owner or property
management firm shall file an application with the Finance Director or
designee, on forms supplied by the Town, accompanied by the following:
      (1)   An administrative fee of $260, unless the STR is located in a
building with on-site management services available at all times, and then the
administrative fee shall be $50;
      (2)   An affidavit, signed by the owner or the property management firm,
under penalty of perjury, certifying that the STR is in habitable condition and
complies with the health and safety standards set forth in this Chapter; and
      (3)   If the STR is located within a duplex, a copy of a written notice
sent by the owner or property manager to the last known address of the record
owner of the adjoining residential dwelling unit, by first-class mail at least
seven (7) days prior to submission of the application.
   (C)   Local Representative. Each application shall include the appointment
of a natural person who shall remain within a sixty (60) minute distance of the
STR and is available twenty four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week,
to serve as the local representative for the STR. At least five (5) days prior
to any change in such appointment, the STR owner or property management firm
shall notify the Town of such change, including new contact information. For an
STR located in a building with onsite management services available at all
times, if the STR owner uses such services, no local representative appointment
shall be required.
   (D)   Expiration; Renewal. Each STR license shall expire on February 28 of
each calendar year, or when title of the STR transfers to a new owner,
whichever occurs first; each change in ownership of a STR shall require a new
license.
   (E)   Timing. An initial license application shall be filed at least thirty
(30) days prior to any advertising of an STR. A renewal application shall be
filed by January 31 of the year in which the license expires.
   (F)   Revocation. In addition to any other penalties allowed by this
Chapter, the Town may revoke any STR license if the Town finds and determines
that any violation of this Chapter exists at the STR; provided that the Town
provides the licensee with at least fourteen (14) days’ prior written notice
and an opportunity to be heard prior to revocation. The notice shall include a
description of the violation and the date and time when the STR owner may
appear and be heard, and the notice shall be either personally served on the
STR owner or mailed by first-class United States Mail to the last-known address
of the STR owner or property management firm.
(Ord. 19(2018) § 1; Ord. 11(2022) § 1)
§ 4-14-4 INSURANCE.
   Every STR shall be continuously insured, with minimum limits of $1,000,000.
The insurance may be in any of the following forms: property liability
insurance; commercial liability insurance; or an endorsement to a homeowner's
policy for coverage of STR activities.
(Ord. 19(2018) § 1; Ord. 11(2022) § 1; Ord. 1(2023) § 1)
§ 4-14-5 HEALTH AND SAFETY STANDARDS; INSURANCE.
   (A)   Standards: Each STR shall comply with all of the following standards,
at a minimum, at all times while the STR is occupied:
      (1)   Buildings, structures or rooms shall not be used for purposes other
than those for which they were designed or intended.
      (2)   Roofs, floors, walls, foundations, ceilings, stairs, handrails,
guardrails, doors, porches, all other structural components and all
appurtenances thereto shall be capable of resisting any and all forces and
loads to which they may be normally subjected and shall be kept in sound
condition and in good repair.
      (3)   An operable toilet, sink, and either a bathtub or shower shall be
located within the same building, and every room containing a toilet or
bathtub/shower shall be completely enclosed by walls, doors, or windows that
will afford sufficient privacy.
      (4)   There shall be a sufficient number of trash receptacles to
accommodate all trash generated by the occupants, and all receptacles shall
comply with Title 5, Chapter 9 of this Code.
      (5)   Occupancy of an STR shall comply with Title 12, Chapter 2 of this
Code.
      (6)   The use of portable outdoor fireplaces is prohibited.
      (7)   Electrical panels shall be clearly labeled.
      (8)   All pets shall be subject to Title 6, Chapter 4 of this Code.
      (9)   All items listed in subsection B.2. hereof shall comply with the
current Vail Fire Code.
      (10)   Parking for each STR shall comply with all applicable provisions
of this Code. All vehicles shall be parked in designated parking areas, and
parking is prohibited in any landscaped area.
      (11)   A sign, in a form approved by Town, shall be conspicuously posted
inside each STR with the STR license number, the local representative's current
contact information, and the physical address of the STR, including unit number
if applicable.
      (12)   A second sign, in a form approved by the Town, shall be posted in
a location so as to be visible from the exterior of the STR by passersby,
stating that the property contains an STR and providing the local
representative's current contact information and the Town's hotline for
complaints. The second sign shall not be required if the STR is located in a
building with on-site management services available at all times.
   (B)   Inspections:
      (1)   When required:
         (a)   Each STR, other than those located in buildings with on-site
management services available at all times, shall obtain a fire and life safety
inspection as a condition of license issuance and every three (3) years
thereafter. Requests for inspections shall be made to Vail Fire and Emergency
Services at least sixty (60) days prior to the date of the initial license
application and at least sixty (60) days prior to the end of each subsequent
three (3) year period.
         (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, each STR that was validly
registered with the Town on the date of the ordinance codified in this Section,
and is not located in a building with on-site management services available at
all times, is eligible for an STR license without an initial inspection,
provided that the STR is inspected prior to January 1, 2026 and every three (3)
years thereafter. Requests for initial inspections shall be made to Vail Fire
and Emergency Services on or before July 1, 2025, and requests for later
inspections shall be made at least sixty (60) days prior to the end of each
subsequent three (3) year period.
      (2)   Items Inspected: The following will be inspected by Vail Fire and
Emergency Services for compliance with the current Vail Fire Code:
         (a)   Fire extinguishers;
         (b)   Adequacy of egress;
         (c)   Posted egress plan;
         (d)   Carbon monoxide detectors;
         (e)   Smoke alarms;
         (f)   Occupant load;
         (g)   Improvised electrical conditions and use of extension cords;
         (h)   Use of portable heating appliances and outdoor heating
appliances; and
         (i)   Conspicuous posting of the physical address of the STR.
      (3)   Re-inspection: If an inspection reveals that an STR is not in
compliance with this Chapter, a re-inspection shall be required. Re-inspections
must be scheduled in advance and may take up to sixty (60) days to complete.
      (4)   For each STR inspection that was requested and the licensee failed
to appear for or allow the inspection when scheduled or canceled the inspection
within twenty four (24) hours prior to the scheduled inspection, there shall be
a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars ($115), which shall be paid to the town
prior to rescheduling such inspection.
(Ord. 19(2018) § 1; Ord. 11(2022) § 1; Ord. 3(2025) § 1)
§ 4-14-6 ADVERTISING.
   Advertising for an STR shall include the STR license number immediately
following the description of the STR.
(Ord. 19(2018) § 1; Ord. 11(2022) § 1)
§ 4-14-7 TAXES.
   All applicable Town Sales and Lodging Taxes for STRs shall be timely
collected and remitted.
(Ord. 19(2018) § 1; Ord. 11(2022) § 1)
§ 4-14-8 INITIAL COMPLAINTS.
   Initial complaints concerning a short-term rental property shall be directed
to the local representative. The local representative shall resolve the issue
that was the subject of the complaint within sixty (60) minutes, or within
thirty (30) minutes if the problem occurs between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
including visiting the site if necessary.
(Ord. 19(2018) § 1; Ord. 11(2022) § 1)
§ 4-14-9 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation:  It is unlawful to violate any provision of this Chapter.
Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Liability: Each STR owner shall be liable for any and all violations
occurring at the STR. A property management firm shall be jointly and severally
liable for any and all violations occurring at any of its professionally
managed STRs in the Town.
   (C)   Civil Enforcement:
      (1)   If the Town chooses civil enforcement, a citation may be served by
posting on the front door of the STR, or by personal service on the STR owner
or professional management firm, or by mailing first-class U.S. Mail to the
last known address of the STR owner or property management firm.
      (2)   Civil violations shall be subject to the following fines and
penalties, per STR:
         (a)   First violation in any twelve (12) month period: $1,500.
         (b)   Second violation in any twelve (12) month period: $2,650.
      (3)   All penalties shall be paid within fourteen (14) days of the date
of the citation. If the civil violation is paid, there shall be no opportunity
to challenge or otherwise appeal the violation. If the STR owner disputes the
violation, the STR shall file a written protest with the Town within fourteen
(14) days of the date of the citation.
      (4)   If the STR protests the citation, the Town shall cancel the
citation and proceed to criminal enforcement.
      (5)   If the penalty is not timely paid and no protest is timely filed,
the Town may summarily suspend the STR license until the penalty is fully paid.
Written notice of such suspension shall be provided to the last-known address
of the STR owner, or to the local representative or property management firm.
   (D)   Criminal Enforcement:  If the Town chooses criminal enforcement or a
protest is filed and the civil citation is canceled, a summons and complaint
may be served as provided in the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Civil
Procedure. The penalties shall be as set forth in Section
1-4-1  of this Code.
   (E)   Suspension:  Regardless of the type of enforcement, the third
violation in any twelve (12) month period for a single STR, regardless of
ownership of the STR, shall result in a three (3) year suspension, commending
on the date of the last violation, during which no license shall be granted for
such STR.
   (F)   Other Remedies: In addition to the penalties described above, the Town
shall have any and all remedies provided by law and in equity for a violation
of this Chapter, including without limitation: damages; specific performance;
and injunctive relief, including without limitation an injunction requiring
eviction of any occupants of the STR and an injunction to prohibit the
occupancy of any property in violation of this Chapter.
   (G)   Prior Violations: Any violations of the prior version of this Chapter
shall count toward the number of violations for the particular property.
(Ord. 19(2018) § 1; Ord. 11(2022) § 1)
CHAPTER 15: SECURITY GUARDS AND PRIVATE SECURITY EMPLOYERS
Section
4-15-1   Definitions
4-15-2   License required
4-15-3   Application; issuance
4-15-4   Security guard license endorsements
4-15-5   Private security employer license endorsements
4-15-6   Term
4-15-7   Renewal
4-15-8   Identification
4-15-9   Training
4-15-10 Insurance
4-15-11 Indemnification
4-15-12 Uniforms and badges
4-15-13 Vehicles
4-15-14 Weapons
4-15-15 Confiscation of property
4-15-16 Reporting requirements
4-15-17 Revocation
4-15-18 Violation; penalty
§ 4-15-1 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   BACKGROUND CHECK. A national criminal history records check conducted by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation upon submission of fingerprint records and all
required documents.
   BODILY HARM. Physical damage to a person’s body for which medical attention
was provided, including cuts, burns, disfigurement, concussion, loss of
consciousness, or any impairment of physical condition.
   CONDUCTIVE ENERGY WEAPON. A device capable of temporarily immobilizing a
person by the infliction of an electrical charge, including without limitation
but not limited to stun guns and tasers.
   DEPARTMENT. The Vail Police Department.
   PERSONAL PROTECTIVE SERVICES. A private arrangement where one or more
qualified individuals, for a fee or other consideration, provide services to
ensure the safety of another specific individual or group who may be exposed to
elevated personal risk because of their employment, financial status,
associations or fame.
   PRIVATE SECURITY EMPLOYER. An employer that employs security guards to
provide security services in the Town.
   SECURITY GUARD. A person employed by a private security employer to provide
security services in the Town.
   SECURITY SERVICES.  Any of the following activities:
   (A)   Observing, investigating, or reporting unlawful activity;
   (B)   Preventing or detecting theft or misappropriation of goods, money, or
other items of value;
   (C)   Protecting individual or property from harm or misappropriation;
   (D)   Taking enforcement action by physically detaining or ejecting persons
from premises; or
   (E)   Controlling access to premises.
   WEAPON. A conductive energy weapon, oleoresin capsicum (“OC”) aerosol spray,
baton, or any other “dangerous or illegal weapon” as defined by C.R.S. § 18-12-
102.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 4-15-2 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Security guards. It is unlawful for any person to act as a security
guard without first obtaining a license as provided by this Chapter.
   (B)   Private security employers. It is unlawful to operate as a private
security employer without first obtaining a license as provided by this
Chapter.
   (C)   Exceptions. This Chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Law enforcement officers while engaged in the performance of their
official duties or while engaged in off-duty employment;
      (2)    Personal protective services;
      (3)   An individual while protecting the individual’s own property;
      (4)   A Town employee while engaged in the performance of their assigned
job duties; or
      (5)   An individual providing guest services, including without
limitation a ticket vendor, ticket taker, usher, door attendant, identification
checker, parking attendant, traffic controller, crowd monitor, or event staff,
if such individual does not: carry a weapon; wear a uniform or clothing readily
identifiable by the public as that worn by a security guard or law enforcement
officer; have the authority or permission to initiate confrontational
activities, including physical contact and the confiscation of property; or
have the authority to physically detain or eject persons from the premises.
   (D)   Nontransferable. A license granted pursuant to this Chapter is not
transferable.
   (E)   Posting. A private security employer license shall at all times be
posted in a conspicuous place in the licensee’s principal place of business.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 4-15-3 APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Security guard license. An application for a security guard license
shall be filed with the Department on a form provided by the Department. Every
application for a security guard license shall contain all of the following
information:
      (1)   The name of the private security employer by whom the applicant
will be employed, the address of the employer, the nature of the services to be
rendered.
      (2)   A list of any criminal convictions of the applicant, including the
date and location of each offense, the nature of the offense and the penalty or
punishment imposed.
      (3)   A background check as defined in this Chapter, provided by the
applicable private security employer, completed no more than sixty (60) days
before the application date.
      (4)   Verification of a successful completion of a basic security guard
training program as provided by this Chapter, completed no more than sixty (60)
days before the application date.
      (5)   Any additional relevant information required by the Department.
   (B)   Private security employer license. An application for a private
security employer license shall be filed with the Department on forms provided
by the Department, and shall including all of the following information:
      (1)   The name of the private security employer, the address of its
principal place of business, and the name and address of each principal and
managing agent.
      (2)   A description of the specific types of services to be offered.
      (3)   A description and photograph of the uniform and badges to be worn
by the security guards.
      (4)   A list of any criminal convictions for each principal and managing
agent, including the date and location of the offense, the nature of the
offense and the penalty or punishment imposed.   
      (5)   An affidavit attesting that each of its security guards is duly
licensed pursuant to this Chapter.
      (6)   Certificates of insurance demonstrating the minimum insurance
coverage as required by this Chapter.
      (7)   Any additional relevant information required by the Department.
   (C)   Grounds for denial. An application for a security guard license or a
private security employer license under this Chapter may be denied under the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The issuance of a license to the applicant would not comply with
any applicable law, rule or regulation.
      (2)   The applicant owes any outstanding fines, assessments, taxes or
fees to the Town;
      (3)   The applicant has an outstanding warrant for their arrest.
      (4)   The application contains any fraudulent or false statement or
material misrepresentation;
      (5)   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
      (6)   The applicant has been convicted of or released from incarceration
for any felony within five (5) years of the application date;
      (7)   The applicant has been convicted of or released from incarceration
for any misdemeanor offense involving fraud, theft, deceit, or
misrepresentation within five (5) years of the application date;
      (8)   The applicant has been convicted of or released from incarceration
for any offense involving an act of violence against persons or property within
five (5) years of the application date, including without limitation, assault,
child abuse, and offenses where the underlying factual basis has been found to
include any act of domestic violence.
      (9)   The applicant has been previously denied a license under this
Chapter or has had a license issued under this Chapter revoked within five (5)
years of the application date.
      (10)   The applicant has been convicted of operating without a license
required by Chapter or performing any act for which a license is required by
this Chapter.
      (11)   The applicant is unable to provide sufficient verification that
they are physically and mentally capable of performing security services in a
manner that will not jeopardize the public health, safety, or welfare of any
person.
      (12)   The applicant’s character and reputation show a pattern of conduct
or personal history that does not demonstrate honesty, fairness, and respect
for the rights of others or for the law.
   (C)   Issuance. Within 30 days of the filing of a complete application, the
Department shall issue the license or shall issue a written statement
explaining why the license was denied.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 4-15-4 SECURITY GUARD LICENSE ENDORSEMENTS.
   (A)   Plainclothes endorsement.
      (1)   A security guard shall not work in plainclothes without first
receiving an endorsement from the Department authorizing them to do so.
      (2)   A security guard that intends to seek a plainclothes endorsement
shall submit with their initial or renewal application, a letter of request
describing why plainclothes are necessary. The request shall:
         (a)   Be documented on the private security employer’s letterhead;
         (b)   Describe the nature and context of each business or event for
which the applicant seeks plainclothes status, including time and location; and
         (c)   Include an explanation for the necessity of plainclothes status.
      (3)   A plainclothes license endorsement shall be effective only for the
times, events and locations identified on the application. A security guard
shall provide notice to the Department prior to adding additional times, events
or locations to the plainclothes endorsement, no less than seventy-two (72)
hours prior to the first time or event.
      (4)   The plainclothes endorsement is associated only with specific
private security employer.
   (B)   Firearms endorsement.
      (1)   A security guard shall not carry a firearm while acting as a
security guard without first receiving an endorsement from the Department
authorizing them to do so. No security guard under twenty-one (21) years of age
may carry a firearm while acting as a security guard.
      (2)   A security guard who intends to seek a firearms endorsement shall
submit with application a letter of request describing the need to carry a
firearm. The request shall:
         (a)   Be documented on the private security employer’s letterhead;
         (b)   Include an explanation for the necessity of a firearms
endorsement for the security guard;
         (c)   Include a statement from the private security employer stating
that they are not aware of any mental, physical, or emotional condition that
would disqualify the applicant from possession of a firearm; and
         (d)   Include a statement from the private security employer releasing
the Town from any liability related to the request to arm the employee.
      (3)   If the security guard wishes to obtain a plainclothes endorsement
in addition to a firearms endorsement, a valid copy of their concealed handgun
permit must be included. It is unlawful for a security guard to work in
plainclothes and open-carry a firearm while providing security services.
      (4)   A firearms endorsement shall be effective only for the term of the
underlying security guard license.
      (5)   A firearms endorsement is associated only with a request related to
a specific private security employer.
      (6)   A security guard who has obtained a firearms endorsement shall not
carry more than one (1) firearm at any times while providing security services.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 4-15-5 PRIVATE SECURITY EMPLOYER LICENSE ENDORSEMENTS.
   (A)   Weapons endorsement.
         (1)   A private security employer shall not provide or otherwise
authorize the use of any weapon, without first receiving a weapons endorsement
from the Department.
      (2)   A private security employer that intends to seek a weapons
endorsement shall submit with its application, a letter of request describing
why the weapons are necessary. The request shall:
         (a)   Be documented on the private security employer’s letterhead;
         (b)   Identify the types of weapons to be provided or authorized for
use;
         (c)   Include an explanation of the necessity of the weapons
endorsement, including the name, dates and information related to any public or
private event for which the weapons endorsement is requested;
         (d)   Include a statement certifying that all security guards that
will be provided or otherwise authorized to use the identified weapons will
have successfully completed training specific to said weapons before carrying
or using said weapons; and
         (e)   Include a statement from the private security employer releasing
the Town from any liability related to the request for a weapons endorsement.
         (3)   A weapons endorsement shall be effective only for the term of
the private security employer license.
         (4)   A weapons endorsement shall only be provided for weapons that
are approved for use by the Department. The weapons endorsement is associated
only with the specific weapons outlined in the request. A private security
employer shall not add or modify the weapons it provides or authorizes without
prior approval from the Department.
   (B)   Vehicle endorsement.
      (1)   A private security employer shall not authorize the use of vehicles
for security services without first receiving a vehicle endorsement from the
Department.
      (2)   A private security employer that intends to seek a vehicle
endorsement shall submit with its application a written request to use
vehicles. The request shall include either photographs or a rendering of each
proposed vehicle design that depicts the front, back, and sides of the vehicle
in full color, including any insignias.
      (3)   A vehicle endorsement shall be effective only for the term of the
private security employer’s license.
      (4)   A vehicle endorsement is associated only with the specific vehicle
design disclosed to the Department.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 4-15-6 TERM.
Unless the license granted pursuant to this Chapter is granted only for a
specific public or private event, a license granted under this Chapter shall be
valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless suspended
or revoked earlier. Any firearm endorsement, plainclothes endorsement, weapons
endorsement or vehicle endorsement shall expire at the same time as the
license.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 14-5-7 RENEWAL.
   (A)   Security guard license. Applications for renewal of a security guard
license shall include:
      (1)   A background check completed by the applicable private security
employer, no more than sixty (60) days before the renewal application check;
      (2)   Any additional relevant information required by the Department.
   (B)   Private security employer license. Applications for renewal of a
private security employer license shall include:
      (1)   An affidavit attesting that each security guard is duly licensed
pursuant to this Chapter;
      (2)   Updated certificates of insurance; and
      (3)   Any additional relevant information required by the Department.
   (C)   Grounds for denial. The Department may refuse to renew a license for
any of the grounds stated in Section
4-15-3 (C).
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 4-15-8 IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Identification card. In addition to a license, each security guard
shall be issued an identification card which shall contain, at a minimum, the
following information:
      (1)   The license type and license number;
      (2)   The issuance date and expiration date of the license;
      (3)   The name and a recent photograph of the cardholder;
      (4)   A firearm endorsement, if applicable; and
      (5)   A plainclothes endorsement, if applicable.
   (B)   Location. The security guard shall carry the identification card on
their person at all times when performing security services, and shall exhibit
the card upon request by a law enforcement officer or other Town official.
Security guards who have been granted a firearms endorsement shall wear their
identification card on the outermost part of their uniform in a clearly visible
manner at all times when performing security services; a plainclothes
endorsement does not exempt any security guard from this requirement.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 4-15-9 TRAINING.
   (A)   Verification. With an application for a security guard license, the
applicant shall provide verification of successful completion of at least the
basic security guard training program no more than sixty (60) days before the
application date. The training verification shall identify, at a minimum, the
applicant’s name, the courses taken, the number of training hours obtained, the
date(s) of training, and the name of the training provider.
   (B)   Basic training program. The basic training program shall include at
least sixteen (16) hours with a certified training provider, covering the
following topics, at a minimum:
      (1)   Duties of a security guard;
      (2)   Communication procedures and protocol;
      (3)   Interaction with law enforcement;
      (4)   Use of force, including the use of oleoresin capsicum (“OC”)
aerosol spray;
      (5)   Cardiopulmonary resuscitation;
      (6)   De-escalation training; and
      (7)   Any additional training required by the Department.
   (C)   Annual training. In addition to the basic training program, each
security guard shall complete eight (8) hours of annual training with an
eligible training provider, covering the topics described in subsection (B)
hereof.
   (D)   Weapons training. A private security employer requesting a weapons
endorsement shall provide verification that its employees underwent training
specific to the weapons used.
   (E)   Training provider certification. Training providers shall be approved
in the discretion of the Department. In determining whether to approve a
training provider, the Department may consider the following factors:
      (1)   The experience of the trainer, consultant, industry expert, or
person providing the training;
      (2)   Whether the trainer has tenure with federal, state, or local law
enforcement agencies;
      (3)   Copies of the training provider’s lesson plans, curricula, and
materials.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 4-15-10 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Private security employers shall maintain the following minimum
insurance coverages at all times:
      (1)   Workers’ compensation and employers’ liability insurance as
required by law.
      (2)   If vehicles are used to provide security services, automobile
liability insurance with a minimum policy limit of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000).
      (3)   Commercial general liability insurance with a policy limit of one
million dollars ($2,000,000) combined single limit for bodily injury and
property damage for each occurrence.
   (B)   Notice of any change in insurance shall be provided to the Department
within seventy-two (72) hours. The suspension, voiding, nonrenewal,
cancellation, or reduction of insurance is cause of automatic suspension of the
license until the coverage is reinstated.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 4-15-11 INDEMNIFICATION.
Each security guard and private security employer licensed under this Chapter
shall indemnify and hold harmless the Town and its officers, agents, and
employees from all suits, actions, damages, claims or injuries to any person or
property due to any act or omission of the licensee, its agents or employees,
or due to the failure of the licensee to observe any provision of this Chapter.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 4-15-12 UNIFORMS AND BADGES.
   (A)   Unless they hold a plainclothes endorsement provided by this Chapter,
all security guards shall wear a uniform while performing security services.
All uniforms shall be presented to the Department for approval prior to being
issued by any private security employer to any security guards, and upon
approval uniforms shall not be changed except with further approval from the
Department.
   (B)   The outer uniform shall prominently display the following:
      (1)   A badge or patch containing the words “security”, “private
security”, “security guard”, or “guard.”
      (2)   A nametag or identification card containing the guard’s name.
      (3)   A badge or patch containing the name of the private security
employer.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, while performing or providing security
services, to wear a uniform or badge similar to that worn by any law
enforcement agency.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to wear or display any badge, insignia,
shield, patch, or pattern that indicates or implies that the person is a law
enforcement officer.
   (E)   It is unlawful for any person, while performing security services, to
wear a uniform or badge that contains the words “enforcement”, “police” or
“officer.”
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 14-15-13 VEHICLES.
   (A)   All vehicles used for security services shall be approved by the
Department, and once determined, shall not be changed without approval from the
Department.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, while providing or performing security
services within the Town, to use or operate any vehicle displaying the word
“police” “patrol” or “officer”, or displaying any sign, shield, marking, or
insignia that indicates or implies that the vehicle is operated by a law
enforcement agency.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to equip vehicles used to perform
security services in any manner resembling any authorized emergency vehicle,
including lights or sirens.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 4-15-14 WEAPONS.
   (A)   Batons. A private security employer that is permitted to issue batons
to its employees shall only be authorized to issue a baton that meets the
following specifications:
      (1)   Length: A baton cannot be longer than twenty-six (26) inches either
solid or when fully expanded;
      (2)   Diameter: A baton shall be between one (1) inch to one and one
quarter (1.25) inches in diameter;
      (3)   Weight: A baton’s weight shall be proportional to its size as
specified by the manufacturer;
      (4)   Surface: The ends of the baton shall be rounded blunt with no
ridged, or sharp edges;
   (B)   Firearms. Security guards may only carry a firearm with a firearms
endorsement. A permit to carry a concealed weapon does not constitute the
specific authorization required by this Chapter. The authority to carry
firearms includes only the time while the security guard is performing security
services while in route to or from the place of business.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 4-15-15 CONFISCATION OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   A security guard may temporarily confiscate personal property from an
individual only if that property constitutes a security risk or otherwise would
endanger the health, safety, and welfare of the persons, property, or premises
the security guard is employed to protect.
   (B)   Upon confiscation of property from any individual, a security guard
shall make a record of the property and store the property in a manner that
will allow the individual to identify and retrieve their property upon exiting
the premises or at a later time.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 4-15-16 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Termination or changes in employment.
      (1)   When the employment of a security guard is terminated for any
reason, the private security employer shall notify the Department within
seventy-two (72) hours of such termination.
      (2)   When the employment of a security guard is terminated for any
reason, the security guard shall notify the Department within seventy-two (72)
hours of such termination.
      (3)   Any person changing a place of business or adding an employee shall
notify the Department of such fact within seventy-two (72) hours, together with
the name and address of the new place of business or new employee.
   (B)   Convictions. If a security guard is convicted of a crime, the security
guard shall notify the Department within seventy-two (72) hours of such a
conviction.
   (C)   Use of force. When a security guard, while providing security
services, uses force that results in bodily harm to another person, the
security guard shall immediately notify the Department.
   (D)   Changes to principal or managing agent. A private security employer
shall notify the Department of any changes to the named principals or managing
agents associated with their license within seventy-two (72) hours. Any new
principal or managing agent shall receive approval from the Department before
acting as the principal or managing agent.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 4-15-17 REVOCATION.
If the Department receives notice that a person holding a license or
endorsement under this Chapter has violated any provision of this Chapter, the
Department may revoke the license or endorsement, following reasonable notice
and an opportunity to be heard. Upon revocation, the Department shall provide a
written statement explaining the grounds for the revocation.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
§ 4-15-18 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation: It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of
this Chapter, and each day of violation shall be a separate offense. In
addition, the following acts shall be considered violations of this Chapter:
      (1)   For any security guard to detain and hold any person except when
that person commits a criminal offense in the presence of the security guard,
and it is unlawful for the security guard to fail to immediately release upon
request any such person detained to the Department.
      (2)   For any person to draw or fire a firearm while providing security
services, except as allowed by C.R.S. §§ 18-1-704 - 18-1-707.
      (3)   For any person, while performing security services, to possess or
be accompanied by a canine or to have a canine within a vehicle used for
security services.
      (4)   For a security guard or private security employer to hinder or
interfere with any investigation under the jurisdiction of the Department or
any other law enforcement agency.
      (5)   For any security guard or private security employer to fail to
report immediately to the Department all violations of Town, state, or federal
laws, or to fail to cooperate in the investigation of such criminal activity
when requested by law enforcement.
      (6)   For any person to represent themselves as a law enforcement officer
while providing security services.
   (B)   Penalty. Violations of this Chapter shall be subject to the penalties
set forth in Section
1-4-1  of this Code, which shall be in addition to any other penalties allowed
by law, including without limitation revocation of a license or endorsement
issued under this Chapter.
(Ord. 5(2023) § 1)
TITLE 5: PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1: PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
5-1-1 Definitions
5-1-2 Designated generally
5-1-3 Keeping junk
5-1-4 Depositing waste material
5-1-5 Abatement of mountain pine beetle (Rep. by Ord. 23(2007) §1)
5-1-6 Noxious weeds
5-1-7 Noise prohibited
5-1-8 Mufflers and vehicle idling
5-1-9 Ice and snow overhangs and accumulations
5-1-10 Ice, snow and obstructions on sidewalks
5-1-11 Private property drainage
5-1-12 Construction work lighting
5-1-13 Creation of nuisance prohibited
5-1-14 Investigation; abatement notice
5-1-15 Abatement procedure
5-1-16 Civil remedy not precluded
5-1-17 Violation; penalty
§ 5-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   IDLE: A combustible vehicle engine running at any location while the vehicle
is stationary.
   NUISANCE: Any act or condition which endangers the public health or
environment or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public or damage to
any property or injury to any person.
   PASSENGER TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE: A motor vehicle that is used to transport
passengers for compensation, excluding vehicles operated by the Town.
(Ord. 18(1966) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 12(2022) § 1)
§ 5-1-2 DESIGNATED GENERALLY.
   Each of the actions or conditions set out in §§
5-1-3 through
5-1-11 of this chapter shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and may be
proceeded against according to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 18(1966) § 2)
§ 5-1-3 KEEPING JUNK.
   The storing or keeping by any person within the town of any old articles or
materials which may be classified as junk, adjacent to or in close proximity to
any public building, public park or grounds, business buildings or residences
without first providing fully enclosed buildings for the storage of the same,
shall be deemed a public nuisance. It is specifically provided that trash,
garbage and refuse and trash, garbage and refuse containers, barrels and cans
must be obscured from view and not accessible to scavenging animals. It is
further specifically provided that “junk” as referred to in this chapter shall
be expressly deemed to include, without limitation, any motor vehicle that is
incapable of operation under its own power. A motor vehicle shall be presumed
incapable of operation if it has remained in one location for a period in
excess of 30 days.
(Ord. 18(1966) § 2(b); Ord. 15(1968) § 1; Ord. 16(1968) § 1)
§ 5-1-4 DEPOSITING WASTE MATERIAL.
   The throwing, depositing, scattering by any person or the permitting by any
person of the throwing or scattering of any waste or other material of any kind
upon any sidewalk, street, alley, public passageway, public park, open area or
upon any private property within the town shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(Ord. 18(1966) § 2(c))
§ 5-1-5 ABATEMENT OF MOUNTAIN PINE BEETLE.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed by Ord. 23(2007) § 1. See Chapter 11 of this
title.
§ 5-1-6 NOXIOUS WEEDS.
   (A)   Plants listed. All plants declared noxious weeds pursuant to the Town
of Vail weed management plan, which shall be annually reviewed and updated in
compliance with the C.R.S. §§ 35-5.5-101 et seq., the Colorado Noxious Weed
Act.
   (B)   Declaration of nuisance. Any and all plants designated noxious weeds
by the town are declared to be a public nuisance. Such action may be taken as
is available for nuisance abatement under the laws of this state and the town,
and as Town Council, in their sole discretion, deem necessary.
   (C)   Removal of noxious weeds required by property owner. Property owners
within the town shall be responsible for the elimination of noxious weeds from
their property within 90 days of the effective date hereof. Such removal shall
be accomplished in an ecologically feasible and environmentally safe manner in
accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
   (D)   Enforcement. The town shall have the right to enter upon any premises,
land or place, whether public or private, during reasonable business hours or
upon proper notice for the purpose of inspecting for the existence of noxious
weeds, and shall have the right to propose, implement or enforce the management
of noxious weeds upon such lands in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. §§
35-5.5-108.5 and 109.
   (E)   Advisory board. The Vail Town Council shall be the local advisory
board for all state and local noxious weed statutes, ordinances and
regulations. The Mayor shall be the Chair and the Mayor Pro Tem shall be the
Secretary. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
   (F)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be subject to penalty as
provided in §
1-4-1 of this code, in addition to any other remedies provided herein or
allowed by ordinance, law, rule or regulation.
(Ord. 19(1993) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 6(2004) § 1)
§ 5-1-7 NOISE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibited act. The making and creating of an excessive or an
unusually loud noise at any location within the town heard and measured in a
manner hereinafter set forth, shall be unlawful, except when made under and in
compliance with a permit issued pursuant to subsection (E) of this section.
   (B)   Definition. An EXCESSIVE OR UNUSUALLY LOUD NOISE shall be defined as
follows:
      (1)   Noise of any duration which exceeds the allowable noise limit for
the zone in which the noise source is located by 15 decibels;
      (2)   A noise, one minute or more in duration out of any ten-minute
period, which exceeds the allowable noise limit for the zone in which the noise
source is located by ten decibels; and
      (3)   A noise of five minutes in duration and a total of five minutes out
of any ten-minute period, which exceeds the allowable noise limit for the zone
in which the noise source is located by three decibels.
   (C)   Sound measurement standard. For the purpose of determining and
classifying any noise as excessive or unusually loud as declared to be unlawful
and prohibited by this section, the noise shall be measured on a decibel or
sound level meter of standard design and quality operated on the A weighting
scale.
      (1)   If the noise source is located on private property, the noise shall
be measured at or beyond the property line of the property on which the noise
source is located.
      (2)   If the noise source is located on public property, the noise shall
be measured no closer than ten feet from the noise source.
   (D)   Allowable limits. The following shall be the allowable noise limits
for the time periods and zones specified:
 
Zoning Designation of    Maximum Number of Decibels  Maximum Number of Decibels
Property on Which Source Permitted from 7:00 a.m. to Permitted From 11:00 p.m.
of Noise is Located      11:00 p.m.                  to 7:00 a.m.
All residential zones    55 decibels                 50 decibels
excepting HDMF
Commercial plus HDMF     65 decibels                 60 decibels
Industrial service zones 80 decibels                 75 decibels
 
 
Zoning Designation of    Maximum Number of Decibels Maximum Number of Decibels
Property on Which Source Permitted from 2:00 p.m.   Permitted at All Other
of Noise Is Located      to 8:00 p.m.               Times
Lionshead Mixed Use 1,
Public Accommodation,
Commercial Service       80 decibels                Refer to above table
Center, Commercial Core
1, Ski Base/Recreation 2
 
   (E)   Permit to exceed limits. Applications for a specified permit to exceed
noise level designated in this section may be made to the Town Manager or duly
authorized representative. The Town Manager or duly authorized representative
may grant the relief as applied for if he or she finds the following.
      (1)   That additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or
modify such activity or operation to comply with this section.
      (2)   The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary
duration, and cannot be done in a manner that will comply with subsection A of
this section.
      (3)   That no other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.
      (4)   That the permit is necessary for the community’s cultural,
historical or social benefit. The Town Manager may prescribe any conditions or
requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or
the surrounding neighborhood, including, but not limited to, specific times or
functions of the noise on location of the noise source. Any permit granted by
the Town Manager under this section shall contain all conditions upon which the
permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the permit
shall be effective.
   (F)   Exceptions. The maximum permissible noise limits for the times and
zones specified in subsection (D) of this section shall not apply to sound
emitted from the following:
      (1)   Any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency
call or acting in time of an emergency;
      (2)   Activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and for which a
license or permit therefor has been granted by the town, including, but not
limited to, parades and fireworks displays;
      (3)   Any construction equipment operated upon a residential, commercial,
industrial or public premises during the time period between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m.; provided, however, that the operation of the construction equipment
during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. shall not exceed 90 decibels;
      (4)   Any snowmaking equipment;
      (5)   Any motor vehicles designated for and operated on the public
streets, alleys, highways or freeways; and
      (6)   The sounds of any permitted bells or chimes or the amplified
reproductions of the sounds of any bells or chimes played between the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., provided that said sounds shall not exceed 80 decibels.
   (G)   Motor vehicle noise.
      (1)   Type of vehicle; time period. No person shall operate nor shall the
owner permit the operation of any motor vehicle or combination of motor
vehicles at any time or place when such operation exceeds the following noise
levels for the category of motor vehicle and for the designated time period
specified in the table set forth below. The standards set forth in this table
shall apply to all noise emitted from motor vehicles including any and all
equipment thereon, under any conditions of acceleration, deceleration, idle,
greater load and whether or not in motion. Maximum allowable noise levels for
motor vehicles shall be as follows:
 
                                                                                 Maximum   Measurement
Type Of Vehicle                                                           Time   Allowable Distance
                                                                          Period Noise     From
                                                                                 Levels    Vehicle
Vehicles weighing less than 10,000 pounds, manufacturer’s gross vehicle Any    80        25 feet
weight                                                                    time   decibels
Vehicles weighing more than 10,000 pounds, manufacturer’s gross vehicle Any    90        25 feet
weight                                                                    time   decibels
 
      (2)   Exhaust muffler. It is unlawful for any person to drive or move or
for the owner of any motor vehicle to permit to be driven or moved, any motor
vehicle or combination of motor vehicles at any time which is not equipped with
an exhaust muffler. It is unlawful for any person or for the owner of any motor
vehicle to change or modify the exhaust muffler, air intake muffler or any
other sound reducing device in such a manner that the noise emitted from the
motor vehicle:
         (a)   Exceeds the noise levels as established in the maximum allowable
noise level table for motor vehicles; or
         (b)   Is increased above the sound pressure level of the vehicle as
originally manufactured.
   (H)   Amplified sounds.
      (1)   Purpose. The Town Council enacts this legislation for the purpose
of securing and promoting the public comfort, safety and welfare of its
citizenry. While recognizing that certain uses of sound amplifying equipment
are protected by the constitutional rights of freedom of speech and assembly,
the Council nevertheless feels obligated to reasonably regulate the use of
sound amplifying equipment in order to protect the correlative constitutional
rights of the citizens of this community to privacy and freedom from public
nuisance and loud and unnecessary noise.
      (2)   Prohibition and regulation. It shall be unlawful for any person
other than the personnel of law enforcement or governmental agencies to
install, use or operate within the town a loudspeaker or sound amplifying
equipment in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any sound truck for
the purposes of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures or
transmit or project music to any person or assemblage of persons in or upon any
public street, alleys, sidewalks, park or place, or public property, except
when installed, used or operated in compliance with the following provisions.
         (a)   In all residential zones, no sound amplifying equipment shall be
installed, operated or used for commercial purposes at any time.
         (b)   The operation or use of sound amplifying for noncommercial
purposes in all residential zones and within 100 feet thereof, except when used
for regularly scheduled operative functions by any school or for the usual and
customary purposes of any church is prohibited between the hours of 4:30 p.m.
and 9:00 a.m. of the following day.
         (c)   At the Gerald R. Ford Amphitheater located within Gerald R. Ford
Park, the operation or use of sound amplifying equipment for commercial
purposes is prohibited between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. of the
following day.
         (d)   In all other zones, except such portions thereof as may be
included within 100 feet of any residential zone, the operation or use of sound
amplifying equipment for commercial purposes is prohibited between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the following day on Sunday through Thursday, and
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the following day on Friday
and Saturday.
         (e)   1.   In all other zones, except such portions thereof as may be
included within 100 feet of any residential zone, the operation or use of sound
amplifying equipment for noncommercial purposes is prohibited between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. The only sounds permitted
shall be either music, human speech, or both.
            2.   The sound emanating from sound amplifying equipment shall be
limited in volume and intensity for the times such sound is permitted by
subsection (H)(2) of this section shall be as set forth in subsection (D) of
this section. In no event, shall the sound be loud and raucous or unreasonably
jarring, disturbing, annoying or a nuisance to reasonable persons of normal
sensitivity within the area of audibility.
      (3)   Permit required.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, business or corporation to
operate sound amplifying equipment in accordance with this chapter without
first obtaining a permit from the town. Application for such permits will be on
forms provided by the town. The following information shall be provided by the
applicant:
            1.   Name, address and telephone number;
            2.   The place or places the applicant will be playing amplified
sound; and
            3.   The dates and times the applicant will be playing amplified
sound.
         (b)   All permits shall be valid for a period of one calendar year.
   (I)   Appeal. Appeal of any action of the Town Manager or duly authorized
representative pursuant to subsections (E) and (H) of this section, denying the
issuance of a permit to exceed the noise level or to play amplified sounds, may
be filed within 30 days following such action with the Town Council which shall
hear said appeal in accordance with its rules of procedure. The Town Council
may confirm, reverse or modify the actions of the Town Manager or his or her
duly authorized representative.
   (J)   Penalty. Any person, partnership, association or corporation convicted
of a violation of any provision of this section shall be subject to penalty as
provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
   (K)   Four day limit.
      (1)   Any person wishing to play “amplified sounds” as defined in
subsection (H) of this section during any period not to exceed four consecutive
days shall not be required to provide the information set forth in subsection
(H)(3) of this section in such person’s application.
      (2)   Upon the receipt of an application to play amplified sound during
any period not to exceed four consecutive days, the Town Manager, without the
necessity of a public hearing, shall either grant or deny the application after
consideration of all the relevant factors. Before the Town Manager shall grant
any such application, the Town Manager shall be required to make the findings
set forth in subsection (E)(4) of this section.
(Ord. 1(1981) § 1; Ord. 32(1982) § 1; Ord. 26(1984) § 1; Ord. 15(1988) § 1;
1997 Code; Ord. 20(1988) § 1; Ord. 3(1999) § 10; Ord. 14(2007) § 1; Ord. 8
(2021) § 1; Ord. 12(2022) § 2)
Cross-reference:
   Exhaust mufflers, see §
5-1-8
§ 5-1-8 MUFFLERS AND VEHICLE IDLING.
   (A)   Mufflers: The operation of a motor vehicle within the town which is
not at all times equipped with a muffler in good working order upon the exhaust
thereof and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, or the
use, by any person operating a motor vehicle within the town, of a cutout,
bypass or similar muffler elimination appliance shall be deemed a public
nuisance.
   (B)   Idling:
      (1)   Passenger vehicles: No unattended passenger vehicle shall idle for
any period of time, except between the months of November through April, when a
passenger vehicle may idle for up to three (3) minutes at a time.
      (2)   Commercial vehicles: No unattended commercial vehicle shall idle
for any period of time in the Lionshead Mixed Use 1, Lionshead Mixed Use 2,
Commercial Core 1 or Commercial Core 2 zone districts.
      (3)   Passenger transportation vehicles: Passenger transportation
vehicles may not idle when unoccupied. When occupied, operators are encouraged
to turn off the vehicles during dwell time. If it is not practicable to turn
off the vehicle due to extreme cold, operators are encouraged to limit any
vehicle idling time to three (3) minutes.
      (4)   Construction vehicles: Construction vehicles operating at an active
construction site may idle for up to three (3) minutes at a time.
      (5)   Exemptions: This Section shall not apply to any commercial
refrigeration vehicles, authorized emergency vehicles when actively in use for
emergency purposes, Town-owned vehicles, waste collection trucks when actively
collecting waste, or vehicles operating under a permit or license issued by the
Town for a special event.
(Ord. 18(1966) § 2(e); Ord. 12(2022) § 3)
Cross-reference:
   Similar provisions, see §
5-1-7(G)(2)
§ 5-1-9 ICE AND SNOW OVERHANGS AND ACCUMULATIONS.
   (A)   Located over public property or ways. No owner, occupant or manager of
any real property or improvement thereon shall allow or permit ice or snow to
project or overhang from any roof, ledge or other part of the structure or
building owned, managed or occupied by such    person where the projection or
overhang constitutes a hazard or reasonable possibility that the ice or snow
projection or overhang (or water resulting therefrom) might fall, collapse or
drop onto any sidewalk, street, alley, public way, park or any other publicly
used way.
   (B)   Accumulations on buildings. No owner, occupant or manager of any real
property or improvement thereon shall allow or permit ice or snow to accumulate
on the roof or any other part of the structure or building owned, occupied or
managed by him or her where the accumulated ice or snow constitutes a hazard or
reasonable possibility of sliding off the building onto any sidewalk, street,
alley, public way, park or any other publicly used way.
(Ord. 9(1978) § 1)
§ 5-1-10 ICE, SNOW AND OBSTRUCTIONS ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Duty to clear sidewalks. It shall be the duty of every owner or
occupant of any lot, property, or parcel of land within the town, or his or her
agent, to keep the sidewalks in the public right-of-way on or adjacent to such
lot or parcel of land, free and clear of and from snow, ice, mud and all other
obstructions. It is unlawful to fail to keep the sidewalks free and clear of
snow, ice, mud and all other obstructions. Snow, ice, mud and other
obstructions cleared from sidewalks shall not be deposited in public streets or
alleys.
   (B)   Notice to responsible person. If the Town Manager or his or her
designee finds that any portion of a sidewalk has not been cleared of snow,
ice, mud and other obstructions as required by subsection (A) of this section
and that a hazardous condition exists, the Town Manager or designee shall
notify the owner or manager of any property, the lessee leasing the premises or
any adult occupant of a single-family dwelling that such person must remove the
snow within 24 hours. Notice under this subsection (B) is sufficient if hand
delivered or telephoned to the owner, manager, lessee or occupant.
   (C)   Town abatement for noncompliance. If the person so notified fails to
remove the snow as required by the notice set forth in subsection (B) of this
section, the Town Manager or his or her designee may cause the snow removal to
be done to meet the requirements of this section and charge the cost thereof,
plus an additional amount up to $25 for administrative costs to the person so
notified.
   (D)   Lien. If any person fails or refuses to pay any charge imposed under
this section, the Town Manager may, in addition to taking other collection
remedies, certify due and unpaid charges to the Eagle County Treasurer for
collection.
(Ord. 18(1996) § 2(g); Ord. 1(1968) § 1; Ord. 3(1992) § 1)
§ 5-1-11 PRIVATE PROPERTY DRAINAGE.
   (A)   General.  
      (1)   It is the responsibility of the owner of any real property to
protect their property and any improvements on said property from any and all
drainage that may flow from any public property, public roads, right of way,
and easements, unless the said private property is damaged by drainage flows
determined to be caused as a result of negligence on behalf of the Town, other
public entity, utility, or private property owner.
      (2)   Improvements necessary to protect the property shall be approved by
the Town, except for temporary measures that are utilized in the event of an
emergency.
   (B)   Maintenance. Owners of any real property, including buildings and
vacant land, that gain access from public property, public roads, right of way
or easements are required to repair and maintain, at their sole cost and
expense, any drainage feature, improvement, or facility that maintains positive
drainage flow away from buildings or property improvements, and/or allows for
access onto said real private property. This shall include drainage ditches,
swales, berms, concrete curbs and curb cuts, concrete pans and gutters,
culverts, driveways and any other features that are required for parking and/or
access onto and for said property.
   (C)   Abatement for non-compliance. If the property owner is found to be in
default or non-compliance of this requirement, the Town may notice the owner of
such default by certified mail, requiring the default to be remedied within 60
days, given that the 60 days occur within the reasonable construction window of
May through October.
   (D)   Lien. If any person fails or refuses to pay any charge imposed under
this section, the Town may maintain and/or repair the issue, and the cost of
such repair and/or maintenance shall be assessed upon and made a lien upon the
land so benefitted. The Town Manager may, in addition to taking other
collection remedies, certify due and unpaid charges to the Eagle County
Treasurer for collection.
(Ord. 7(2024) § 1)
§ 5-1-12 CONSTRUCTION WORK LIGHTING.
   The purpose of this section is to minimize the possible negative effects of
construction work lighting on adjacent properties within the town.
   (A)   All artificial light sources operated for the purpose of illuminating
construction work activities shall be directed internally to the development
site toward the specific construction work area or on site objects intended to
be illuminated. Any artificial light sources operating between sunset and
sunrise for the purpose of illuminating construction work activities directed
at an adjacent property or public way within the town shall be deemed a public
nuisance.
   (B)   All artificial light sources operated for the purpose of illuminating
construction work activities shall cease operation once the associated
construction activities have ceased. Any artificial light source operating
between sunset and sunrise for the purpose of illuminating construction work
activities that remains in operation after the associated construction
activities have ceased shall be deemed a public nuisance.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to lighting required for identifying
hazards or illuminating road construction.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to any outdoor lighting otherwise
regulated by §
14-10-7, “Outdoor Lighting”, of this code.
(Ord. 4(2009) § 1)
§ 5-1-13 CREATION OF NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall perform any act or acts constituting a nuisance under §§
5-1-2 through
5-1-13 of this chapter nor shall any person create, keep, maintain or allow or
cause to be created, kept, maintained or to exist any nuisance set forth in §§
5-1-2 through
5-1-13 of this chapter within the town.
(Ord. 4(2009) § 1)
§ 5-1-14 INVESTIGATION; ABATEMENT NOTICE.
   The Town Council or any person specifically authorized by the Council shall
investigate into every public nuisance within the town, and the Town Council
shall have the power to deliver a request for abatement to any person in
control of any public nuisance. Any request for abatement delivered by the Town
Council shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the nuisance or
nuisances which are to be abated and shall specify a reasonable time within
which such nuisance or nuisances are to be abated. It is the duty of any person
in control of any public nuisance within the town to abate the nuisance upon
receiving a request for abatement from the Town Council within the time
specified in the request.
(Ord. 4(2009) § 1)
§ 5-1-15 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   In addition to or in place of proceeding under §
5-1-13 of this chapter against any person who is believed to have violated or
to be violating any of the provisions of this chapter, the Town Council may
direct the Town Attorney to bring an action in the Municipal Court for the town
to abate and restrain any nuisance set forth in §§
5-1-2 through
5-1-13 of this chapter within the town; provided, that any action to abate and
restrain any such nuisance shall operate as a bar to any subsequent proceedings
under §
5-1-14 of this chapter for the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter where the violation occurred prior to the action to abate or restrain
the nuisance, and no testimony given by the defendant at any hearing in an
action to abate or restrain the nuisance shall be admissible against such
person in any proceeding under §
5-1-14 of this chapter instituted for any violation of the provisions of this
chapter occurring subsequent to the hearing.
(Ord. 4(2009) § 1)
§ 5-1-16 CIVIL REMEDY NOT PRECLUDED.
   No provision of this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting any private
person from bringing any action, seeking any remedy or taking any step with
respect to any nuisance set forth in §§
5-1-2 through
5-1-13 of this chapter as that person may be authorized or permitted to bring,
seek, or take under state law.
(Ord. 4(2009) § 1)
§ 5-1-17 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punished as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code; provided, that each separate act in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, or each and every day or portion thereof during
which any separate act in violation of this chapter is committed, continued or
permitted, shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 4(2009) § 1)
CHAPTER 2: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
5-2-1 Definitions
5-2-2 Refuse accumulation
5-2-3 Refuse containers required
5-2-4 Refuse storage
5-2-5 Rubble storage
5-2-6 Garbage; wrapping required
5-2-7 Building refuse
5-2-8 Littering prohibited
5-2-9 Hauling of refuse
5-2-10 Deposits on public ways prohibited
5-2-11 Removal by town; owner responsible for costs
5-2-12 Burying garbage unlawful
5-2-13 Deposit in sewage system unlawful
5-2-14 Removal of dead animals
5-2-15 Inspection
5-2-16 Removal notice; enforcement
5-2-17 Violation; penalty
§ 5-2-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of each and every provision of this chapter, the following
definitions of terms shall apply.
   DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. The Department of Community Development
of the town.
   ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH OFFICER. The Environmental Health Officer of the town
or authorized agent.
   FIRE CHIEF. The Fire Chief of the town, or authorized agent.
   GARBAGE. Putrescent animal or vegetable waste resulting from the
preparation, cooking and serving of food, or the storage and sale of produce.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Newspapers, magazines, cardboard, telephone books,
loose paper, glass containers, plastic containers, steel cans, aluminum cans
and scraps and reusable clothing and household items.
   REFUSE. All solid wastes, garbage and rubbish, whether combustible or
noncombustible, including rubble.
   REFUSE CONTAINER. A metal or nonabsorbent and fire-resistant container,
which shall be equipped with a tightly fitting metal or nonabsorbent and fire-
resistant cover or lid.
   REFUSE HAULER. Any person engaged in the business of collecting, storing and
transporting of refuse in the town and who is licensed therefor by the town.
   REFUSE STORAGE ROOM. A wholly enclosed area approved by the Town Manager or
authorized agent for the storage of refuse which does not constitute or tend to
create a fire or health hazard or any unsanitary condition.
   RUBBISH. All nonputrescent solid wastes, consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, including, but not limited to, paper, ashes, cardboard,
tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, rags, discarded clothes or wearing
apparel of any kind, or any other discarded object or thing, not exceeding
three feet in length.
   RUBBLE. Large brush wood, large and/or heavy yard trimmings, discarded
fenceposts, crates, motor vehicle tires, junk motor vehicle bodies or parts
thereof, scrap metal, discarded furniture and all other household goods or
items, demolition materials, old lumber and any other discarded similar object
or thing which cannot conveniently be cut into sizes of three feet in length.
   TOWN MANAGER. The Town Manager of the Town of Vail, or authorized agent.
(Ord. 4(1973) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 5-2-2 REFUSE ACCUMULATION.
   (A)   Single-family residences. It is unlawful for any occupant or owner of
any single-family residence to accumulate, or permit or cause to be
accumulated, on the premises occupied or owned by such person, any refuse, the
accumulation of which constitutes, or may create, an unsanitary condition or a
health or fire hazard.
   (B)   Multiple-family residences. It is unlawful for any owner, manager or
operator of any multiple-family residence, apartment house, condominium,
boardinghouse, private club or any other like premises to accumulate or permit
or cause to be accumulated on said premises any refuse, the accumulation of
which constitutes, or may create, an unsanitary or unsightly condition or a
health or fire hazard.
   (C)   Commercial establishments. It is unlawful for any owner, operator or
manager of any commercial establishment to accumulate or permit or cause to be
accumulated on said premises any refuse, the accumulation of which constitutes,
or may create, an unsanitary and unsightly condition or health or fire hazard.
(Ord. 4(1973) § 2(a–c))
§ 5-2-3 REFUSE CONTAINERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Single-family residences. It is unlawful for any occupant or owner of
any single-family dwelling to fail to provide or make available at all times
one or more “refuse containers”, as defined in §
5-2-1 of this chapter, at the premises owned or occupied by such person.
   (B)   Multiple-family residences. It is unlawful for any owner, manager or
operator of any multiple-family residence, apartment house, condominium,
boardinghouse, private club or any other like premises to fail to provide or
make available at all times one or more “refuse containers”, as defined in §
5-2-1 of this chapter, or “refuse storage rooms”, as defined in §
5-2-1, at the said premises owned, operated or managed by such person.
   (C)   Commercial or industrial establishments. It is unlawful for any owner,
operator or manager of any commercial or industrial establishment to fail to
provide or make available at all times one or more “refuse containers”, as
defined in §
5-2-1 of this chapter or “refuse storage rooms”, as defined in §
5-2-1 of this chapter, at the premises owned, operated or managed by such
person.
(Ord. 4(1973) § 3(a–c))
§ 5-2-4 REFUSE STORAGE.
   All refuse, except rubble and recyclable materials, shall be stored either
in “refuse containers”, as defined in §
5-2-1 of this chapter, or in “refuse storage rooms”, as defined in §
5-2-1 of this chapter, at a designated place on the premises, either inside or
outside, easily accessible to refuse haulers within the town, and shall be
properly concealed so as to not degrade the architectural and landscaping
qualities of the premises. Concealment facilities shall be approved by the
Department of Community Development.
(Ord. 4(1973) § 4(a); 1997 Code)
§ 5-2-5 RUBBLE STORAGE.
   Rubble need not be stored in refuse containers or refuse storage rooms, but
shall not be allowed to accumulate and shall be stored in such a manner as not
to constitute or create an unsanitary or unsightly condition or a health or
fire hazard.
(Ord. 4(1973) § 4(b))
§ 5-2-6 GARBAGE; WRAPPING REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to place garbage or any other putrescible
material in any refuse container or refuse storage room unless the garbage or
putrescible material is wrapped in paper or other material in such a manner as
to prevent spillage or leakage.
(Ord. 4(1973) § 4(c))
§ 5-2-7 BUILDING REFUSE.
   Sections
5-2-4 through
5-2-6 of this chapter shall not prohibit any person from keeping building
materials on any premises before or during the period of active construction,
nor shall these sections be construed to prohibit any person from storing any
materials used in the operation of a business which is located in an area
allowing such a use to be carried on.
(Ord. 4(1973) § 4(d))
§ 5-2-8 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to deposit, throw or leave any refuse on any
public or private property or on any water or watercourse.
   (A)   Definition. PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY as used in this section
includes, but is not limited to the right-of-way of any road or highway, a body
of water or watercourse, any park, playground, recreation area, building,
parcel of property, (publicly or privately owned), refuse container or
receptacle provided for private use.
   (B)   Defense. It shall be an affirmative defense that:
      (1)   The property where the refuse was deposited, thrown or left in an
area designated by law for the disposal of such refuse and the person is
authorized by the proper public authority to so use the property;
      (2)   The refuse was placed in a receptacle or container installed on
such property for that purpose, and the person is authorized by the owner,
provider or maintainer of the receptacle or container to use the same; or
      (3)   Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such
property, or has obtained written consent of the owner in lawful possession, or
the act is done under the personal direction of said owner or tenant.
   (C)   Owner responsibility. Whenever refuse is thrown, deposited, dropped or
dumped from any motor vehicle in violation of this section the operator of said
motor vehicle is presumed to have caused or permitted the refuse to be so
thrown or deposited, dropped or dumped therefrom.
(Ord. 23(1977) § 1)
§ 5-2-9 HAULING OF REFUSE.
   (A)   Commercial haulers. All vehicles operated by persons, companies or
other entities in the business of hauling refuse, rubble, rubbish or garbage
shall provide a tightly enclosed body to prevent the refuse, rubbish, rubble or
garbage from spilling out of the vehicle. Every such vehicle must also have a
durable, secure canvas or similar covering, large enough to cover all of the
materials hauled, and said covering shall be tied down or otherwise securely
fastened in place at all times that such vehicle is driven or operated on the
public streets and ways within the town.
   (B)   Private haulers. All vehicles, whether privately owned, or regularly
used for the business of hauling refuse, rubble, rubbish or garbage, while
being used for the hauling of such materials shall haul or carry the rubbish,
rubble, refuse or garbage in an enclosed part of the vehicle which is covered
by a durable and secure covering large enough to cover all said material to
prevent the same from spilling on the public street or way. Said covering shall
be tied down or otherwise securely fastened in place while said vehicle is
being used on the public streets or ways within the town.
   (C)   Violation. It is unlawful for any person to own, operate, or control a
vehicle that is being operated on the public streets or ways of the town in
violation of this section.
(Ord. 17(1979) § 1)
§ 5-2-10 DEPOSITS ON PUBLIC WAYS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Unlawful deposits. Subject to subsection (C) of this section, it is
unlawful for any person to litter, track or deposit, or cause to be littered,
tracked or deposited, sand, gravel, rocks, mud, dirt, snow, ice or any other
debris or material upon any street, sidewalk, alley or public place, or any
portion thereof.
   (B)   Notice; abatement. The Director of Public Works may notify and require
any person who violates or causes another to violate the provision of
subsection (A) of this section, or who has in the Director’s employment a
person who violates or causes another to violate the same, to remove such sand,
gravel, rocks, mud, dirt, snow, ice or any other debris or material within 24
hours after receipt of said notice by the Director of Public Works. In the
event the person so notified does not comply with the notice within the period
of time herein specified, the Director of Public Works, or authorized agent,
may cause any such sand, gravel, rocks, mud, dirt, snow, ice, debris or any
other material to be removed from any street or alley at the expense of the
person notified.
   (C)   Exceptions. The provisions of subsection (A) of this section shall not
be applicable:
      (1)   Within the immediate area of any construction, maintenance or
repair project of any street or alley or of any water main, sewer main,
electricity line, gas line, telephone line or any appurtenances thereto;
      (2)   To deposits of sand, dirt or materials necessary for the protection
of the public safety; and
      (3)   To public areas designated for the dumping or depositing of said
materials.
   (D)   Summons; penalty. As an alternative to the notice for removal provided
in subsection (B) above, any person who violates or causes another to violate
the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, or who has in such person’s
employment a person who violates or causes another to violate the same, may be
issued a summons to appear before the Municipal Court of the town for said
violations, and upon being found guilty of a violation hereunder be punished as
provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
   (E)   Notice; penalty. It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to
comply with the notice of the Director of Public Works as provided in
subsection (B) of this section, and any such person shall, in addition to
payment of the expense of removal incurred by the Director of Public Works, as
provided in subsection (B) of this section, upon being found guilty of a
violation hereunder, be punishable as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 6(1979) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 5-2-11 REMOVAL BY TOWN; OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR COSTS.
   (A)   Town abatement. In case any notice given under §
5-2-10 of this chapter shall not be complied with, the Director of Public
Works, or authorized agent, is authorized and empowered to order the removal of
the sand, gravel, rocks, mud, dirt, snow, ice or any other debris or material,
and shall have the authority to call the necessary assistance therefor.
   (B)   Cost assessed to owner. Upon completion of the removal, the Director
of Public Works, or authorized agent, shall certify to the Director of Finance
the cost of said removal of sand, gravel, rocks, mud, dirt, snow, ice or any
other debris or material, and the Director of Finance shall thereupon, by
certified mail addressed to the owner of the premises from which the sand,
gravel, rocks, mud, dirt, snow, ice or any other debris or material originated
or came, or other person to whom the notice was directed as provided for in §
5-2-10 of this chapter, give notice of the removal, and the cost incurred for
such work will be assessed against the owner’s lot, tract or parcel of land if
the same is not paid within 30 days of the date of notice.
   (C)   Cost added to tax. It shall be the duty of the owner of the premises,
or other person to whom the notice was directed, to pay the cost of said
removal within 30 days after the mailing of the notice, and in case of such
person’s failure to do so, the town shall have the right to make assessment
against any lot, tract or parcel of land, and to certify such assessment to the
Treasurer of Eagle County for the purpose of having the assessment placed upon
tax rolls and collected in the same manner as general taxes are collected.
(Ord. 6(1979) § 1)
§ 5-2-12 BURYING GARBAGE UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person to bury or cause to be buried anywhere within
the town any garbage.
(Ord. 4(1973) § 5(b))
§ 5-2-13 DEPOSIT IN SEWAGE SYSTEM UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited garbage in
the town’s sewage system, unless it is first shredded by an approved mechanical
grinder.
(Ord. 4(1973) § 5(c))
§ 5-2-14 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for any person in possession, charge or control of any dead
animals or of any premises upon which dead animals may be located, to permit or
allow such an animal to remain thereon for a period longer than 24 hours, or to
deposit or bury, or cause to be deposited or buried, the body of any dead
animal, or portion thereof, on any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, stream
or any public ground. Removal and disposal of dead animals shall be done in
accordance with the direction of the Environmental Health Officer.
(Ord. 4(1973) § 5(d))
§ 5-2-15 INSPECTION.
   The Town Manager, the Environmental Health Officer or the Fire Chief, have
the right to enter upon and inspect any and all premises within the town at
reasonable hours during the daytime for the purpose of enforcing the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. 4(1973) § 6)
§ 5-2-16 REMOVAL NOTICE; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Time specified. It is the duty of the Town Manager, the Environmental
Health Officer, or the Fire Chief, to require the owner or agent of the owner
of any premises whereon is situated any unlawful accumulation or unlawful
storage of refuse to remove it within a reasonable time, which shall be no
longer than three days, to be fixed by the Town Manager, the Environmental
Health Officer or the Fire Chief, in written notice to the owner or agent of
the owner. Emergency situations will be given notice of not longer than one
day.
   (B)   Noncompliance; summons issued. In case the owner or agent of the owner
fails to follow the requirements of the notice, the Town Manager, the
Environmental Health Officer or the Fire Chief shall cause the refuse to be
removed at the expense of the owner or agent of the owner. After removal of the
refuse, the Town Manager, the Environmental Health Officer or the Fire Chief
shall issue a summons to the owner or agent of the owner to appear in Municipal
Court.
(Ord. 4(1973) § 7)
§ 5-2-17 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Every person, upon conviction of violation of this chapter, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 4(1973) § 8; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 3: AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
Section
5-3-1 Purpose; applicability
5-3-2 Definitions
5-3-3 Fireplaces and fuel burning devices restricted
5-3-4 Permitted devices
5-3-5 Nonconforming devices, fireplaces and appliances
5-3-6 Coal usage
5-3-7 Refuse burning
5-3-8 Building permits required; exception
5-3-9 Violation; penalty
§ 5-3-1 PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Purpose. These regulations are enacted for the purpose of promoting
the health, safety and general welfare of the residents and visitors in the
town. These regulations are intended to achieve the following more specific
purposes:
      (1)   To protect the air quality in the town;
      (2)   To reverse the continuing trend toward increased air degradation in
the town;
      (3)   To provide heat sources that are efficient and have a reduced
polluting effect; and
      (4)   To generally protect the air for the purpose of the public’s
overall health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all areas
of the town.
(Ord. 21(1991) § 1)
§ 5-3-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCOMMODATION UNIT. Any room or group of rooms without kitchen facilities
designed for or adapted to occupancy by guests and accessible from common
corridors, walks or balconies without passing through another accommodation
unit or dwelling unit.
   CERTIFIED SOLID FUEL BURNING DEVICE. A solid fuel burning device which is
certified by the Environmental Protection Agency and by the Air Pollution
Control Division of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment to
produce not more than four and five-tenths grams of particulates per hour, or
to meet the current Environmental Protection Agency standard, whichever is more
restrictive. This shall include both catalytic and noncatalytic phase II stoves
as well as pellet burners and any other technology which can be shown to meet
these emission criteria.
   COMMON AREA. The lobby of any lodge (as that term is defined in Title 12,
Chapter 2 of this code), the area of any condominium project available for the
common use of all the unit owners and restaurants and bars.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms in a single-family, two-family or
multiple-family dwelling with kitchen facilities designed for or used by one
family as an independent housekeeping unit.
   EMPLOYEE HOUSING UNIT. A dwelling unit which shall not be owner occupied,
leased or rented for any period less than 30 consecutive days, and shall be
occupied by at least one person who is an employee. For the purposes of this
definition EMPLOYEE shall mean a person who works an average of 30 hours per
week or more on a year round basis in Eagle County, Colorado.
   GAS APPLIANCE. A fully self-contained, Underwriter’s Laboratories, Inc. (UL)
listed and American Gas Association (AGA) “fireplace” unit which does not
require venting through a chimney and which does not permit the use of solid
fuel.
   GAS LOG FIREPLACE. A fireplace as defined herein equipped with an AGA and UL
listed artificial log unit which is approved for the burning of natural gas.
   REFUSE. All solid wastes, garbage and rubbish, whether combustible or
noncombustible, including rubble.
   SOLID FUEL BURNING DEVICE. Any fireplace, stove, firebox or device intended
and/or used for the purpose of burning wood, pulp, paper or other nonliquid or
nongaseous fuel.
   WOOD BURNING FIREPLACE. An open hearth or fire chamber or similar prepared
place in which a fire may be made and which is built in conjunction with a
chimney.
(Ord. 21(1991) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 32(2005) § 1; Ord. 2(2007) § 2; Ord. 20
(2018) § 1)
§ 5-3-3 FIREPLACES AND FUEL BURNING DEVICES RESTRICTED.
   There shall be no wood burning fireplace and no solid fuel burning device,
other than a certified solid fuel burning device, constructed or installed
within any dwelling unit, accommodation unit, employee housing unit or common
area within the town.
(Ord. 21(1991) § 1; Ord. 2(2007) § 2)
§ 5-3-4 PERMITTED DEVICES.
   Certified solid fuel burning devices, gas appliances and gas log fireplaces
shall be permitted to be installed or constructed in dwelling units,
accommodation units, restricted dwelling units or common areas subject to the
following provisions.
   (A)   Dwelling units. Dwelling units shall contain not more than one
certified solid fuel burning device or not more than two gas log fireplaces.
   (B)   Employee housing units. Employee housing units shall contain not more
than one gas log fireplace.
   (C)   Accommodation units. Accommodation units shall not contain certified
solid fuel burning devices and not more than one gas fireplace. All gas
fireplaces located in accommodation units shall be constructed in such a manner
that access to the firebox is prohibited except for the purposes of repair and
maintenance. A sign shall be placed on each fireplace unit reading: “Caution -
Gas Fireplace Only”. All gas log fireplaces and gas appliances in accommodation
units shall be equipped with a timing device or a thermostat which shall cause
an automatic shutoff of the fire for safety and conservation purposes.
   (D)   Common area. Any common area shall contain not more than one certified
solid fuel burning device, or one gas log fireplace.
(Ord. 21(1991) § 1; Ord. 2(2007) § 2)
§ 5-3-5 NONCONFORMING DEVICES, FIREPLACES AND APPLIANCES.
   (A)   Preexisting devices.
      (1)   Nonconforming solid fuel burning devices, certified solid fuel
burning devices, wood burning fireplaces, gas appliances and gas log
fireplaces, lawfully constructed or installed prior to the effective date
hereof, may continue, subject to any limitations or restrictions contained in
this chapter.
      (2)   Any certified solid fuel burning devices, gas appliances and gas
log fireplaces lawfully designed and for which a completed Design Review Board
application was received by the Department of Community Development prior to
August 15, 1991, may be installed or constructed subject to any limitations or
restrictions contained in this chapter.
   (B)   Consolidated dwelling units to comply. If one or more separate
conforming or nonconforming dwelling units, employee housing units or
accommodation units are combined to form one larger dwelling, employee housing
unit or accommodation unit, the newly formed unit shall comply in all respects
with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Moved or altered fireplaces to comply. No existing wood burning
fireplace shall be moved or structurally altered, unless it is modified in such
a manner that it complies with all the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Restored units to comply. Whenever any dwelling unit, accommodation
unit, employee housing unit or common area is substantially demolished or
destroyed, whether by the intent of its owner or lessee, or by natural
disaster, if such dwelling unit, accommodation unit, employee housing unit or
common area is restored or reconstructed, it shall meet all the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 21(1991) § 1; Ord. 2(2007) § 2)
§ 5-3-6 COAL USAGE.
   The burning of coal within the town is prohibited.
(Ord. 21(1991) § 1)
§ 5-3-7 REFUSE BURNING.
   The burning of refuse in any solid fuel burning device is prohibited within
the town.
(Ord. 21(1991) § 1)
§ 5-3-8 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   A building permit shall be required for the installation of any certified
solid fuel burning device, gas appliance or gas log fireplace. However, to
encourage the conversion of wood burning fireplaces and noncertified solid fuel
burning devices to certified solid fuel burning devices, gas log fireplaces and
gas appliances, all applicable building permit fees for such conversion shall
be waived by the town.
(Ord. 21(1991) § 1)
§ 5-3-9 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter or to
fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person
performing any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful by this chapter or
failing to perform an act required by or otherwise made mandatory by this
chapter shall be punished as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code. Any such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for
each and every day during any portion of which a violation of any provision of
this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be
punished accordingly. In addition to penalties provided in this section, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be by this town similarly
abated as such, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as
a new and separate offense.
(Ord. 21(1991) § 1; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 4: SMOKING
Section
5-4-1 Definitions
5-4-2 Smoking prohibited
5-4-3 Smoking permitted
5-4-4 Discrimination or retaliation unlawful
5-4-5 Minors
5-4-6 Violation and penalty
§ 5-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. An electric or battery operated device, the use
of which resembles conventional smoking, which can be used to deliver
substances, including, without limitation, nicotine, tobacco or marijuana, to
the person using such device. ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE includes, without
limitation, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, pipe or hookah, but does
not include any product approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration as a
drug or medical device that is used in accordance with its purpose.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who is employed by any employer.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, partnership or corporation, including a municipal
corporation, who employs the services of any person.
   ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on
all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doors or passageways) which
extend from floor to ceiling, including all space therein screened by
partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid or similar
structures.
   ENTRYWAY. The front or main doorway leading into a building.
   MINOR. A person under 21 years of age.
   NICOTINE PRODUCT. An electronic device or any component thereof that can be
used to deliver nicotine to the person inhaling from the device, including,
without limitation, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, hookah, pipe or
nicotine vaporizer; and nicotine or other chemical liquids, extracts, and oils
intended to be used therein.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed area under the control of a public or
private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of
employment.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed area in which the general public is permitted,
including, without limitation: convention halls, covered parking structures,
public or private educational facilities, childcare facilities, adult daycare
or medical or healthcare facilities, hospitals, gymnasiums, post offices,
guestrooms in commercial lodging establishments, laundromats, performance
halls, polling places, professional offices, public transportation facilities,
taxis, reception areas, restaurants, bars, retail food production and
marketing/grocery establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores,
indoor sports arenas, bowling alleys, billiard or pool halls, and theaters;
every room, chamber or place of meeting or public assembly; all areas of an
establishment that are open to, or customarily used by, the general public,
including, without limitation, elevators, restrooms, lobbies, reception areas,
hallways, waiting rooms and other common areas in apartment buildings,
condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes and other
multiple-unit residential or commercial lodging establishments; and any private
residence when in use as a childcare, adult daycare or healthcare facility.
   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail store utilized primarily for the sale of
tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is
merely incidental.
   SMOKING. The lighting of any cigarette, cigar, pipe, or the activation of an
electronic smoking device, or the possession of any lighted cigarette, cigar,
pipe or activated electronic smoking device, regardless of its composition.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. A product that contains tobacco or is derived from tobacco
and is intended to be ingested, inhaled, smoked, placed in oral or nasal
cavities, or applied to the skin of an individual, including, without
limitation, cigarettes, cigars, cigarillos, kreteks, bidis, hookah and pipes;
granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff
and snuff flour, snus, plug and twist, fine cut and other chewing or dipping
tobacco; shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and seepings of tobacco;
and any other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be
suitable for both chewing or for smoking in a cigarette, pipe or otherwise, or
both for chewing and smoking.
   WORK AREA. An area in a place of employment where one or more employees are
routinely assigned and perform services for or on behalf of their employer.
(Ord. 22(2016) § 1; Ord. 20(2020) § 1)
§ 5-4-2 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Public places. Smoking is prohibited in any public place.
   (B)   Entryways. Smoking is prohibited within 15 feet of any entryway.
   (C)   Outdoor eating areas. Smoking is prohibited within 15 feet of any
outdoor eating area.
   (D)   Outdoor recreation areas and bus stops. Smoking is prohibited at all
Town of Vail parks, open spaces, recreation areas, skate parks, soccer fields,
ball fields, and within 15 feet of all multiuse recreation paths, bus stops and
platforms.
   (E)   Posted areas. Smoking is prohibited in designated “no smoking” areas.
   (F)   Other areas. Smoking is prohibited in those areas where smoking is
prohibited by state law, Fire Code regulations or other regulations of the
town.
(Ord. 22(2016) § 1)
§ 5-4-3 SMOKING PERMITTED.
   (A)   Smoking is permitted in the following places:
      (1)   Private homes except if any such home or vehicle is being used for
childcare or daycare or if a private vehicle is being used for the public
transportation of children;
      (2)   Private automobiles;
      (3)   Limousines under private hire;
      (4)   Commercial lodging including, without limitation, hotel or motel
rooms rented to one or more guests and designated as smoking rooms; provided,
however, that not more than 25% of the rooms rented in a hotel or motel may be
so designated;
      (5)   Retail tobacco stores;
      (6)   A place of employment that is not open to the public and that is
under the control of an employer that employs three or fewer employees;
      (7)   Smoking by performers as part of a stage production at a theater;
and
      (8)   Areas of assisted living facilities that are designated for smoking
for residents; that are fully enclosed and ventilated and to which access is
restricted to the residents and their guests.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an owner,
operator, manager or other person who controls an establishment, facility or
grounds described in this section may declare the entire establishment,
facility or grounds smoke free.
   (C)   In the case of employers who own facilities otherwise exempted under
this section, each such employer shall provide a smoke free work area for each
employee requesting not to have to breathe environmental tobacco smoke. Every
employee shall have a right to work in an area free of environmental tobacco
smoke.
(Ord. 22(2016))
§ 5-4-4 DISCRIMINATION OR RETALIATION UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for an employer, proprietor or person in charge of a public
place or place of employment regulated under this chapter to discharge,
discriminate against or in any manner retaliate against any person who requests
the designation of “no smoking” areas or enforcement of “no smoking” areas.
(Ord. 22(2016) § 1)
§ 5-4-5 MINORS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a minor to possess, consume or use a tobacco
product or nicotine product in the town.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a minor to purchase, obtain or attempt to purchase
or obtain a tobacco product or nicotine product in the town by
misrepresentation of age or by any other method.
   (C)   It is unlawful for a person to knowingly furnish to a minor in the
town, by gift, sale or any other means, a tobacco product or nicotine product.
   (D)   It is a rebuttable presumption that the substance within a package or
container is a tobacco product or nicotine product if the package or container
has affixed to it a label which identifies the package or container as
containing a tobacco or nicotine product.
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section that
the person furnishing the tobacco product or nicotine product was presented
with and reasonably relied upon a document which identified the minor receiving
the tobacco product or nicotine product as being 21 years of age or older.
(Ord. 22(2016) § 1; Ord. 20(2020) § 2)
§ 5-4-6 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   The penalty for a violation of this chapter shall be as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 22(2016) § 1)
CHAPTER 5: SKIER SAFETY
Section
5-5-1 Purpose
5-5-2 Definition
5-5-3 Skier duties
5-5-4 Penalties
§ 5-5-1 PURPOSE.
   The Town Council declares that it is in the interest of the town to
establish reasonable safety standards for skiers using ski areas within the
town.
(Ord. 3(1990) § 1)
§ 5-5-2 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this chapter, SKIER shall mean any person on alpine
skis, telemark skis or snowboards.
(Ord. 3(1990) § 1)
§ 5-5-3 SKIER DUTIES.
   (A)   Skill assessment. Each skier solely has the responsibility for knowing
the range of such person’s own ability to negotiate any ski slope or trail and
to ski within the limits of such ability.
   (B)   Control; right-of-way; liability. Each skier has the duty to maintain
control of such speed and course at all times when skiing and to maintain a
proper lookout so as to be able to avoid other skiers and objects. However, the
primary duty shall be on the person skiing downhill to avoid collision with any
person or objects below him or her. It is presumed, unless shown to the
contrary by a preponderance of the evidence, that the responsibility for
collisions by skiers with any person, natural object or human-made structure
that is marked is solely that of the skier or skiers involved and not that of
the ski area operator.
   (C)   Obedience to signs. No skier shall ski on a ski slope or trail that
has been posted as “Closed”.
   (D)   Avoid obstacles. Each skier shall stay clear of snow-grooming
equipment, all vehicles, lift towers, signs and any other equipment on the ski
slopes and trails.
   (E)   Individual responsibility. Each skier has the duty to heed all posted
information and other warnings and to refrain from acting in a manner which may
cause or contribute to the injury of the skier or others. Each skier shall be
presumed to have seen and understood all information posted in accordance with
this chapter near base area lifts, on the passenger tramways and on such ski
slopes or trails as such person is skiing. Under conditions of decreased
visibility, the duty is on the skier to locate and ascertain the meaning of all
signs posted.
   (F)   Equipment provision. Each ski, snowboard or telemarking ski used by a
skier while skiing shall be equipped with a strap or other device capable of
stopping the ski or snowboard should the ski or snowboard become unattached
from the skier.
   (G)   Safety. Before beginning to ski from a stationary position or before
entering a ski slope or trail from the side, the skier shall have the duty of
avoiding moving skiers already on the ski slope or trail.
   (H)   Impaired ability. No person shall move uphill on any passenger tramway
or use any ski slope or trail while such person’s ability to do so is impaired
by the consumption of alcohol or by the use of any “controlled substance”, as
defined in C.R.S. §12-22-303(7), or other drug or while such person is under
the influence of alcohol or any “controlled substance”, as defined in C.R.S. §
12-22-303(7), or other drug.
   (I)   Report collision; provide information. No skier involved in a
collision with another skier or person in which an injury results shall leave
the vicinity of the collision before giving his or her name and current address
to an employee of the ski area operator except for the purpose of securing aid
for a person injured in the collision; in which event the person so leaving the
scene of the collision shall give his or her name and current address as
required by this subsection (I) after securing such aid.
   (J)   Trespass. No person shall knowingly enter upon public or private lands
from an adjoining ski area when such land has been closed by its owner and so
posted by the owner or by the ski area operator.
(Ord. 3(1990) § 1)
§ 5-5-4 PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §
5-5-3(B), (C), (E), (F), (G), (H), (I) or (J) of this chapter, is guilty of an
ordinance violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided
in §
1-4-1 of this code. Any person under the age of 18 who violates any of the
above listed provisions of this section is guilty of an ordinance violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 3(1990) § 1; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 6: FIRE LANES
Section
5-6-1 Definitions
5-6-2 Established
5-6-3 Map identification; changes
5-6-4 Parking prohibited
5-6-5 Vehicle impoundment
5-6-6 Violation; penalty
§ 5-6-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE LANE. Any public right-of-way, including streets, alleys, and other
thoroughfares, as well as privately owned land, not otherwise dedicated to
public use, which is officially designated by the Town Council, as provided in
this chapter, as a fire lane. The purpose of such fire lanes established in
this chapter is to provide access to structures in order to more effectively
combat fires or deal with other hazards which may occur in such structures. A
fire lane shall be 20 feet wide.
   FIRE LANE MAP. The official map maintained by the Town Clerk indicating the
exact locations of the fire lanes established by the Town Council, pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 8(1971) § 1; Ord. 8(1994) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 5-6-2 ESTABLISHED.
   There are created within the town “fire lanes”, as defined in §
5-6-1 of this chapter as shown and otherwise indicated in the official fire
lane map, which is referred to and incorporated in this section by reference.
The fire lane map is declared to be a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 8(1971) § 2)
§ 5-6-3 MAP IDENTIFICATION; CHANGES.
   (A)   Identification. The official fire lane map shall be maintained by the
Town Clerk and shall be located in the office of the town and shall be
identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the Town Clerk, and shall
bear the official seal of the town. The map shall also bear the certification
that it is the official fire lane map and shall refer to this chapter, which
establishes fire lanes as indicated on the fire lane map.
   (B)   Changes. From time to time after the adoption of this chapter, the
Town Council may alter or revise the official fire lane map by adding, deleting
or otherwise changing the fire lanes indicated on the fire lane map by
ordinance duly enacted in accordance with the laws of the state. At such times
as the Town Council adopts changes in the official fire lane map, the map shall
immediately be changed to reflect the additions, deletions or alterations
adopted by the Town Council so that the map shall at all times accurately
portray and reflect the status of fire lanes in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 8(1971) §§ 3, 4)
§ 5-6-4 PARKING PROHIBITED.
   Upon the establishment of fire lanes, in accordance with this chapter, signs
shall be posted in all such fire lanes bearing the words, “Fire Lane”. Parking
of any vehicle shall be prohibited in all fire lanes at all times, and
enforcement of this chapter shall be strictly administered by the Police
Department. No person shall stand or park any vehicle within a fire lane as
established by this chapter or in any way obstruct the fire lane. Enforcement
of this chapter shall be applied in order to implement provisions of the Fire
Code.
(Ord. 8(1971) § 5)
Cross-reference:
   Similar provisions, see §
10-1-1
§ 5-6-5 VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT.
   Any police officer of the town upon finding a vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, standing or being parked within a fire lane shall require such
vehicle to be removed or cause it to be removed and impounded, and the owner or
operator of the vehicle shall be liable for the cost of such removal and
impounding, in addition to any other penalties imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. 8(1971) § 6)
§ 5-6-6 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter.
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 8(1971) § 7; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 7: FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES
Section
5-7-1 Purpose
5-7-2 Services outside town boundaries; fees
5-7-3 Adjustment for inflation
5-7-4 Payment; delinquency constitutes a lien
5-7-5 Foreclosure on lien
§ 5-7-1 PURPOSE.
   The Town Council finds and determines that it would be of benefit to the
town as well as to the areas outside the Town of Vail boundary to continue
providing fire protection services to these areas under the conditions set
forth in this chapter, because provision of such services would protect
property located outside the town and would also help prevent the spread of any
fire into the town itself.
(Ord. 10(2016) § 1)
§ 5-7-2 SERVICES OUTSIDE TOWN BOUNDARIES; FEES.
   (A)   Response. The Town Fire Department may respond to requests for fire
protection services out of the town’s boundaries. Because the town operates the
dispatch for emergency and fire services for Eagle County, the Eagle County
Sheriff is not required to request that the town respond to fires outside the
town’s boundaries.
   (B)   Alternative fees. As an alternative to the fee schedule set forth in
subsection (C) of this section, the town may enter into contracts with property
owners, homeowners’ associations or tenants for the provision of fire
protection services outside the town’s boundaries. When such a service contract
is in place, the fees for fire protection services shall be as stated in such
service contract, and no additional fees or costs shall be charged for a
response to a request for fire protection services.
   (C)   Fees. The fees for provision of fire protection services outside town
boundaries without a service contract shall be as currently adopted by the Town
Council and shall be set forth on the schedule of fees maintained in the Fire
Department.
   (D)   Liability. If a property is not subject to a service contract for fire
protection services as described in subsection (B) of this section, and the
Town Fire Department responds to a request, the town may seek reimbursement
from the property owner(s) and/or any party benefitted by such fire protection
services, as determined by the Fire Chief in his or her sole discretion, for
the actual costs incurred by the town in the provision of such fire protection
services. The party benefitting from the fire protection services and the
property owner(s) shall be jointly and severally liable for such costs. Any
such costs, if unpaid, may be certified to the Eagle County Treasurer as a
first and prior lien on any associated real property.
(Ord. 10(2016) § 2)
§ 5-7-3 ADJUSTMENT FOR INFLATION.
   The fees and rates set forth in §
5-7-2(C) of this chapter shall be automatically increased each year by the
percentage the consumer price index has increased over the preceding year.
(Ord. 3(1991) § 3)
§ 5-7-4 PAYMENT; DELINQUENCY CONSTITUTES A LIEN.
   Any fee which is to be paid pursuant to this chapter for the provision of
fire protection services or any consideration which is to be paid pursuant to
any contract for fire protection services, if not paid within 30 days of
billing, and all costs of collection of such fee or consideration shall
constitute a lien on the real property for which said fire protection services
are provided. Such liens shall continue until the amount thereof is paid or
until its discharge of record by foreclosure or otherwise.
(Ord. 19(1985) § 3)
§ 5-7-5 FORECLOSURE ON LIEN.
   If any fee due hereunder is not paid within the 30-day time period as set
forth in §
5-7-4 of this chapter, then the town may record upon the land records of Eagle
County, Colorado, a written notice of lien, which lien may be foreclosed as a
mortgage is foreclosed in the courts of the State of Colorado.
(Ord. 19(1985) § 4)
CHAPTER 8: OPEN BURNING
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was repealed by Ord. 19(2017) § 1
CHAPTER 9: WILDLIFE PROTECTION
Section
5-9-1 Purpose
5-9-2 Definitions
5-9-3 Residential refuse disposal
5-9-4 Maintenance and operation of all refuse containers and enclosures
5-9-5 Special event refuse disposal
5-9-6 Construction site refuse disposal
5-9-7 Commercial refuse disposal
5-9-8 Compactors
5-9-9 Feeding of wildlife prohibited
5-9-10 Enforcement
5-9-11 Penalty assessment
5-9-12 Violator’s responsibility
5-9-13 Compliance required and time period
§ 5-9-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect and maintain wildlife in the Town
of Vail and surrounding areas and to minimize the risk of dangerous interaction
between humans and wildlife.
(Ord. 20(2006))
§ 5-9-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   ATTRACTANT. Any substance which could reasonably be expected to attract
wildlife or does attract wildlife, including, but not limited to, food
products, pet food, feed, compost, grain or salt.
   REFUSE. Any waste that could reasonably attract wildlife which includes, but
shall not be limited to, kitchen organic waste, food, food packaging,
toothpaste, deodorant, cosmetics, spices, seasonings and grease.
   REFUSE CONTAINER. Any trash can, dumpster or similar device used for the
collection and storage of solid waste.
   RESIDENT. Any person, firm, corporation or organization within the Town of
Vail or on town controlled land.
   SPECIAL EVENT. An outdoor gathering such as a concert, conference or
festival.
   WILDLIFE. Any undomesticated animal, including, but not limited to, elk,
deer, sheep, lynx, skunks, magpies, crows, bears, raccoons, coyotes, beavers,
porcupines, mountain lions, bobcats and foxes.
   WILDLIFE PROOF REFUSE CONTAINER. A fully enclosed metal container with a
metal lid. The lid must have a latching mechanism, which prevents access to the
contents by wildlife. WILDLIFE PROOF REFUSE CONTAINER must be certified as such
by the Living with Wildlife Foundation, Interagency Grizzly Bear Committee
(Fish and Wildlife Service, Forest Service, Park Service and Bureau of Land
Management). A container not so certified, is considered a wildlife proof
refuse container if it is certified as such by a Town of Vail designated
official.
   WILDLIFE RESISTANT ENCLOSURE. A fully enclosed structure consisting of four
sides and a secure door or cover, which shall have a latching device of
sufficient strength and design to prevent access by wildlife. WILDLIFE
RESISTANT ENCLOSURES are subject to all planning and zoning requirements and
Building Codes. An enclosure of less than 120 square feet shall not require a
building permit. An enclosure of 120 square feet or larger requires a building
permit. The walls of the enclosure must extend to the ground and the door can
have no more than a three-eighths inch gap along the bottom. The latching
device must be of sufficient strength and design to prevent access by wildlife.
Ventilation openings shall be kept to a minimum and must be covered with a
metal mesh or other material of sufficient strength to prevent access by
wildlife. Wildlife resistant enclosures must be approved by a Town of Vail
designated official.
   WILDLIFE RESISTANT REFUSE CONTAINER. A fully enclosed plastic container, of
sturdy construction, with a sturdy plastic lid which must have a latching
mechanism which prevents access to the contents by wildlife. WILDLIFE RESISTANT
REFUSE CONTAINERS must be certified as such by the Living with Wildlife
Foundation, Interagency Grizzly Bear Committee (Fish and Wildlife Service,
Forest Service, Park Service and Bureau of Land Management). A container not so
certified, is considered a wildlife resistant refuse container if it is
certified as such by a Town of Vail designated official.
(Ord. 20(2006))
§ 5-9-3 RESIDENTIAL REFUSE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   All residential refuse containers which receive “refuse” or
attractants as defined by this chapter must be either wildlife resistant refuse
containers or wildlife proof refuse containers, or be securely stored within a
house, garage or wildlife resistant enclosure at all times.
   (B)   Residents with curbside pick up shall place only wildlife resistant
refuse containers or wildlife proof refuse containers, at the curb, alley or
public right-of-way at or after 6:00 a.m. on the morning of scheduled pick up.
After pick up, all containers must be removed from the curb, alley or public
right-of - way by 7:00 p.m. on the same day.
   (C)   Other household waste that cannot reasonably be considered “refuse” or
an attractant as defined in this chapter, including, but not limited to,
nonedible yard maintenance waste, household items, and cardboard, shall not
require the use of wildlife resistant or wildlife proof containers when not
commingled with refuse or any other attractant.
   (D)   Multi-family housing developments and other types of clustered
residential housing, utilizing centralized refuse containers, must use either a
wildlife proof refuse container or a wildlife resistant enclosure for all
refuse. The container or enclosure shall be kept closed in secure manner except
when refuse is being deposited.
(Ord. 20(2006))
§ 5-9-4 MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION OF ALL REFUSE CONTAINERS AND ENCLOSURES.
   (A)   All refuse containers defined in this chapter shall be kept closed and
secured when refuse is not being deposited. Any container which is overfilled
so as to prevent a container’s designed latching is not a wildlife resistant or
wildlife proof refuse container within the meaning of this chapter.
   (B)   If a container or enclosure is damaged, allowing access by wildlife,
repairs must be made within 24 hours after written notification by Town of Vail
police or Code Enforcement Officers.
   (C)   All refuse containers that are placed at the curb, alley or public
right-of-way for collection must have the residence street address and unit
number permanently affixed to the container with digits no smaller than two
inches in height.
(Ord. 20(2006))
§ 5-9-5 SPECIAL EVENT REFUSE DISPOSAL.
   Outdoor special event sites shall be kept free from the accumulation of
refuse. Refuse must be collected from the grounds at the close of each day’s
activities and shall be deposited into appropriate wildlife resistant, wildlife
proof containers or wildlife resistant enclosures as provided in this chapter,
or shall be removed to an appropriate disposal site.
(Ord. 20(2006))
§ 5-9-6 CONSTRUCTION SITE REFUSE DISPOSAL.
   All construction sites must have a designated refuse container which
receives “refuse” or attractants as defined by this chapter. This container
shall be a wildlife proof refuse container.
(Ord. 20(2006))
§ 5-9-7 COMMERCIAL REFUSE DISPOSAL.
   All refuse containers receiving refuse from commercial establishments and
restaurants shall be in wildlife proof containers, or shall be secured in a
wildlife resistant enclosure. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this requirement
shall not apply to municipal refuse containers which are emptied at the end of
each day, or multiple times per day.
(Ord. 20(2006))
§ 5-9-8 COMPACTORS.
   Trash compactors are compliant with this chapter when no refuse is exposed.
Compactor doors must be kept closed at all times, except when loading or
removing refuse and the area around the compactor must be kept clean of refuse
and debris.
(Ord. 20(2006))
§ 5-9-9 FEEDING OF WILDLIFE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Intentional or unintentional. No person shall intentionally or
unintentionally feed or provide food in any manner for wildlife on public or
private property within the Town of Vail. A person will be considered to be in
violation of this chapter if they leave or store any garbage, refuse or
attractant in a manner which would create or does create a lure or enticement
for wildlife.
   (B)   Bird feeders. Bird feeders are allowed. However between the dates of
April 15 and November 15, all bird feeders must be suspended on a cable or
other device so that they are inaccessible to bears and the area below the
feeders must be kept free from the accumulation of seed debris.
(Ord. 20(2006))
§ 5-9-10 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Town of Vail police and Code Enforcement Officers shall have the power
to issue a warning notice or a summons and complaint to any person in violation
of this chapter.
   (B)   Town of Vail police or Code Enforcement Officers shall have the right
to inspect, during reasonable hours, any property in the town concerning any
wildlife concern or potential wildlife attractant.
(Ord. 20(2006))
§ 5-9-11 PENALTY ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Violation of any provision of this chapter by any person shall be
unlawful and subject to the general penalty provision, §
1-4-1 this code. Either the owner or occupant of a residence or commercial
establishment may be held responsible for a violation of any provision of this
chapter.
   (B)   A resident shall be deemed to have been issued an appropriate notice
of violation if it is personally served upon the resident, placed in the U.S.
mail, postage prepaid and addressed to the resident according to the last known
address given by the resident to any Town of Vail or Eagle County government
department. If the identity of the resident is not known, the entity
responsible for payment of the garbage removal services for the subject
location will be held responsible for complying with this chapter and for any
penalties assessed pursuant to the same.
(Ord. 20(2006))
§ 5-9-12 VIOLATOR’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   In addition to the penalties outlined in this chapter, violators may be
required to perform all necessary actions to remove or abate attractants of
wildlife. This may include, but shall not be limited to, the removal of bird
feeders or pet food, cleaning or appropriate storage of barbecue grills,
additional storage requirements for refuse containers and/or the required use
of wildlife proof containers and/or wildlife resistant enclosures.
(Ord. 20(2006))
§ 5-9-13 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED AND TIME PERIOD.
   Any container required by this chapter shall be brought into conformity with
the provision of this chapter by April 15, 2007. Any enclosure required by this
chapter shall be brought into conformity with the provision of this chapter by
August 1, 2007. Upon application to the Town Manager, and showing of hardship
by an owner of an enclosure or container required hereunder, the Town Manager
may grant an extension, for a reasonable period of time, with which to comply
with the provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 20(2006))
CHAPTER 10: FIREWORKS
Section
5-10-1 Definitions
5-10-2 Prohibited acts
5-10-3 Permits for display
5-10-4 Insurance and bonding
5-10-5 Seizure of fireworks
5-10-6 Fire hazard declaration
5-10-7 Penalty
§ 5-10-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings.
   FIREWORKS.
      (1)   Any combustible or explosive composition, article, device,
substance or combination of substances, prepared for the primary purpose of
producing a visual or auditory sensation by combustion, explosion, deflagration
or detonation, including, without limitation, the following articles and
devices commonly known and used as fireworks: toy cannons or toy canes in which
explosives are used to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets,
rockets, Roman candles, daygo bombs, torches, bottle rockets or other devices
of like construction and any devices containing any explosive or flammable
compound, or any tablets or device containing any explosive substances.
      (2)   FIREWORKS shall not include toy caps which do not contain more than
twenty-five hundredths of a gram of explosive compound per cap, sparklers, toy
smoke devices, trick matches, cigarette loads, trick noise makers, novelty auto
alarms, highway flares, railway fuses, ship distress signals, smoke candles and
other emergency signal devices.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person who manufactures, makes, constructs or produces any
fireworks article or device.
   PYROTECHNIC SPECIAL EFFECTS MATERIAL. A low explosive material, other than
detonating cord, commonly used in motion picture, television, theatrical or
group entertainment productions.
   RETAILER. Any person who sells, delivers, consigns or furnishes fireworks to
another person not for resale.
   WHOLESALER. Any person who sells, delivers, consigns, gives or in any way
furnishes fireworks to a retailer for resale.
(Ord. 16(2007) § 1)
§ 5-10-2 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the Town of Vail to sell, offer
for sale, or possess with intent to offer for sale, or to use or explode any
fireworks or pyrotechnic special effects material, except as provided in §
5-10-3 of this chapter. It shall also be unlawful for any person to violate a
fire hazard emergency declaration as set forth in §
5-10-6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 16(2007) § 1)
§ 5-10-3 PERMITS FOR DISPLAY.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall have the power to grant permits for supervised
public fireworks displays and pyrotechnic special effects material, and to
adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of such permits. Any
organization or public entity may apply for a permit for supervised public
displays of fireworks and pyrotechnic special effects material. Application for
a permit shall be made in writing at least 15 days in advance of the date of
display. Before a permit is granted, the operator and the location and handling
of the display shall be approved, after investigation by the Fire Chief or his
or her designee and a determination has been made that the requested display is
of such character and so located, discharged and fired as not to be hazardous
to property or endanger any person.
   (B)   The permit shall be granted only if the Fire Chief finds that the
permit application, operator and conditions meet the requirements of the fire
code as adopted by the town in Title 10, Chapter 1 of this code, and other
reasonable requirements the Fire Chief deems necessary to protect the public
welfare.
   (C)   A permit shall not be transferred or assigned.
   (D)   If the operations of a permittee require additional town personnel to
be assigned to the permitted event in order to protect the public welfare, the
permittee shall pay in advance all labor and equipment costs associated with
the assignment of such additional personnel.
(Ord. 16(2007) § 1)
§ 5-10-4 INSURANCE AND BONDING.
   (A)   No permit for a display of fireworks shall be issued pursuant to §
5-10-3 of this chapter until the applicant furnishes the town with a
certificate of insurance, naming the town as an additional insured for purposes
of the display, demonstrating the applicant’s insurance coverage for liability
for physical injury and property damage in an amount determined by the town.
   (B)   A bond may be required of each permittee in a sum not less than
$1,000, conditioned for the payment of all damages which may be caused either
to persons or property by reason of the licensed display and arising from the
acts of the permittee, his or her agents, employees or subcontractors.
(Ord. 16(2007) § 1)
§ 5-10-5 SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS.
   Any police officer of the town, or the Fire Chief or his or her designee,
shall seize, take and remove, at the expense of the violator, all stocks of
fireworks or combustibles offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 16(2007) § 1)
§ 5-10-6 FIRE HAZARD DECLARATION.
   During conditions of extreme fire danger, the Town Manager and/or Fire Chief
shall have the authority to declare a fire hazard emergency. The authority
granted herein shall be in the discretion of the Town Manager and the Fire
Chief and shall include the ability to prohibit the sale, possession and use of
any article, device or substance defined as “permissible fireworks” by the
Colorado Revised Statutes as well as those items not included in the definition
of “fireworks” pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 16(2007) § 1)
§ 5-10-7 PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this chapter.
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a criminal offense,
punishable by imprisonment or fine, or both, as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code and may also be subject to civil remedies provided by
Colorado law. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such
person is in violation of this chapter and for each separate incident within a
day. The court shall consider the issue of restitution to any victim suffering
personal injury or property damage through the illegal use of fireworks.
(Ord. 16(2007) § 1)
CHAPTER 11: REDUCTION OF WILDFIRE RISKS
Section
5-11-1 Purpose
5-11-2 Applicability
5-11-3 Definitions
5-11-4 Diseased trees and wildfire fuels
5-11-5 Permit for removal
5-11-6 Inspection
5-11-7 Emergencies
5-11-8 Notice of violation
5-11-9 Abatement order
5-11-10 Costs
5-11-11 Violation and penalty
5-11-12 Design review exemption
§ 5-11-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to reduce the risk of wildfires in the Town
by requiring the removal of wildfire fuels and diseased trees from properties
in the Town and requiring the creation of non-combustible zones around
structures in the Town.
(Ord. 19(2022) § 1)
§ 5-11-2 APPLICABILITY.
   This Chapter shall apply to all property in the Town.
(Ord. 19(2022) § 1)
§ 5-11-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   CHIEF: The Town's Fire Chief or designee.
   DISEASED TREE: A tree, alive or dead, which is or has been infested or
infected with any insect or disease identified in the most recent version of
the "Field Guide To Diseases And Insects Of The Rocky Mountain Region".
   LADDER FUELS: Vegetation, live or dead, that allows a fire to climb up from
the landscape or forest floor into the tree canopy, including without
limitation tall grasses, shrubs, and tree branches.
   WILDFIRE FUELS: Vegetation such as trees, shrubs, forbs or grasses and other
materials such as firewood, construction material or debris surrounding a
structure, which represent a threat to life or property during a fire as
determined by the Chief.
(Ord. 19(2022) § 1)
§ 5-11-4 DISEASED TREES AND WILDFIRE FUELS.
   It is unlawful for an owner to maintain on any property in the Town diseased
trees or wildfire fuels which represent an imminent threat.
(Ord. 19(2022) § 1)
§ 5-11-5 PERMIT FOR REMOVAL.
   (A)   An owner desiring to remove any diseased trees from any property in
the Town shall file an application for a permit with the Community Development
Department. There shall be no application fee for the permit.
   (B)   The application shall contain a written narrative describing the type,
size, quantity and general location of the diseased trees proposed to be
removed.
   (C)   The Chief may perform a site visit prior to the Town taking any action
on the permit application.
   (D)   To protect nesting birds, no tree removal shall be required between
May 15 and August 1st unless the tree poses an imminent threat to public
safety.
(Ord. 19(2022) § 1)
§ 5-11-6 INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Chief may enter a property for the purpose of inspection for
compliance with this Chapter, with permission from the owner, when at least one
of the following events has occurred:
      (1)   The owner has requested the inspection;
      (2)   A neighboring landowner has reported a diseased tree or wildfire
fuels and requested an inspection; or
      (3)   The Chief has made a visual observation from a public right of way
or adjacent property and has reason to believe that diseased trees or wildfire
fuels exist on the property.
   (B)   If the owner does not grant permission to inspect the property, the
Chief may seek an inspection warrant from the Municipal Court.
(Ord. 19(2022) § 1)
§ 5-11-7 EMERGENCIES.
   In the case of an emergency involving imminent danger to the public health,
safety or welfare, the Chief may enter upon any property to conduct an
emergency inspection or abatement without permission from the owner or a
warrant.
(Ord. 19(2022) § 1)
§ 5-11-8 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   If the Chief determines that a property is in violation of this
Chapter, the Chief shall provide a written notice to the owner. The notice
shall be sent by first-class United States mail to the owner at the owner's
last known address, or personally served.
   (B)   The notice shall:
      (1)   Advise the owner of the violation of this Chapter;
      (2)   Describe approved methods for abatement of the violation; and
      (3)   Require that the abatement be completed within the timeframe stated
in the notice, which shall be no less than thirty (30) days of the date of the
notice, or that an acceptable plan and schedule for abatement be submitted to
the Chief within such time.
   (C)   If the owner fails to dispute the notice, and fails to timely abate
the violation, the Town may seek an abatement order pursuant to this Chapter.
   (D)   If the owner disputes the notice, the owner shall notify the Chief
within seven (7) days of the date of the notice. If a timely notice of dispute
is given, the Chief shall meet with the owner in an effort to resolve the
dispute. If the Chief meets with the owner and is unable to resolve the
dispute, the Town may seek an abatement order pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 19(2022) § 1)
§ 5-11-9 ABATEMENT ORDER.
   (A)   An application for an abatement order shall be accompanied by an
affidavit, signed by the Chief, stating that:
      (1)   The Chief has determined that the property is in violation of this
Chapter;
      (2)   The Chief has complied with the notice requirements of this
Chapter; and
      (3)   Within the required time, the owner has failed to remedy the
violation or has failed to submit an acceptable plan and schedule for such
abatement; and
      (4)   The Municipal Court will consider the application for an abatement
order at the date and time set forth in the notice, which date shall be at
least fourteen (14) days after the notice.
   (B)   The Town shall provide notice to the owner of the application, either
by first class United States Mail to the owner's last known address, or by
personal service. The notice shall include a copy of the Town's application and
affidavit.
   (C)   At the stated time, date and place, the Municipal Court shall review
the Town's application, as well as any statement or evidence presented by the
owner. If the Municipal Court finds that the property is in violation of this
Chapter, the Municipal Court may enter an order authorizing the Town to enter
upon the property, remove the violation and recover its costs.
(Ord. 19(2022) § 1)
§ 5-11-10 COSTS.
   If the Town abates a violation of this Chapter, the owner shall be assessed
the Town's actual costs, plus a 10% administrative fee.
(Ord. 19(2022) § 1)
§ 5-11-11 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful to violate any provision of this Chapter.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Chapter shall
be punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code; provided that each separate act in violation of this
Chapter, and each and every day or portion thereof during which any act in
violation of this Chapter is committed, continued, or permitted, shall be
deemed a separate offense. This penalty shall cumulative, and any penalty under
Section
1-4-1 shall be in addition to any assessment of costs under this Chapter or
other available remedies.
(Ord. 19(2022) § 1)
§ 5-11-12 DESIGN REVIEW EXEMPTION.
   (A)   The abatement, mitigation, or removal of wildfire fuels in accordance
with this Chapter shall be exempt from the design review process in Title 12
off this Code.
   (B)   For any property owned in common or located within a development lot,
no part of this Chapter shall be interpreted as to require the consent, action,
or approval of more than one property owner for any abatement, mitigation, or
removal of wildfire fuels located anywhere on such property.
(Ord. 19(2022) § 1)
CHAPTER 12: RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS
Section
5-12-1 Purpose
5-12-2 Applicability
5-12-3 Definitions
5-12-4 Hauler registration requirement
5-12-5 Municipal solid waste hauler requirements
5-12-6 Designated recyclables list
5-12-7 Recycling requirements
5-12-8 Violations and enforcement
§ 5-12-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish policy and infrastructure to
support recycling by all residential, multi-family and commercial customers and
haulers in the Town of Vail in order to reduce the town’s impact on the
environment by decreasing waste deposited in the landfill, energy consumed and
carbon emissions, and ensure ongoing waste diversion education in the
community.
(Ord. 6(2014) § 1)
§ 5-12-2 APPLICABILITY.
   All residential, multi-family and commercial customers that contract for
solid waste and/or recycling services shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 6(2014) § 1)
§ 5-12-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   BASE UNIT OF REFUSE. The smallest increment of volume of refuse or solid
waste collection which is no larger than 32 gallons of capacity.
   COMMERCIAL CUSTOMER. Any commercial, industrial or institutional business or
enterprise including, without limitation, retail shops and establishments,
eating or drinking establishments, healthcare facilities, child daycare
centers, public and private schools, professional and business offices,
religious institutions, and public buildings and facilities.
   DISCARDED MATERIALS. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste
discarded from any residential, multi-family or commercial source including
recyclable material. The term DISCARDED MATERIALS shall exclude discarded or
abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, sewage sludge, hazardous waste, materials
used for fertilizer and recyclable material that have been source separated for
collection.
   HAULER. A registered person or company in the business of collecting,
transporting or disposing of discarded materials for a fee, or for no fee
except as described in §
5-12-4(B) of this chapter.
   MULTI-FAMILY CUSTOMER. Any residential property that employs a communal
system for solid waste and/or recyclable materials collection.
   NONATTRACTANT. Any substance which does not attract wildlife. Substances
that are considered to attract wildlife include food products, pet food, feed,
compost, grain or salt or materials which formerly contained such items. Office
paper or cardboard that did not previously contain food are considered
NONATTRACTANTS.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Materials from any commercial, multi-family or
residential source to be collected separately for the purpose of such materials
being repurposed or reprocessed into new or different materials.
   RECYCLING. The process of separating recyclable materials from refuse and
placement for collection by a hauler for the purpose of such materials being
reused or reprocessed into new or different materials.
   RECYCLING FACILITY. A licensed materials recovery facility (MRF) (e.g., the
Eagle County MRF) that accepts and sorts, packages and otherwise prepares
recyclable materials to be repurposed or reprocessed into new or different
materials.
   REFUSE. As defined in §
5-9-2 of this title. REFUSE shall not include recyclable material.
   RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER. Any residential property that does not employ a
dumpster or communal service for solid waste and or recyclable materials
collection.
   SOLID WASTE. All putrescible (i.e., containing organic matter) and
nonputrescible waste or refuse, excluding discarded or abandoned vehicles or
parts thereof, sewage sludge, hazardous waste, materials used for fertilizer
and recyclable material that have been source separated for collection.
   SOURCE SEPARATION. The process by which recyclable materials are separated
at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid waste for the
purposes of recycling.
(Ord. 6(2014) § 1)
§ 5-12-4 HAULER REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or company to operate or conduct
business as a hauler of residential, multi-family or commercial solid waste or
recyclable material without first obtaining a municipal solid waste hauler
registration as set forth in this section.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to any hauler of solid waste or
recyclable material operating in the Town of Vail.
   (B)   Exceptions. The following persons or entities are not required to
obtain a municipal solid waste hauler registration:
      (1)   Any person or his or her designee who transports to the landfill
only the refuse that person generates;
      (2)   A civic, community, benevolent or charitable nonprofit organization
collecting, transporting and marketing recyclables solely for the purpose of
raising funds for a civic, community, benevolent or charitable event;
      (3)   A property owner or agent thereof who transports discarded
materials left by a tenant upon such owner’s property, so long as such property
owner is not provided compensation for the waste hauling services from tenants
on a regular basis;
      (4)   Demolition or construction contractors or landscaping companies
that produce and transport discarded material produced incidentally to the
demolition, construction or landscaping work;
      (5)   Any person who transports only liquid waste (e.g., restaurant
grease or portable toilet waste);
      (6)   The Town of Vail municipal organization and employees thereof, who
transport solid waste, recyclable materials and compostable materials generated
by the municipal organization, public containers or special events;
      (7)   Special event producers, who transport solid waste and recyclable
materials for permitted events;
      (8)   Companies that provide special event collection services (e.g.,
electronic waste collection, on site paper shredding); and
      (9)   Companies contracted by registered solid waste haulers.
   (C)   Registration process.
      (1)   Generally. The Town of Vail Community Development Department shall
set forth the standards for the implementation of the municipal solid waste
hauler registration process including the amount of the registration fees, the
designation of recyclable materials, and the schedule for collecting
registration fees.
      (2)   Proof of insurance. Upon request, registered haulers shall provide
proof of general comprehensive liability/automobile insurance protecting the
hauler from all claims for damage to property or for bodily injury, including
death, which may arise from operations under or in connection with this
registration and providing limits of coverage of not less than $500,000 for
bodily injury and property damage per occurrence or in aggregate.
(Ord. 6(2014) § 1)
§ 5-12-5 MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE HAULER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Biannual reporting required. All registered haulers (the “registrant”)
shall submit twice yearly reports to the Community Development Department on
the weight (in tons) of solid waste and recyclable materials collected within
the Vail town limits. For loads that contain solid waste or recyclable
materials originating in part from within the town limits and in part from
outside the town limits the reported quantity may be estimated by the
registered hauler but shall use a format approved by the Community Development
Department which shall include the use of both the scale tickets and customer
route sheets, and reported as an estimate.
   (B)   Submittal required. Biannual reports shall be submitted on May 1 and
October 1, or on the next business day, using a format approved by the
Community Development Department. All reports shall be treated as confidential
commercial documents under the provisions of the Colorado Open Records Act.
   (C)   Recyclable material designation. Haulers may not dispose of recyclable
materials set out by customers by any means other than delivering it to an MRF
that sorts, packages and otherwise prepares recyclable materials to be
repurposed or reprocessed into new materials, except for materials that
customers have not properly prepared for recycling and as a result are
contaminated 25% or more with nonrecyclable refuse.
   (D)   Notice. Haulers of residential, multi-family or commercial solid waste
shall give each of its customers written notice of all available service
options and corresponding variable rate ranges upon commencement of service.
Written notice of the full range of services including variable rate service,
container sizes, and the recycling service options including the materials that
must be recycled shall be provided to all new customers upon commencing service
and all haulers shall provide notice at least annually to customers on the full
range of services, container sizes, variable rate ranges for each level of
service and recycling options including the materials that may be recycled. On
or before January 31 of each year the hauler shall deliver to the Community
Development Department a true and correct copy of the notices sent to each
customer type.
   (E)   Residential embedded rates. On residential customer waste bills,
haulers shall combine charges for solid waste and recyclable material
collection service and shall not itemize them separately.
   (F)   Residential volume based rates.
      (1)   Generally. Haulers shall offer each of its customers the option to
subscribe to different levels of service with different capacities of solid
waste containers, such as 32-, 64- and 96-gallon containers/carts, and shall
charge their customers based on this volume of service. For residential source
customers, the base unit of solid waste service shall be no larger than the
approximate capacity equivalent of a 32 gallon container or cart. If a customer
does not select a level of service, the provider shall establish a default
minimum level of service that is not larger than two units of service or a
single 64-gallon container or cart.
      (2)   Variable rates. Haulers shall charge variable rates for the
corresponding level of service or units of solid waste collection for
residential customers.
         (a)   Haulers shall structure the increments of their variable rate at
a multiple of the base unit of solid waste collection which is no larger than
32 gallons. The second largest increment of solid waste collection shall be no
larger than two times the capacity of the base unit or no larger than 64
gallons, and the third largest increment of solid waste collection shall be no
larger than two times the capacity of the second largest increment of solid
waste collection. Such rate increments shall be equal to 80% or more of the
charges for the base unit of collection (e.g., if $10 is applied to a 32-gallon
container, a minimum of $18.00 shall be applied to a 64-gallon container, and a
minimum of $32.40 shall be applied to a 96-gallon container).
         (b)   The provisions of this subsection (F) shall not be construed to
prohibit any hauler from establishing rules and regulations regarding the safe
maximum weight of containers of solid waste and recyclable material containers.
         (c)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any
hauler from providing separate pricing for special collection of bulky items,
yard waste, contaminated recyclables, unscheduled pick up or extra volumes of
solid waste or recyclable material, or more than what was subscribed for with
the hauler.
   (G)   Commercial embedded rates. On commercial customer account bills, every
hauler shall combine charges for solid waste and recyclable material collection
service and shall not itemize them separately. Haulers shall provide sufficient
recyclable material capacity and frequency service to prevent an overflow of
material.
   (H)   Auditing. A representative of the Town of Vail may audit a registered
hauler’s subscription, billing and other relevant records to determine whether
or not the provider has complied with the provisions of §
5-12-4 of this chapter at the provider’s office located nearest to the Town of
Vail during hours that the office is open for business, on at least five days’
written notice.
   (I)   Frequency of residential recycling service. Haulers shall offer each
of their residential customers’ curbside recyclables collection service at the
same frequency of all other refuse collection, no smaller than 64 gallons
capacity of the designated recyclable materials. All containers are subject to
the provisions of Chapter 9 of this title, wherein all attractants shall be
stored in wildlife resistant, locked containers. Nonattractants are not
required to be stored in wildlife resistant, locked containers provided they
are not mixed with attractants.
   (J)   Containers and labeling. Recycling containers shall be clearly
distinguishable from solid waste containers. Haulers shall provide labels or
label all solid waste and recycling containers indicating which materials are
accepted in each container. The labels shall include pictures and words of the
acceptable materials and be in both English and Spanish.
(Ord. 6(2014) § 1)
§ 5-12-6 DESIGNATED RECYCLABLES LIST.
   (A)   Designated recyclables (collection). The recyclable materials that
haulers are required to pick up shall be set forth in the town’s recyclable
materials list which shall be prepared and may be amended as conditions change.
The recyclable materials list shall be available for review on the town’s
website.
   (B)   Designated recyclables (generators), The recyclable materials that
generators are required to source separate from their solid waste shall be set
forth in the town’s recyclable material list which shall be prepared and
amended as conditions change. The recyclable materials list shall be available
for review on the town’s website.
(Ord. 6(2014) § 1)
§ 5-12-7 RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Placement of recyclable materials and solid waste for pick up.
      (1)   All recyclable materials accumulated on any premises shall be
placed in a container or containers separate from solid waste.
      (2)   Recyclable materials shall not be placed in solid waste containers.
      (3)   No refuse, solid waste or compost shall be placed in any recycling
container.
      (4)   Nothing in this section is intended to prevent any person from
donating or selling recyclable materials generated on his or her premises.
   (B)   Requirement for recycling service.
      (1)   All recyclable material shall be source separated, stored and
presented for collection by a registered municipal solid waste hauler.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant of any premises to
ensure that containers designated for collection or disposal of solid waste do
not contain recyclable materials when such containers are offered for solid
waste collection.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant of any premises to
ensure that they contract for recycling service or otherwise provide service
for the delivery of recycling material to an MRF. The service shall be of an
adequate level to prevent the designated recyclable material containers from
overflowing on a regular basis.
      (4)   All recycling container(s) shall be wildlife resistant, and handled
in accordance with Chapter 9 of this title, employing a latching mechanism on
the access door sufficient to defeat attempts by wildlife to enter. This
provision does not apply to recycling containers greater than 20 cubic yards of
capacity.
      (5)   Any owner or occupant of a commercial establishment with solid
waste disposal containers available for customers or guests shall make
available a container for recyclable materials that is of similar size and
located in an equally convenient location.
(Ord. 6(2014) § 1)
§ 5-12-8 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Violation of provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fines, penalty
assessments or penalties according to §
1-4-1 of this code, in the same manner as violations for depositing, throwing
or leaving any refuse on any public or private property or on any water or
watercourse (§
5-2-8 of this title).
   (A)   Violations (hauler). It shall be unlawful for haulers to:
      (1)   Fail or refuse to follow the requirements for registration of this
chapter; or
      (2)   Aid or abet another in any attempt to evade any requirements
imposed by this chapter.
   (B)   Violations (generator). It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant
of any residential, multi-family or commercial premises to:
      (1)   Fail or refuse to follow the requirements imposed by this chapter;
or
      (2)   Aid or abet another in any attempt to evade any requirements
imposed by this chapter.
   (C)   Enforcement. Town of Vail police and Code Enforcement Officers shall
have the authority to issue a warning notice, a penalty assessment or a summons
and complaint to any person in violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Penalty assessment. A resident or owner/occupant of a commercial
establishment shall be deemed to have been issued an appropriate penalty
assessment notice if it is personally served upon the resident or owner/
occupant, placed in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid and addressed to the
resident or owner/occupant according to the last known address given by the
resident or owner/occupant to any Town of Vail or Eagle County government
department. If the identity of the resident is not known, the entity
responsible for contracting and/or payment of solid waste and/or recyclable
materials collection services for the subject location will be held responsible
for complying with this chapter and for any penalties assessed pursuant to the
same.
   (E)   Exemption. Unless otherwise exempted, all customers shall comply with
the provisions of this chapter. Upon application to the Town of Vail and
demonstration of an inability to comply with this chapter, the Planning and
Environmental Commission may grant an exemption for a period of time not to
exceed 24 months with which to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
Prior to granting an exemption to the provisions of this chapter, the Planning
and Environmental Commission shall find that the request is warranted for at
least one of the following reasons:
      (1)   Costs considerations including, but not limited to, unreasonable
hauling costs, or unreasonable renovation and/or unreasonable retrofitting
expense;
      (2)   Physical limitations including, but not limited to, size, shape or
dimensions of a site or structure or location of an existing structure thereon,
topographic or physical conditions on the site in the immediate vicinity;
      (3)   Operational considerations including, but not limited to, hours of
operation, staffing, proximity to recycling facilities, implementation
schedule; or
      (4)   Conflicts with adopted regulations including, but not limited to,
land use regulations, Building/Fire Code regulations.
(Ord. 6(2014) § 1)
CHAPTER 13: CARRYOUT BAGS
Section
5-13-1 Purpose
5-13-2 Definitions
5-13-3 Carryout bags
5-13-4 Carryout bag fee
5-13-5 Records
5-13-6 Polystyrene food containers
5-13-7 Violation and penalty
§ 5-13-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by encouraging the use of reusable carryout bags and discouraging the
use of disposable carryout bags.
(Ord. 23(2022) § 1)
§ 5-13-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   CARRYOUT BAG: A bag that is furnished to a customer at a store at the point
of sale for use by the customer to transport or carry purchased items, but
excluding: a bag made of paper when the paper has a basis weight of 30 pounds
or less; a bag that a pharmacy provides to a customer purchasing prescription
medication; a laundry, dry cleaning or garment bag; or a bag that a customer
uses inside a store to package loose or bulk items, such as fruits, vegetables,
nuts, grains, candy, greeting cards, small hardware, live insects, fish
crustaceans, mollusk or other small species, bulk seed, livestock or pet feed,
or to contain or wrap unwrapped prepared foods, meat, seafood, fish, flowers,
potted plants or other items that, if they were to come into contact with other
items, could dampen or contaminate the other items.
   CONTAINER: A receptacle upon which or inside which food may be placed for
consumption, whether or not the receptacle can be fully closed, including
hinged food containers, plates, bowls, and trays.
   EXPANDED POLYSTYRENE: Blown polystyrene, commonly known as StyrofoamTM, and
any other expanded or extruded foam consisting of thermoplastic petrochemical
materials utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by techniques that may
include:
   (A)   For expandable bead polystyrene, fusion of polymer spheres;
   (B)   Injection molding;
   (C)   Foam molding; and
   (D)   For extruded foam polystyrene, extrusion blow molding.
   FOOD: Any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale, in whole or in part, for human
consumption, but excluding a drug, as defined in C.R.S. § 25-5-402(9).
   GROCER: A retail business located in a permanent building containing at
least 4,000 square feet of retail space, that operates year round as a full
line, self-service market offering for sale staple foodstuffs, meats, produce
or other perishable items for off-premises human consumption, but excluding
businesses at which foodstuffs are an incidental part of the business.
   PLASTIC: A synthetic material made from linking monomers through a chemical
reaction to create a polymer chain that can be molded or extruded at high heat
into various solid forms that retain their defined shapes during their life
cycle and after disposal.
   POINT OF SALE: A check-out stand, cash register, or other point in a store
or retail food establishment at which a sales transaction occurs, or for
products that are ordered remotely from a store or retail food establishment
and delivered, the location where the products are delivered.
   RECYCLED PAPER CARRYOUT BAG: A paper carryout bag made from one hundred
(100) percent recycled material or other post-consumer content.
   RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: Has the meaning set forth in C.R.S. § 25-4-1602
(14), except it does not include farmers' markets and roadside markets as
described in C.R.S. § 25-4-1602(14)(j).
   REUSABLE CARRYOUT BAG: A carryout bag that is designed and manufactured for
at least one hundred twenty-five (125) uses, can carry at least twenty-two (22)
pounds over a distance of one hundred seventy-five (175) feet, has stitched
handles, and is made of cloth, fiber, or other fabric or recycled material such
as polyethylene terephthalate (PET); excluding bags made of biologically based
polymers such as corn or other plant sources; except that a carryout bag made
of hemp is a reusable carryout bag if it is designed and manufactured in
accordance with the above terms.
   SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG:  A carryout bag that is a single-use
plastic product made predominantly of plastic derived from natural gas,
petroleum, or a biologically based source, such as corn or other plant sources,
and that is provided to a customer at the point of sale.
   STORE: A grocer, supermarket, convenience store, liquor store, dry cleaner,
pharmacy, drug store, clothing store, or other type of retail establishment at
which carryout bags are traditionally provided to customers, including a
farmers' market, roadside market or stand, festival, or other temporary vendor
or event that includes temporary vendors.
(Ord. 23(2022) § 1; Ord. 25(2023) § 2)
§ 5-13-3 CARRYOUT BAGS.
   (A)   Commencing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
Chapter, all stores shall charge the fee established by Section
5-13-4 for each carryout bag provided to a customer at any point of sale.
Commencing on January 1, 2024, all stores and retail food establishments shall
charge the fee established by Section
5-13-4 for each carryout bag provided to a customer at any point of sale.
   (B)   Commencing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
Chapter, no grocer shall provide a single-use plastic carryout bag to a
customer at any point of sale. Commencing on January 1, 2024, no store or
retail food establishment shall provide a single-use plastic carryout bag to a
customer at any point of sale; provided that, until June 1, 2024, a store or
retail food establishment may provide a single-use plastic carryout bag to a
customer, for the fee established by Section
5-13-4, if the single-use plastic carryout bag was part of the inventory of the
store or retail food establishment before January 1, 2024.
   (C)   A retail food establishment is exempt from this Section if it prepares
or serves food in individual portions for immediate on-premises or off-premises
consumption and is not a grocer or convenience store.
   (D)   This Chapter shall not prohibit a customer from using bags of any type
that the customer brings into the store or retail food establishment, or from
carrying away goods that are not placed in a bag.
(Ord. 23(2022) § 1)
§ 5-13-4 CARRYOUT BAG FEE.
   (A)   The carryout bag fee shall be $0.25 per carryout bag.
   (B)   Stores shall record the number of recycled paper carryout bags and
single-use plastic carryout bags provided to each customer and the total amount
of the carryout bag fee charged to the customer on the customer transaction
receipt.
   (C)   No store may reimburse a customer for any part of the carryout bag
fee, but stores may provide incentives for the use of reusable carryout bags
through credits or rebates.
   (D)   Each store shall conspicuously display a sign in a location inside or
outside the store, which sign alerts customers about the carryout bag fee.
   (E)   The carryout bag fee shall not apply to any customer that provides
proof that they are a participant in a federal or state food assistance
program.
   (F)   A store may retain $0.15 of each carryout bag fee charged to be used
for:
      (1)   Providing educational information to customers;
      (2)   Training staff in the implementation and administration of the
carryout bag fee;
      (3)   Improving or altering infrastructure to allow for the
administration, collection, implementation and reporting of the carryout bag
fee; and
      (4)   Providing recycled paper carryout bags and reusable carryout bags
to customers.
   (G)   The remaining $0.10 of each carryout bag fee shall be paid to the
Town, and the Town shall deposit all revenues from carryout bag fees in a
designated waste reduction fund, to be used for:
      (1)   Producing and providing reusable carryout bags to Town residents
and guests;
      (2)   Providing education and outreach campaigns to raise awareness about
waste reduction, recycling and compost;
      (3)   Funding programs and infrastructure that allow the community to
reduce waste and recycle;
      (4)   Purchasing and installing equipment designed to minimize waste
pollution, including recycling containers and waste receptacles;
      (5)   Funding community cleanup or collection events and other activities
to reduce waste;
      (6)   Maintaining a public website for the purpose of educating the
Town's residents and guests on waste reduction efforts; and
      (7)   The administration of the carryout bag fee.
   (H)   The carryout bag fee shall be paid pursuant to all applicable
provisions of the Town's sales tax code, including administration, collection
and enforcement. The Town shall provide the necessary forms for stores to file
individual returns with the Town to demonstrate compliance with this Chapter.
Notwithstanding this method of collection, the carryout bag fee is not a tax.
(Ord. 23(2022) § 1)
§ 5-13-5 RECORDS.
   (A)   Each store shall maintain accurate and complete records of the
carryout bag fees collected under this Chapter and the number of carryout bags
provided to customers, and shall also maintain such books, accounts, invoices,
or other documentation necessary to verify the accuracy and completeness of
such records. All such documents and records shall be maintained for a period
of three (3) years from the end of the calendar year of such records.
   (B)   If requested, each store shall make the foregoing records available
for inspection and audit by the Town during regular business hours so that the
Town may verify compliance with this Chapter.
(Ord. 23(2022) § 1)
§ 5-13-6 POLYSTYRENE FOOD CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Effective January 1, 2024, a retail food establishment shall not
distribute an expanded polystyrene product for use as a container for ready-to-
eat food in the Town.
   (B)   Notwithstanding subsection (A) hereof, if a retail food establishment
purchased expanded polystyrene products before January 1, 2024, the retail food
establishment may distribute any remaining inventory of the expanded
polystyrene products then purchased for use as containers for ready-to-eat food
in the Town until the inventory is depleted.
(Ord. 25(2023) § 3)
§ 5-13-7 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful to violate this Chapter. Each violation of this Chapter
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Violations of this Chapter shall be punishable as follows:
      (1)   First violation in any calendar year: a fine of $50;
      (2)   Second violation in the same calendar year: a fine of $100; and
      (3)   Third or subsequent violation in the same calendar year: a fine of
$300.
(Ord. 23(2022) § 1; Ord. 25(2023) § 4)
CHAPTER 14: STREAM TRACT PROTECTION
Section
5-14-1 Purpose
5-14-2 Definitions
5-14-3 Use of stream tract
5-14-4 Encroachments prohibited
5-14-5 Removal of vegetation prohibited
5-14-6 Notice of violation
5-14-7 Abatement
5-14-8 Violation and penalty
§ 5-14-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by regulating sensitive stream tract areas in the town, prohibiting
private encroachments in such areas and ensuring that such areas remain natural
open space. This chapter shall not apply to public facilities as presently
constructed, or as upgraded or replaced, or to new construction of public
facilities.
(Ord. 6(2015) § 1)
§ 5-14-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
   DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director or designee.
   ENCROACHMENT. A private improvement of any kind located in the stream tract,
whether temporary or permanent in nature, including, without limitation,
landscaping, irrigation systems, garden improvements, patios, decks, fencing,
retaining walls, sheds, pathways, gravel, concrete, outdoor furniture, benches
and play equipment.
   STREAM TRACT. A lot, tract or parcel of real property located in the town,
owned by the town and situated along or adjacent to a creek, stream or other
natural waterway.
(Ord. 6(2015) § 1)
§ 5-14-3 USE OF STREAM TRACT.
   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, every stream tract
shall be used primarily for natural open space purposes, or for limited public,
pedestrian or recreational uses as may be determined by the town to be
appropriate for the stream tract.
(Ord. 6(2015) § 1)
§ 5-14-4 ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person other than the town shall erect, construct or maintain, or
cause or permit the erection, construction or maintenance of, any encroachment
on a stream tract.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town may authorize an encroachment
on a stream tract, upon a finding by the Town Council that the encroachment is
not inconsistent with the designated uses of the stream tract and will not
detrimentally impact the environmental values of the stream tract. Such
authorization shall be evidenced by a resolution adopted by the Town Council
and recorded in the real property records of Eagle County.
(Ord. 6(2015) § 1)
§ 5-14-5 REMOVAL OF VEGETATION PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person other than the town to mow, trim, cut or
remove any grasses, trees or other vegetation in a stream tract without prior
written authorization from the Director, which authorization may be withheld if
the Director determines, in the Director’s sole discretion, that such activity
would be detrimental to environmental value of the stream tract.
(Ord. 6(2015) § 1)
§ 5-14-6 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   If the Director determines that there is an encroachment onto a stream
tract in violation of this chapter, the Director shall provide written notice
of the violation by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, to the
record owner of the adjacent real property or the owner of the encroachment, if
different, at the owner’s last known address.
   (B)   The notice shall:
      (1)   Advise the owner of the nature of the unlawful encroachment;
      (2)   Advise the owner of town approved methods for the removal of the
encroachment and any rehabilitation required to restore the stream tract to its
natural condition; and
      (3)   Advise the owner that the encroachment shall be removed and the
stream tract restored to its natural condition completed within 45 days
following the date of the notice, or such longer time as stated in the notice.
   (C)   If the owner disputes that a violation exists, the owner shall notify
the Director in writing of such dispute within 45 days of the date of the
notice. If a timely notice of dispute is given, the town shall not proceed with
abatement until the Director has met with the disputing party in an effort to
resolve the dispute. If the Director meets with the owner and is unable to
resolve the dispute, and the owner fails to comply with the notice as described
above, the town may proceed with abatement pursuant to §
5-14-7 of this chapter.
(Ord. 6(2015) § 1)
§ 5-14-7 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   If the owner fails to timely and fully comply with the notice
described in §
5-14-6 of this chapter, the town may complete the removal of the encroachment
and the associated restoration activities and recover its costs as provided in
subsection (D) of this section.
   (B)   The town shall not be responsible for any property loss or damage that
occurs in connection with abatement pursuant to this section.
   (C)   In the case of an emergency involving imminent danger to the public
health, safety or welfare, the town may authorize the immediate removal of any
encroachments without notice.
   (D)   The owner shall be assessed twice the entire cost of removal of the
encroachments and restoration activities. If all costs and charges incurred by
the town are not paid within 30 days of the date of the assessment, the unpaid
costs shall be certified to the Eagle County Treasurer for collection in the
same manner as real property taxes.
(Ord. 6(2015) § 1)
§ 5-14-8 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this
chapter. Each separate act in violation of this chapter, or each and every day
or portion thereof during which any separate act in violation of this chapter
is committed, continued or permitted, shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Violations of this chapter shall be punished as follows, and such
penalties shall not be waived, reduced or deferred by the Municipal Court:
      (1)   First offense in any 12-month period: $1,500;
      (2)   Second offense in any 12-month period: $2,650; and
      (3)   Third offense in any 12-month period: mandatory appearance in the
Municipal Court and the general penalty provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
   (C)   Town police officers and code enforcement officers are authorized to
issue a summons and complaint for a violation of this chapter.
   (D)   The penalties in this section shall not be the town’s exclusive
remedies for addressing encroachments on a stream tract, and nothing in this
section shall preclude any other remedy or penalty for addressing encroachments
on town owned property. A person may be charged with a violation of this
chapter as well as trespass or any other applicable criminal violation.
(Ord. 6(2015) § 1; Ord. 12(2019) § 1)
CHAPTER 15: RECREATIONAL UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS
Section
5-15-1 Definitions
5-15-2 Safety requirements
5-15-3 Reckless or careless operation
5-15-4 Restricted areas
5-15-5 Use by law enforcement/emergency services
5-15-6 Violation and penalty
§ 5-15-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
   OPERATE. To use, fly, launch, land, employ, control or engage the
functionality of a UAS in any manner.
   TOWN AIRSPACE. Includes all airspace above the territorial boundaries of the
town, to the full extent that such airspace can legally be regulated by the
town.
   UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEM (UAS). An aircraft, powered aerial vehicle or other
device without a human pilot aboard, the flight of which is controlled either
autonomously by onboard computers or by the remote control of a pilot operator
on the ground or in another vehicle or aircraft, and all associated equipment
and apparatus, used for a hobby or recreational purpose.
   VISUAL LINE OF SIGHT. The UAS must be visible at all times to the operator
of the UAS, the operator must use his or her own natural vision to observe the
UAS, and persons other than the operator may not be used in lieu of the
operator for maintaining visual line of sight. The operator’s own natural
vision may include vision corrected by standard eyeglasses or contact lenses.
(Ord. 21(2016) § 1)
§ 5-15-2 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   It is unlawful to operate a UAS within the town or in town airspace, except
in conformance with the following.
   (A)   The UAS shall be flown below a maximum altitude of 400 feet above the
ground.
   (B)   The UAS shall weigh no more than 55 pounds at the time of operation,
inclusive of equipment, payload and fuel.
   (C)   The UAS shall be flown within the visual line of sight of the person
operating the UAS.
   (D)   The UAS shall not be operated over any person not directly involved in
the operation.
   (E)   The UAS shall not be flown near pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists,
roadways, parking lots, playgrounds, stadiums, sporting events, festivals or
other open air assembly of persons, or areas or special events subject to an
FAA notice of temporary flight restriction.
   (F)   The UAS shall remain clear of and not interfere with manned aircraft
operations or other UAS.
   (G)   The UAS shall be operated during daylight hours only.
   (H)   The UAS shall not be operated from a moving vehicle or other aircraft.
   (I)   The UAS shall be operated in compliance with all applicable law,
including any regulations adopted by the FAA.
(Ord. 21(2016) § 1)
§ 5-15-3 RECKLESS OR CARELESS OPERATION.
   It is unlawful to operate a UAS in a reckless or careless manner so as to
endanger the health, safety or well being of persons or property. A person
shall not operate a UAS if he or she knows or has reason to know of any
physical or mental condition that would interfere with the safe operation of
the UAS, or if he or she knows or has reason to know that the UAS is not in
proper working order.
(Ord. 21(2016) § 1)
§ 5-15-4 RESTRICTED AREAS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to operate a UAS in pedestrian areas of Vail Village,
Lionshead Village and Ford Park, or on Meadow Drive between Vail Village and
Lionshead Village.
   (B)   It is unlawful to operate a UAS in any area in the town in which the
UAS would interfere with a helicopter accessing or leaving the Vail Valley
Medical Center.
   (C)   It is unlawful to operate a UAS in or above a public parking
structure.
(Ord. 21(2016) § 1)
§ 5-15-5 USE BY LAW ENFORCEMENT/ EMERGENCY SERVICES.
   Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit the use of a UAS for lawful
purposes and in a lawful manner by any law enforcement agency of the town or
other local, state or federal government, or emergency services personnel.
(Ord. 21(2016) § 1)
§ 5-15-6 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter. A person who
is convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty set forth in subsection (A) of this
section, the town may impound any UAS that is operated in a careless or
reckless manner, in the interest of public safety.
(Ord. 21(2016) § 1)
TITLE 6: POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
6-1-1 Department created
6-1-2 Chief of police
6-1-3 Department duties
6-1-4 Reserve police
§ 6-1-1 DEPARTMENT CREATED.
   There is created a Police Department for the town which shall consist of the
Chief of Police and as many police deputies as may from time to time be deemed
necessary for the safety and good order of the town.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 6)
§ 6-1-2 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   Appointment. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Town
Manager.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Chief of Police shall perform the following
duties:
      (1)   See that the ordinances of the town are duly enforced and the rules
and regulations of the Police Department obeyed, and perform such duties as may
be required by the Town Manager;
      (2)   Direct the operations of the Police Department, subject to its
rules and regulations; and
      (3)   Arrest any person violating any of the town ordinances and take
such violator before the Municipal Court for trial.
   (C)   Rule promulgation. The Chief of the Police Department may make or
prescribe such rules and regulations as he or she deems advisable. Such rules
and regulations may cover the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment to
be worn or carried, assignments, hours of service, and all other similar
matters necessary or desirable for the better efficiency of the Department.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 6; 1997 Code)
§ 6-1-3 DEPARTMENT DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to enforce all
the laws of the town and all statutes of the state applicable thereto, to
preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators thereof,
to serve and execute any process directed to the Chief of Police, and to
perform any police service which the Chief of Police might lawfully do.
(Ord. 20(1976) § 6)
§ 6-1-4 RESERVE POLICE.
   The Town Manager may, upon any emergency, riot, pestilence, invasion or at
any time he or she deems it necessary for the peace, good order or health of
the town, order the Chief of Police to appoint reserve police officers. The
Town Manager may also order the Chief of Police to appoint such number of
reserve police officers to serve upon days of election, public celebration and
holidays, and the reserve police officers shall have and possess all powers and
privileges of regular police officers during the time for which they may be
appointed.
(Ord. 20(1976) §6)
CHAPTER 2: UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Section
6-2-1 Definitions
6-2-2 Procedures
6-2-3 Exemptions
6-2-4 Disposition
§ 6-2-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
   ABANDONED INTANGIBLE PROPERTY. Any fixed and certain interest in intangible
property held, issued, or owned in the ordinary course of the town’s business,
including without limitation cash, checks, drafts, deposits, interest,
dividends, income, credit balances, customer overpayments, gift cards, refunds,
unpaid wages or pension benefits, reimbursements, stocks, unpaid wages, and
interest or income derived therefrom that is held by or under the control of
the town that has not been claimed by its owner for a period of more than one
year after the property became distributable.
   OWNER. A person that owns unclaimed property held by the town or his or her
duly authorized legal representative or successor in interest.
   UNCLAIMED PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible property, except abandoned
intangible property or jewelry, that is held by or under the control of the
Town that has not been claimed by its owner for a period of more than 90 days
after the Town took possession of the property.
(Ord. 1(2021) § 1; Ord. 10(2023) § 1)
§ 6-2-2 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Personal notice. Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having
an estimated value of $1,000 or more or any abandoned intangible property
regardless of value, the Police Department shall give written notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of a known
owner of the unclaimed property or the abandoned intangible property. The
notice shall include a description of the property, the estimated value of the
property, and the location where the owner may pick up the property. The notice
shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the Police Department with
a written claim for the return of any unclaimed property within 30 days of the
date of the notice for unclaimed property, or five years for abandoned
intangible property, the property shall become the sole property of the town
and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited.
   (B)   Notice by publication. Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property
having an estimated value of $1,000 or more and having no known owner or
disposition of any abandoned intangible property, or when the town has no last
known address of the owner, the Police Department shall cause a notice to be
published on the town’s website. The notice shall include a description of the
property and the estimated value of the property. The notice shall also state
that if the owner fails to provide the Police Department with a written claim
within 30 days of the date of the publication of the notice for unclaimed
property, or five years for abandoned intangible property, the property shall
become the sole property of the town and any claim of the owner to such
property shall be deemed forfeited.
   (C)   Time limits.
      (1)   If the Police Department receives no timely written claim, the
property shall become the sole property of the town and any claim of the owner
to such property shall be deemed forfeited.
      (2)   Any unclaimed property of less than $1,000 shall become the sole
property of the town 30 days after it becomes unclaimed property.
      (3)   Any abandoned intangible property shall become the sole property of
the town five years after it becomes abandoned intangible property.
   (D)   Claims. The Police Department shall evaluate each timely written claim
and give written notice within 30 days that the claim has been accepted or
denied in whole or in part. The Police Department may investigate the validity
of the claim and may request further supporting documentation from the
claimant. If there is more than one claimant for the same property, the Police
Department may, in its sole discretion, resolve said claims, or may file an
interpleader action. If any claim is denied, the property shall become the sole
property of the town and any claim of the owner of such property shall be
deemed forfeited. The Police Department’s decision shall be final, subject only
to judicial review as provided by law.
(Ord. 1(2021) § 1)
§ 6-2-3 EXEMPTIONS.
   Vehicles subject to impoundment are exempt from this chapter.
(Ord. 1(2021) § 1)
§ 6-2-4 DISPOSITION.
   In the event unclaimed property or abandoned intangible property becomes the
property of the town under this chapter, or is otherwise deemed forfeited to
the town, the Police Department may elect to retain the property for use in the
conduct of town business, may elect to donate the property to a non-
denominational charitable organization serving the citizens of the town, or may
elect to sell the property at public auction. The sale and conveyance of any
such property is without right of redemption. If no bid is made for an item
offered for sale, it shall remain the property of the town and the town may
either retain the property or dispose of it.
(Ord. 1(2021) § 1)
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL OFFENSES
ARTICLE 3A: OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
Section
6-3A-1 Peace officer defined
6-3A-2 Assisting an officer
6-3A-3 Aid in escape
6-3A-4 Aid to an offense
6-3A-5 Resisting an officer
6-3A-6 Impersonating an officer
6-3A-7 Furnishing contraband to prisoners
6-3A-8 False reports
6-3A-9 False alarms
6-3A-10 Violation of bail bond conditions
§ 6-3A-1 PEACE OFFICER DEFINED.
   PEACE OFFICER as used in this title means the town marshal, any police
officer, special police officer or other member of the Police Department of the
town, any county sheriff; any member of the state police; any federal law
enforcement agent, and any deputy or assistant of any of them.
(Ord. 17(1966) Art. 7 § 1; Ord. 12(1968) § 1)
§ 6-3A-2 ASSISTING AN OFFICER.
   It is the duty of all persons within the town, when called upon by any peace
officer, to promptly aid and assist such peace officer in the discharge of such
duties. It is unlawful for any person to refuse such assistance when called
upon.
(Ord. 17(1966) Art. 7 § 2)
§ 6-3A-3 AID IN ESCAPE.
   It is unlawful for any person to aid, abet or assist any person to escape or
attempt to escape from lawful confinement or from the custody of any peace
officer within the town.
(Ord. 17(1966) Art. 7 § 3)
§ 6-3A-4 AID TO AN OFFENSE.
   It is unlawful for any person, with the intent to promote or facilitate the
commission of an offense or violation of any provision of this code, to aid,
abet, counsel, advise or encourage any other person in planning or committing
such offense or violation.
(Ord. 21(1977) § 1)
§ 6-3A-5 RESISTING AN OFFICER.
   (A)   Resisting arrest. It is unlawful for any person within the town to
knowingly prevent or attempt to prevent any peace officer, acting under color
of his or her official authority, from effecting an arrest of the person by the
use or threat of physical force or violence against the police officer or by
the use of any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing physical
injury to the peace officer.
   (B)   Obstructing a peace officer. It is unlawful for any person within the
town to knowingly use or threaten to use violence, force or physical
interference to obstruct or impair or hinder the enforcement of the provisions
of this code or the preservation of the peace by a peace officer acting under
color of his or her official authority or intentionally obstruct, impair or
hinder the prevention, control or abatement of fire by a firefighter acting
under color of his or her official authority.
(Ord. 21(1977) §§ 2, 3; Ord. 12(2004) § 1)
§ 6-3A-6 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   It is unlawful for any person to falsely pretend to be a peace officer and
perform an act in that pretended capacity.
(Ord. 21(1977) § 4)
§ 6-3A-7 FURNISHING CONTRABAND TO PRISONERS.
   It is unlawful for any person to furnish or attempt to furnish or take into
jail or to deliver or attempt to deliver to any prisoner confined therein, or
in the custody of any officer, any weapon, tool, intoxicating liquors, drug or
other article without the consent of the law enforcement officer in charge.
(Ord. 17(1966) Art. 7 § 7; Ord. 12(2004) § 1)
§ 6-3A-8 FALSE REPORTS.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to give or make, or cause to be
given or made in any manner any false report to any police officer of the town
or to any person authorized to receive reports in behalf of the police of the
town.
(Ord. 17(1966) Art. 7 § 8; Ord. 10(1968) § 1; Ord. 12(2004) § 1)
§ 6-3A-9 FALSE ALARMS.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly give or make or cause to be given
or made in any manner a false alarm of fire, avalanche, missing person or other
emergency or disaster.
(Ord. 17(1966) Art. 3 § 2; Ord. 12(2004) § 1)
§ 6-3A-10 VIOLATION OF BAIL BOND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person released on bail bond
of whatever kind to knowingly fail to appear for trial or other proceedings in
the case in which the bond was filed or to knowingly violate any condition of
the bail bond.
   (B)   Penalty. Any violation of this section shall be deemed a violation of
this code, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both in accordance with the
general penalty provisions of this code.
(Ord. 9(2004) § 1)
ARTICLE 3B: OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
Section
6-3B-1 Assault
6-3B-2 Larceny, fraud and related offenses
§ 6-3B-1 ASSAULT.
   (A)   Assault and battery. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly or
recklessly cause or attempt to cause bodily injury to another person.
   (B)   Reporting required. It is the duty of the owner or manager of any
premises licensed by the town to serve, sell or dispense alcoholic beverages or
fermented malt beverages, to report or cause to be reported to the Town Police
Department all incidents involving violations of subsection (A) of this
section, occurring within or upon their premises within 24 hours of such
incidents.
(Ord. 21(1977) § 5; Ord. 12(2004) § 1)
§ 6-3B-2 LARCENY, FRAUD AND RELATED OFFENSES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      LARCENY. To take or exercise control over property of another having a
value of less than $2,000 without authorization or by threat or deception; and
         (a)   With the intention to deprive the owner permanently of the use
or benefit of such property;
         (b)   To knowingly use, conceal or abandon such property in a manner
so as to deprive the owner permanently of its use or benefit; or
         (c)   To knowingly demand any consideration for which one is not
legally entitled as a condition of restoring such property to the owner.
      RECREATIONAL FACILITY. Any golf course, tennis court or any recreational
property, or any related property facility or thing whatsoever.
      SKIING FACILITY. Any ski tow, ski lift, gondola or any related property
or facility.
      SKIING SERVICE. Service and instruction offered or provided by any ski
instructor or ski school, and any service offered or provided in connection
with any skiing facility.
   (B)   Larceny unlawful. It is unlawful for any person to commit larceny in
the town.
   (C)   Concealment of goods. If any person knowingly conceals unpurchased
goods, wares or merchandise owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale
by any store or any other mercantile establishment, whether the concealment be
on his or her own person or otherwise and whether on or off the premises of
such store or mercantile establishment, such concealment constitutes prima
facie evidence that the person intended to commit the offense of larceny.
   (D)   Deceptive use of ski facilities. It is unlawful for any person within
the town, knowingly to obtain or attempt to obtain the use, benefit or
enjoyment of any skiing service or skiing facility or other recreational
facility by any false pretense, trick or deceptive means, method or device
whatsoever.
   (E)   Using false ticket. It is unlawful for any person within the town
knowingly to possess, offer, use, present, sell or give away, any false,
simulated, bogus, spurious, sham, altered, forged, counterfeit, defaced or
mutilated ticket, token, pass, badge, pin or other device which is not genuine
and authorized for obtaining the use, benefit or enjoyment of any skiing
service or skiing facility or other recreational facility by the owner,
proprietor, lessee, licensee or operator of such skiing service or facility or
other recreational facility.
   (F)   False tickets. It is unlawful for any person within the town to
knowingly falsify, alter, forge, counterfeit, deface or mutilate any ticket,
pass, badge, pin or other device entitling the holder thereof to the use,
benefit or enjoyment of any skiing service or skiing facility or other
recreational facility, or to make or manufacture any simulated, bogus, spurious
or sham ticket, token, pass, badge, pin or other device purporting to entitle
the holder thereof to the use, benefit or enjoyment of any skiing service or
facility or other recreational facility.
   (G)   Fraud by check.
      (1)   As used in this subsection (G), unless the context otherwise
requires.
         CHECK. A written, unconditional order to pay a certain amount of money
drawn on a bank, payable on demand and signed by the drawer.
         DRAWEE. The bank upon which a check is drawn.
         DRAWER. A person, either real or fictitious, whose name appears on a
check as a primary obligor, whether the actual signature be that of the person
or of a person authorized to draw a check on himself or herself.
         INSUFFICIENT FUNDS. A drawer has insufficient funds with the drawee to
pay a check when the drawer has no checking account with the drawee, or has
funds in a checking account with the drawee in an amount less than the amount
of the check, plus the amount of all other checks outstanding at the time of
issuance; and a check dishonored for “no account” shall also be deemed to be
dishonored for INSUFFICIENT FUNDS.
         ISSUE. A person issues a check when he or she makes, draws, delivers
or passes it, or causes it to be made, drawn, delivered or passed.
      (2)   Any person, knowing he or she has insufficient funds with the
drawee who, with intent to defraud, issues a check for the payment of services,
wages, salary, commissions, labor, rent, money, property or other thing of
value commits fraud by check, which is unlawful.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (G), no
violation of this subsection occurs if:
         (a)   The check alleged to be fraudulent was for the sum of $200 or
more;
         (b)   The person issues two or more checks within any 30-day period in
the State of Colorado totaling $200 or more in the aggregate; or
         (c)   The person issuing the check has been twice previously convicted
under C.R.S. § 18-5-205 (1973, as amended) or any former Colorado statute of
similar content and purport; and
         (d)   The allegedly fraudulent check was drawn on an account which did
not exist or which has been closed for a period of 30 days or more prior to the
issuance of said check.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to open a checking account
using false identification or an assumed name for the purpose of issuing a
fraudulent check.
      (5)   If the deferred prosecution or sentencing is ordered, the court, as
a condition of such disposition, may require the defendant to make restitution
on all checks issued by the defendant which are unpaid as of the date of
commencement of the deferred period in addition to other terms and conditions
appropriate for the treatment or rehabilitation of the defendant.
      (6)   A bank shall not be civilly or criminally liable for releasing
information relating to the drawer’s account to a police officer, Town
Attorney, Assistant Town Attorney, or authorized investigator for the Town
Attorney investigating or prosecuting a charge under this subsection (G).
   (H)   Control over stolen thing of value. Every person who obtains control
over any stolen thing of value, knowing the thing of value to have been stolen
by another, may be tried, convicted and punished whether or not the principal
is charged, tried or convicted.
(Ord. 4(1967) Art. 1 §1, Art. 2 §§1 - 3; Ord. 9(1968) §1; Ord. 21(1977) §6;
Ord. 3(1980) §1; Ord. 9(1983) §1; Ord. 27(1983) §1; Ord. 28(1985) §1; Ord. 18
(1995) §1; Ord. 12(2004) §1; Ord. 42(2007) §2; Ord. 3(2014) §1)
ARTICLE 3C: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
Section
6-3C-1 Window peeping
6-3C-2 Indecent exposure
6-3C-3 Illegal acts on premises holding liquor licenses
6-3C-4 Drinking in public
6-3C-5 Sale of intoxicating liquors
6-3C-6 Possession of marijuana, marijuana products and marijuana accessories
§ 6-3C-1 WINDOW PEEPING.
   It is unlawful for any person to trespass upon the property owned or
occupied by another in the town for the purpose of looking or peeping into any
window, door, skylight or other opening in a house, room or building, or to
loiter in a public place for the purpose of wrongfully observing the actions of
the occupants of a house, room or building.
(Ord. 17(1966) Art. 4 § 4)
§ 6-3C-2 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly expose such person’s genitals to
the view of any person under circumstances in which such conduct is likely to
cause affront or alarm to the other person.
(Ord. 21(1977) § 7; Ord. 12(2004) § 1)
§ 6-3C-3 ILLEGAL ACTS ON PREMISES HOLDING LIQUOR LICENSES.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply.
      INDECENT DISPLAYS. Performing acts of or acts which simulate:
         (a)   Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;
         (b)   The touching, caressing or fondling on the breast, buttocks,
anus or genitals;
         (c)   The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals;
         (d)   The displaying of the postpubescent human female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola, or the displaying of the
postpubescent human female breast where the nipple only or the nipple and
areola only are covered.
      NUDITY. Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, postpubescent human
genitals, pubic areas or the postpubescent human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola. For purposes of this definition, a
female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the
areola only are covered.
   (B)   Gambling prohibited. No licensee for the sale of spirituous, vinous or
malt beverages or 3.2 beer shall install, maintain or operate or permit the
installation, maintenance or operation of, within or upon the licensed
premises, any gambling table, establishment, device, machine, apparatus or
other thing contrary to this section or to the laws of this state or which is
kept or used for the purpose of gambling either directly or indirectly. This
section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of bona fide amusement
devices which do not and cannot be adjusted to pay anything of value, and which
may not be used for gambling, directly or indirectly, and for the scoring,
achievement, use or operation of which no prize, reward or thing of value is
offered or paid by any person.
   (C)   Offensive behavior by patrons. Each licensee shall conduct his or her
establishment in a decent, orderly and respectable manner, and shall not permit
within or upon the licensed premises indecent displays, profanity, undue noise
or other disturbance or activity offensive to the senses of the average
citizen, or to the residents of the neighborhood in which the establishment is
located.
   (D)   Begging and soliciting drinks. No licensee, manager or agent shall
permit upon any liquor licensed premises for consumption on the premises anyone
to loiter in or about said premises for the purpose of begging, and soliciting
any patron or customer of, or visitor in, such premises to purchase any drinks
or beverages of any type or nature whatsoever, for the one soliciting or
begging.
   (E)   Nudity. No licensee for retail sale by the drink of spirituous, vinous
or malt beverages or 3.2 beer shall permit any person or persons to appear in a
state of nudity or simulated nudity within or upon the premises.
   (F)   Showing of offensive materials. No licensee for retail sale by the
drink of spirituous, vinous or malt beverages or 3.2 beer shall permit the
showing of film, still pictures, electronic reproduction or other visual
reproductions depicting any act or live performance prohibited by this section.
(Ord. 21(1977) § 8; Ord. 12(2004) § 1)
§ 6-3C-4 DRINKING IN PUBLIC.
   (A)   Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to drink any malt, vinous or
spirituous liquors upon any street, alley, sidewalk, public building or public
parking lot in the town or within any vehicle upon the streets, alleys,
sidewalks or public parking lots in the town except by written authorization of
the Town Council. It is unlawful for any person to possess or have in such
person’s possession or under his or her control in or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, public building or public parking lot in the town, any malt, vinous
or spirituous liquors in any container of any kind or description which is not
sealed or upon which the seal is broken. The word “sealed” means the regular
seal applied by the United States government over the cap of all malt, vinous
or spirituous liquors. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be unlawful
for any person to have in their possession or under their control one opened
container of vinous liquor removed from a licensed premises in compliance with
C.R.S. § 44-3-423, as amended.
   (B)   Closed containers prohibited.
      (1)   Affected areas. No person shall possess any malt, vinous, or
spirituous liquor or fermented malt beverage in or upon any public highway,
street, alley, walk, parking lot or any other public property or place or in or
upon those portions of any private property upon which the public has an
expressed or implied license to enter or remain within the area bounded by:
         (a)   Vail transportation center/village parking structure to the
north, the south edge of Seibert Circle to the south, Mill Creek to the east,
the eastern curb line of Willow Bridge Road from Gore Creek Drive through the
International Bridge; and
         (b)   The affected area is inclusive of Wall Street from Gore Creek
Drive through One Vail Place and the Gore Creek Promenade from Willow Bridge
Road through the Children’s Fountain, between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., from
June 30 through July 5, and between 6:00 p.m. on December 31 and 6:00 a.m. of
January 1 of each year.
      (2)   Exception. Notwithstanding the foregoing, persons shall have the
right to possess malt, vinous or spirituous liquor or fermented malt beverage
in said area if they are taking it to permanent or temporary residence located
in said area. In addition, it shall not be unlawful for any person to have in
his or her possession or under his or her control one opened container of
vinous liquor removed from a licensed premises pursuant to and subject to the
limitations set forth in C.R.S. § 12-47-411(3.5), as amended.
      (3)   Resolution by officer. Any peace officer is authorized to seize any
malt, vinous or spirituous liquor or fermented malt beverage possessed in
violation of this section. If no summons or complaint is issued for the
violation and if the circumstances reasonably permit, the officer may require
the possessor to leave the prohibited area with the alcoholic beverage or to
abandon the beverage to the officer for destruction at such person’s option.
(Ord. 17(1966) Art. 1 § 5; Ord. 6(1981) § 1; Ord. 16(1988) § 1; Ord. 13(2001) §
2; Ord. 12(2004) § 1; Ord. 19(2004) § 1; Ord. 5(2022) §10)
§ 6-3C-5 SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
   (A)   Prohibited. It is unlawful for anyone to knowingly sell, give or
dispense any intoxicating beverage of any kind, including fermented malt
beverages, commonly known as 3.2 beer, to any person who is visibly
intoxicated, and it is the responsibility of anyone licensed by the town and
state to dispense any malt, vinous and spirituous liquor, as well as fermented
malt beverages, commonly known as 3.2 beer, to determine if any such person is
visibly intoxicated before selling, serving or delivering such beverages to any
such person.
   (B)   False identification. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly
make false statements or to furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or false
registration card, identification card, driver’s license, note or any other
document; or to furnish, present or exhibit such document or documents issued
to a person other than the one presenting the same, for the purpose of gaining
admission to any prohibited place or for the purpose of procuring the sale,
gift or delivery of prohibited articles, including fermented malt beverages,
malt, vinous or spirituous liquors.
   (C)   Illegal possession or consumption of liquor by underage persons.
      (1)   As used in this subsection (C), unless the context otherwise
requires.
         ESTABLISHMENT. A business, firm, enterprise, service or fraternal
organization, club, institution, entity, group or residence, and any real
property, including buildings and improvements, connected therewith, and shall
also include any members, employees and occupants associated therewith.
         LIQUORS. Any substance which is or contains ethyl alcohol.
         POSSESSION OF LIQUORS. A person has or holds any amount of ethyl
alcohol anywhere on his or her person, or that a person owns or has custody of
ethyl alcohol, or has ethyl alcohol within his or her immediate presence and
control.
         PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any dwelling and its curtilage which is being used
by a natural person or natural persons for habitation and which is not open to
the public and privately owned real property which is not open to the public.
PRIVATE PROPERTY shall not include:
            1.   Any establishment is required to have a license pursuant to
C.R.S. Title 44, Articles 3, 4 or 5;
            2.   Any establishment which sells ethyl alcohol or upon which
ethyl alcohol is sold; or
            3.   Any establishment which leases, rents, or provides
accommodations to members of the public generally.
      (2)   Any person under 21 years of age who possesses or consumes ethyl
alcohol anywhere in the Town of Vail commits illegal possession or consumption
of liquors by an underage person. Illegal possession or consumption of liquors
by an underage person is a strict liability offense.
      (3)   It shall be an affirmative defense to the offense described in
subsection (C)(2) of this section that the ethyl alcohol was possessed or
consumed by a person under 21 years of age under the following circumstances:
         (a)   While such person was legally upon private property with the
knowledge and consent of the owner or legal possessor of such private property
and the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed with the consent of his or her
parent or legal guardian who was present during such possession or consumption;
         (b)   When the existence of ethyl alcohol in a person’s body was due
solely to the ingestion of a confectionery which contained ethyl alcohol within
the limits prescribed by C.R.S. § 25-5-410(1)(i)(II); or the ingestion of any
substance which was manufactured, designed or intended primarily for a purpose
other than oral human ingestion; or the ingestion of any substance which was
manufactured, designed or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes;
or solely from the ingestion of a beverage which contained less than 0.5% of
ethyl alcohol by weight.
         (c)   The person is a student who:
            1.   Tastes but does not imbibe an alcohol beverage only while
under the direct supervision of an instructor who is at least 21 years of age
and employed by a post-secondary school;
            2.   Is enrolled in a university or a post-secondary school
accredited or certified by an agency recognized by the United States Department
of Education, a nationally recognized accrediting agency or association, or the
Private Occupational Education Act of 1981, C.R.S. Title 12, Article 59;
            3.   Is participating in a culinary arts, food service, or
restaurant management degree program; and
            4.   Tastes but does not imbibe the alcohol beverage for
instructional purposes as a part of a required course in which the alcohol
beverage, except the portion the student tastes, remains under the control of
the instructor.
      (4)   The possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol shall not constitute
a violation of this subsection (C)(4) if such possession or consumption takes
place for religious purposes protected by the First Amendment to the United
States Constitution.
      (5)   Prima facie evidence of a violation of subsection (C)(2) of this
section shall consist of:
         (a)   Evidence that the defendant was under the age of 21 years and
possessed or consumed ethyl alcohol anywhere in the Town of Vail; or
         (b)   Evidence that the defendant was under the age of 21 years and
manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with ethyl alcohol
intoxication or impairment while present anywhere in the Town of Vail.
      (6)   During any trial for a violation of subsection (C)(2) of this
section, any bottle, can or any other container with labeling indicating the
contents of such bottle, can or container shall be admissible into evidence,
and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can or other
container shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. A
jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon
such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can or other
container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. A label which
identifies the contents of any bottle, can, or other container as “beer”,
“ale”, “malt beverage”, “fermented malt beverage”, “malt liquor”, “wine”,
“champagne”, “whiskey” or “whisky”, “gin”, “vodka”, “tequila”, “schnapps”,
“brandy”, “cognac”, “liqueur”, “cordial”, “alcohol” or “liquor” shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can or other
container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol.
      (7)   The qualitative result of an alcohol test or tests shall be
admissible at the trial of any person charged with a violation of subsection
(C)(2) of this section upon a showing that the device or devices used to
conduct such test or tests have been approved as accurate in detecting alcohol
by the Executive Director of the Department of Public Health and Environment.
      (8)   Upon the expiration of one year from the date of a conviction for a
violation of subsection (C)(2) of this section, any person convicted of such
violation may petition the Vail Municipal Court for an order sealing the record
of such conviction. The court shall grant such petition if the petitioner has
not been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any felony, misdemeanor,
or petty offense during the period of one year following the date of such
petitioner’s conviction for a violation of subsection (C)(2) of this section.
   (D)   Sale to minors. It shall be unlawful for any person to procure for,
sell to, or give away within the town limits, any malt, vinous or spirituous
liquors, or any fermented malt beverages to any person under the age of 21
years.
(Ord. 19(1971) § 3; Ord. 43(1981) § 1; Ord. 7(1991) § 1; Ord. 20(1998); Ord. 12
(2004) § 1; Ord. 5(2005) § 1)
§ 6-3C-6 POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA, MARIJUANA PRODUCTS AND MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MARIJUANA. All parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis whether growing
or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such
plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marijuana concentrate, but the term
does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from its
stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of said plant, sterilized seed of such
plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient
combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink
or other product.
      MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES. Equipment, products or materials of any kind which
are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, vaporizing or containing marijuana, or for ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body.
      MARIJUANA PRODUCTS. Concentrated marijuana products and marijuana
products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended
for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments
and tinctures.
      OPENLY OR PUBLICLY. The consumption or growing of marijuana in a place
commonly or usually open to or accessible by the general public, or to which
members of the general public may resort, including, without limitation, public
ways, streets, sidewalks, alleys, bicycle paths, trails, golf courses, public
buildings, parks, open spaces, parking lots, shopping centers, places of
business usually open to the general public, and automobiles or other vehicles
in or upon any such place or places, but excluding the interior or enclosed
yard area of private homes, residences, condominiums or apartments. For
purposes of this section, OPENLY OR PUBLICLY expressly includes the consumption
or growing of marijuana in any place not used for residential purposes where
individuals gather to consume or grow marijuana, regardless of whether such
place calls itself private or public or charges an admission or membership fee.
   (B)   Unlawful acts. It is unlawful:
      (1)   For any person to use, display, purchase, transport, possess or
transfer more than one ounce of marijuana in the town;
      (2)   For any person to possess, grow, process or transport in the town
more than six marijuana plants, with three or fewer being mature, flowering
plants. A person may possess the marijuana produced by these plants, provided
that such possession is limited to the premises where the plants were grown and
further provided that the growing takes place in an enclosed locked space and
is not conducted openly or publicly or made available for sale;
      (3)   For a person under the age of 21 to use, display, purchase,
transport, possess or transfer marijuana, marijuana products or marijuana
accessories anywhere in the town;
      (4)   For a person 21 years of age or older to use, display, purchase,
transport, possess or transfer marijuana, marijuana products or marijuana
accessories in the town for any reason other than personal use;
      (5)   For a person 21 years of age or older to purchase on behalf of,
transfer to, or otherwise assist a person under the age of 21 in obtaining
marijuana, marijuana products or marijuana accessories in the town; and
      (6)   For any person to openly or publicly consume or grow marijuana or
to consume marijuana in a manner that endangers others in the town.
   (C)   Penalty.
      (1)   Violations of this section shall be punishable as set forth in
Title 1, Chapter 4 of this code, except that a person who possesses not more
than two ounces of marijuana in violation of this section shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $100; and
      (2)   It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this
section that a person is in possession of a valid registry identification card
authorizing the medicinal use of marijuana issued by the state health agency,
so long as consumption or use does not occur in a public place.
(Ord. 2(2013) § 1; Ord. 5(2014) § 1)
ARTICLE 3D: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
6-3D-1 Unlawful assembly
6-3D-2 Disorderly conduct
6-3D-3 Dangerous or violent conduct
6-3D-4 Disturbing the peace
6-3D-5 Hindering transportation
6-3D-6 Compressed flammable gas prohibited in THC extraction
§ 6-3D-1 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   It is unlawful for two or more persons to assemble together, or being
assembled together, to act in concert to commit, or conspire to commit, any
unlawful act.
(Ord. 21(1977) § 9)
§ 6-3D-2 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   It is unlawful for a person to intentionally, knowingly or recklessly:
   (A)   Make a coarse and obviously offensive utterance in a public place, and
the language by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the
peace;
   (B)   Make a coarse and offensive gesture or display in a public place, and
the gesture or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace;
   (C)   Fight with another in a public place, except in an amateur or
professional contest of athletic skill; or
   (D)   Make an unreasonable noise in a public place or near a private
residence that he or she has no right to occupy.
(Ord. 21(1977) § 10; Ord. 12(2004) § 1)
§ 6-3D-3 DANGEROUS OR VIOLENT CONDUCT.
   It is unlawful for a person to participate with two or more others in
dangerous and violent conduct which creates imminent danger of damage or injury
to property or persons or substantially obstructs the performance of any
governmental function.
(Ord. 21(1977) § 11; Ord. 12(2004) § 1)
§ 6-3D-4 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   Harassment. It is unlawful for a person to intentionally harass, annoy
or alarm another person by:
      (1)   Insults, taunts or challenges to another in a manner likely to
provoke a violent or disorderly response;
      (2)   Following a person in or about a public place;
      (3)   Engaging in conduct or repeatedly committing acts that alarm or
seriously annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose;
      (4)   Initiating communication with a person, anonymously or otherwise in
a manner intended to harass or threaten bodily injury or property damage, or
makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene;
      (5)   Making a telephone call or causing a telephone to ring repeatedly,
whether or not a conversation ensues, with no legitimate conversation; or
      (6)   Making repeated communications at inconvenient hours or in
offensively coarse language.
   (B)   Obscene defined. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, OBSCENE means a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual
acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said
ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus or excretory functions.
   (C)   Location of criminal act. Any act prohibited by subsection (A)(5) of
this section may be deemed to have occurred or to have been committed at the
place at which the telephone call was either made or received.
(Ord. 21(1977) § 12; Ord. 2(2009) § 1; Ord. 10(2022) §1)
§ 6-3D-5 HINDERING TRANSPORTATION.
   A person commits the offense of hindering transportation if he or she
knowingly and without lawful authority stops or hinders the operation of any
vehicle used in providing transportation services of any kind to the public or
to any person, association or corporation.
(Ord. 6(2008) § 1)
§ 6-3D-6 COMPRESSED FLAMMABLE GAS PROHIBITED IN THC EXTRACTION.
   It is unlawful for a person to use any compressed flammable gas as a solvent
in the extraction of tetrahydrocannabinol (“THC”) or any other cannabinoid in
the town.
(Ord. 16(2014) § 1)
ARTICLE 3E: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
6-3E-1 Criminal injury to property
6-3E-2 Theft of library property
6-3E-3 Trespassing
6-3E-4 Handbills
6-3E-5 Glass containers
6-3E-6 Public street use restrictions
6-3E-7 Cable television; unauthorized connection, tampering
§ 6-3E-1 CRIMINAL INJURY TO PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly injure, deface, mutilate, remove,
pull down, break or in any way interfere with, molest, desecrate or destroy any
property with a value of less than $1,000, belonging to or under control of the
town or any person within the limits of the town.
(Ord. 42(2007) § 1)
§ 6-3E-2 THEFT OF LIBRARY PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to take or to retain any property
belonging to the Vail public library for 30 days after notice is sent to said
person in writing to return the same, given after the expiration of the time
that by the rules of the Vail public library such property may be kept.
(Ord. 13(1985) § 1; Ord. 24(1985) § 2; Ord. 12(2004) § 1)
§ 6-3E-3 TRESPASSING.
   It is unlawful for a person to enter upon any property within the town,
owned or occupied by another, without license or privilege to do so, or to
remain upon any such property after having been requested to leave by the owner
of the property or by any person having charge of the property.
(Ord. 21(1977) § 14)
§ 6-3E-4 HANDBILLS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms
shall be construed as herein set forth:
      COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:
         (a)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing;
         (b)   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly
or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
         (c)   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which a commission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit.
      NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature not included in the aforementioned definitions of a commercial
handbill.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY OR PRIVATE PLACE. All property not included in the
definition of “public property” herein, including, but not limited to, vacant
land or to any land, building or other structure designed or used for
residential, commercial, business, industrial, institutional or religious
purposes, together with any yards, grounds, walks, driveway, fence, porch,
steps, vestibule, mailbox and other structure appurtenant thereto.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY or PUBLIC PLACE. All property owned, operated or
controlled by any governmental agency including, but not limited to, streets,
sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, parking lots, schools, libraries, post office,
municipal transport facilities and other public lands and buildings.
   (B)   Restrictions. It is unlawful for any person to stick, paint or post
any handbill, poster or placard of any description upon any private property
within the town without the permission of the owner of or occupant of the
property, or for any person to stick, paint or post any handbill, poster or
placard upon any post, pole or other premises located upon the public
buildings, streets, alleys or sidewalks of the town without the permission of
the Town Council.
   (C)   Distribution regulated. No person shall throw, distribute, deposit or
place any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street,
public building or structure, public park, school building or ground, alley,
utility pole, lamppost, hydrant, bridge, tree or any other public place within
the town. However the provisions of this subsection (C) shall not be deemed to
prohibit the personal delivery of such matter to persons who are willing to
accept the same. Nor shall the provisions of this subsection (C) be deemed to
prohibit the posting of handbills on town kiosks which have been provided for
such purpose or on any other structures specifically designated by the town for
such purpose.
   (D)   Placement in or on vehicles. No person shall throw or deposit any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle. However, it shall
not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute
without charge to the receiver thereof a commercial or noncommercial handbill
to the occupant of any vehicle who is willing to accept it.
   (E)   Placement on private property. No person shall throw, deposit or
distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private property
or place if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on
said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign
bearing the words “no advertising”, “no trespassing” or any similar notice
indicating in any manner that the occupant of said premises does not desire to
be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed or have any such
handbills left upon such premises. Such sign shall not exceed six square inches
in size and shall be in accordance with Title 11 of this code.
   (F)   Placement in or on inhabited premises; exceptions.
      (1)   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private property or place which is inhabited,
except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner,
occupant or other person present or upon such private premises. However, in
case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in this
section, such person, unless requested by anyone upon the premises not to do
so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private
premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent
such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, or
streets or other public places and except that mailboxes may not be so used
when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
      (2)   The provisions of this subsection (F) shall not apply to:
         (a)   The distribution of mail by the United States nor to newspapers,
except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as
to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon private property; and
         (b)   Official citations and court processes, parking tickets, stop
work orders or any other official documents issued by the town.
   (G)   Littering prohibited. Any distribution, circulation or delivery or
commercial or noncommercial handbills by means other than as specified in this
section shall be deemed littering and is hereby made unlawful.
(Ord. 8(1983) §§ 1–6; Ord. 17(1966) Art. 5 § 3)
§ 6-3E-5 GLASS CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Restrictions. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall
be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any town park or town athletic
field in the possession of a glass bottle or glass container.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Glass containers and bottles shall be permitted on the premises of
any liquor licensed establishment.
      (2)   Glass bottles and glass containers shall be permitted on the
premises of any event which has obtained a special events liquor license.
(Ord. 5(1992) § 1)
§ 6-3E-6 PUBLIC STREET USE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Blocking streets. It is unlawful for any person or group of persons to
obstruct or impede public travel upon any public street, highway or sidewalk or
in any place of a public nature within the town, or to interfere with the free
and unobstructed use of a public street, way, sidewalk or place by any other
person or persons; and it is the duty of any person or group of persons to
comply with a request of the Mayor, Town Marshal or any police officer of the
town to disburse or to discontinue any obstruction or interference with the use
of any public street, way, sidewalk or place within the town.
   (B)   Skimobiles. It is unlawful for any person or group of persons to
operate a skimobile, ski-horse, skidoo or other similar type of snow vehicle
upon any public street, way or sidewalk within the town, except upon the
written authorization of the Town Council and under the conditions set forth by
the Town Council.
   (C)   Camping regulations.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to reside temporarily on any parcel
in the town not specifically designated therefor, for a period longer than two
nights, in any tent, shelter, mobile home, recreational vehicle, trailer or any
other temporary or movable shelter that has not been permanently attached to
the land and/or received appropriate approvals from the town.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to reside overnight, cook or
establish a place of abode in any vehicle, trailer or camper on any public
street, way, sidewalk or public place within the town open for the use of the
public, whether publicly or privately owned, including public parking lots.
   (D)   Injuring street.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to operate tractors with lug wheels
or any vehicle with wheels injurious to pavements, upon the paved public
streets in the town unless the operator first makes adequate provision to
protect the streets and receives approval from the Town Manager for the method
of protection.
      (2)   Snowcats may operate on streets designated by the Town Manager
during certain special events approved by the Town Manager which shall be of a
duration not to exceed three hours. Such approval by the Town Manager may
include conditions which the Town Manager deems necessary to protect the town
streets and the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the town.
(Ord. 17(1966) Art. 6 §§ 1, 2, 4; Ord. 18(1971) § 1; Ord. 19(1978) § 1; Ord. 35
(1978) § 2; Ord. 42(1987) § 1)
§ 6-3E-7 CABLE TELEVISION; UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTION, TAMPERING.
   (A)   Unauthorized connections. It is unlawful for any person or entity to
make for himself or herself or for another person to make any unauthorized
connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or
otherwise, with any part of the franchised cable television system within the
town for the purpose of enabling himself or herself or another person or entity
to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound
without payment to the operator of said cable system. In any prosecution
charging a violation of this section, proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was at the time of the alleged violation the owner of record of the
property or the person occupying said property receiving the signal as
prohibited in this section, constitutes in evidence a prima facie presumption
that the owner of record or the person in occupation was the person who
violated the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Tampering prohibited. It is unlawful for any person, without the
consent of the owner thereof to wilfully or negligently tamper with, remove or
injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of franchised
television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound.
(Ord. 20(1979) § 3)
ARTICLE 3F: OFFENSES AGAINST MINORS
Section
6-3F-1 Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators and containers
§ 6-3F-1 ABANDONED ICEBOXES, REFRIGERATORS AND CONTAINERS.
   It is unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any
dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned
building, structure or dwelling under such person’s control within the town in
a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator, or other container which has a door or lid, snaplock or other
locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first
removing the door or lid, snaplock or other locking device.
(Ord. 17(1966) Art. 1 § 6)
ARTICLE 3G: WEAPONS, CRIMINAL ATTEMPT AND COMPLICITY
Section
6-3G-1 Discharge of firearms, weapons or destructive devices
6-3G-2 Exceptions; permits
6-3G-3 Illegal weapons, use or possession
6-3G-4 Unlawful concealment of deadly weapons
6-3G-5 Possession in licensed premises or on public property or in public
buildings
6-3G-6 Selling weapons to certain persons prohibited
6-3G-7 Possession of firearm while intoxicated
6-3G-8 Exceptions
6-3G-9 Forfeiture
6-3G-10 Disposition of confiscated weapons
6-3G-11 Criminal attempt
6-3G-12 Complicity
§ 6-3G-1 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS, WEAPONS OR DESTRUCTIVE DEVICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firearms, deadly weapons,
explosive devices, guns, pistols, shotguns, rifles, airguns, gas-operated guns,
spring guns or a weapon of any kind or description within the limits of the
town; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to
apply to persons firing or discharging such weapons in defense of person or
property.
(Ord. 12(1994) § 2)
§ 6-3G-2 EXCEPTIONS; PERMITS.
   The Town Council may at any time, upon receipt of proper application, grant
permits to shooting galleries, gun clubs, rifle ranges and other establishments
for shooting in fixed localities and under specified rules. Such permits shall
be in writing attested by the Town Clerk, conforming to such requirements and
conditions as the Town Council shall demand, and the permit thus issued shall
be subject to revocation at any time by action of the Town Council.
(Ord. 12(1994) § 2)
§ 6-3G-3 ILLEGAL WEAPONS, USE OR POSSESSION.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly possess, conceal or cause to be
concealed on their person or in any vehicle, or to use, any blackjack, gravity
knife, multi-fixed bladed stellate throwing knife, switchblade knife, nunchaku,
or brass or metallic knuckles.
(Ord. 12(1994) § 2)
§ 6-3G-4 UNLAWFUL CONCEALMENT OF DEADLY WEAPONS.
   (A)   Conceal defined. For purposes of this section only, CONCEAL shall mean
placement of the dangerous or deadly weapon in question about his or her
person, or within his or her immediate reach, in such a manner as to be either
completely hidden from view or partially hidden to such an extent that another
person making normal contact with that person cannot ascertain the true nature
of the weapon.
   (B)   Unlawful concealment. It shall be unlawful for any person to wear
under his or her clothes, or conceal about his or her person, any dangerous or
deadly weapon.
   (C)   Affirmative defense. It shall be an affirmative defense that the
defendant was:
      (1)   A person in his or her own dwelling or place of business or on
property owned or under his or her control at the time of the act of carrying;
      (2)   A person who, prior to the time of carrying a concealed weapon, has
been issued a written permit, pursuant to C.R.S. § 18-12-105.1, to carry the
weapon by a Colorado official lawfully authorized to issue such permit, and the
written permit states that it shall be effective in all areas of the state; or
      (3)   Carrying a folding-type knife with a blade not exceeding three and
one-half inches in length.
(Ord. 12(1994) § 2)
§ 6-3G-5 POSSESSION IN LICENSED PREMISES OR ON PUBLIC PROPERTY OR IN PUBLIC
BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Liquor licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person, as a
patron of an establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption
on the premises, to possess or carry or display any dangerous or deadly weapon,
whether concealed or not, while on the premises of such establishment.
   (B)   Public property. It shall be unlawful for any person entering upon any
public property including public parks or public buildings such as, but not
limited to, the town administrative offices, the public library, the Public
Works Department, any school, hospital, post office or other public facility to
possess or carry or display any dangerous or deadly weapon, whether concealed
or not, while on such premises.
   (C)   Affirmative defense.
      (1)   It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of possession or
carrying a dangerous or deadly weapon under this section that said weapon was a
folding-type knife with a blade not exceeding three and one-half inches. This
defense does not apply to a charge of displaying such a weapon.
      (2)   It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of possession or
carrying a dangerous or deadly weapon under this section that the person is in
that person’s own dwelling or place of business or on property owned or under
that person’s control at the time of the act of carrying or possessing.
(Ord. 12(1994) § 2)
§ 6-3G-6 SELLING WEAPONS TO CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, sell, loan or furnish any
dangerous or deadly weapon to any person intoxicated or under the influence of
alcohol or any narcotic or dangerous drug or glue or to any person suffering
from a mental disease or defect as defined in C.R.S. § 16-8-101, as amended,
who presents a danger to himself, herself or others.
(Ord. 12(1994) § 2)
§ 6-3G-7 POSSESSION OF FIREARM WHILE INTOXICATED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession a
firearm while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or of a CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCE, as defined in C.R.S. § 12-22-303(7). Possession of a permit issued
under C.R.S. §18-12-105.1 is not defense to a violation of this section.
(Ord. 12(1994) § 2)
§ 6-3G-8 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in §§
6-3G-1,
6-3G-3,
6-3G-4 and
6-3G-5 of this article shall be construed to forbid any enforcement officer of
the various law enforcement agencies of the United States government, or the
State of Colorado, or any sheriff or his or her deputies, or any regular,
special or ex officio peace officer, as defined in C.R.S. § 18-1-901, as
amended, from carrying, wearing or using such weapon as shall be necessary in
the proper discharge of such duties so long as such weapons have been issued or
approved by their supervisor or superior officer and they are within the course
and scope of their office or position.
(Ord. 12(1994) § 2)
§ 6-3G-9 FORFEITURE.
   Any dangerous or deadly weapon as defined by this chapter used or possessed
in violation of §§
6-3G-1,
6-3G-3,
6-3G-4,
6-3G-5 and
6-3G-6 inclusive, of this article, is hereby declared to be contraband and
shall be forfeited to the town upon a conviction resulting from such use or
possession.
(Ord. 12(1994) § 2)
§ 6-3G-10 DISPOSITION OF CONFISCATED WEAPONS.
   It shall be the duty of every peace officer upon making an arrest and taking
such a weapon, thing or substance from the person of the offender to deliver or
cause to be delivered the same to the Chief of Police to be held in his or her
custody until the final determination of the prosecution of said offense. The
Chief of Police, or his or her authorized agent, shall dispose of weapons
forfeited pursuant to ordinance by destruction or retention for Department use
in accordance with procedures and regulations of the Police Department.
(Ord. 12(1994) § 2)
§ 6-3G-11 CRIMINAL ATTEMPT.
   (A)   A person commits criminal attempt if, acting with the kind of
culpability otherwise required for commission of an offense, such person
engages in conduct constituting a substantial step toward the commission of the
offense. A substantial step is any conduct, whether act, omission or
possession, which is strongly corroborative of the firmness of the actor’s
purpose to complete the commission of the offense. Factual or legal
impossibility of committing the offense is not a defense if the offense could
have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed
them to be, nor is it a defense that the crime attempted was actually
perpetrated by the accused.
   (B)   A person who engages in conduct intending to aid another to commit an
offense commits criminal attempt if the conduct would establish his or her
complicity under §
6-3G-12 of this article were the offense committed by the other person, even if
the other is not guilty of committing or attempting the offense.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
defendant abandoned his or her effort to commit the crime or otherwise
prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting the complete and
voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal intent.
(Ord. 12(1994) § 2)
§ 6-3G-12 COMPLICITY.
   A person is legally accountable as principal for the behavior of another
constituting a criminal offense if, with the intent to promote or facilitate
the commission of the offense, he or she aids, abets or advises the other
person in planning or committing the offense.
(Ord. 12(1994) § 2)
ARTICLE 3H: ASSAULT WEAPONS
Section
6-3H-1 Legislative intent
6-3H-2 Definitions
6-3H-3 Specific weapons not included
6-3H-4 Supplemental provisions
6-3H-5 Possession of assault weapons unlawful; exceptions
6-3H-6 Conditional exception
6-3H-7 Sale or transfer unlawful
6-3H-8 Specific prohibited assault weapons
6-3H-9 Magazine capacity
6-3H-10 Violation; disposition of weapon
6-3H-11 Penalty
§ 6-3H-1 LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   The Town Council hereby ordains to place reasonable and necessary
restrictions on the sale and possession of assault weapons in the town while
placing no restrictions on the right of citizens to use weapons which are
primarily designed and intended for hunting, target practice and other
legitimate sports and recreational activities and the protection of home,
person, and property.
(Ord. 15(1994) § 1)
§ 6-3H-2 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have these
meanings respectively ascribed to them.
   ASSAULT WEAPON. The general characteristics of an assault weapon may include
the following features: a shorter length than recreational firearms; a folding
stock; a modification of an automatic firearm originally designed for military
use; a greater rate of fire or firing capacity than reasonably necessary for
legitimate sports, recreational or protection activities and shall include all
firearms with any of the following characteristics:
      (1)   All semi-automatic action, centerfire rifles with a detachable
magazine with a capacity of 21 or more rounds;
      (2)   All semi-automatic shotguns with a folding stock or a magazine
capacity of more than six rounds or both;
      (3)   Any firearm which has been modified to be operable as an “assault
weapon” as defined herein;
      (4)   Any part or combination of parts designed or intended to convert a
firearm into an assault weapon, including a detachable magazine with a capacity
of 21 or more rounds, or any combination of parts from which an assault weapon
may be readily assembled if those parts are in the possession or under the
control of the same person; and
      (5)   Any weapon listed in §
6-3H-8 of this article.
   FIXED CARTRIDGE. That self-contained unit consisting of the case, primer,
propellant charge and projectile or projectiles.
   MAGAZINE. A box, drum or other container which holds and feeds ammunition
into a semi-automatic rifle, shotgun or pistol.
   PISTOL. A weapon originally designed, made and intended to fire a projectile
(bullet) from one or more barrels when held in one hand and having:
      (1)   A chamber as an integral part of or permanently aligned with the
bore or having a breech-loading chambered cylinder so arranged that the cocking
of the hammer or movement of the trigger rotates it and brings the next
cartridge in line with the barrel for firing; and
      (2)   A short stock designed to be gripped by one hand and at an angle to
and extending below the line of the bore(s).
   RIFLE. A weapon designed or redesigned, made or remade and intended to be
fired from the shoulder or hip and designed or redesigned or made or remade to
use the energy of the explosive in a fixed cartridge to fire only a single
projectile through a rifled bore for each single pull of the trigger and shall
include any such weapon which may be readily restored to fire a fixed
cartridge.
   SEMI-AUTOMATIC. A weapon which fires a single projectile for each single
pull of the trigger which automatically chambers the next round for firing and
which employs a magazine.
   SHOTGUN. A weapon designed or redesigned, made or remade and intended to be
fired from the shoulder or hip and designed or redesigned and made or remade to
use the energy of the explosive in a fixed shotgun shell to fire through a
smooth bore either a number of projectiles (ball shot) or a single projectile
for each pull of the trigger and shall include any such weapon which may be
readily restored to fire a fixed shotgun shell.
(Ord. 15(1994) § 1)
§ 6-3H-3 SPECIFIC WEAPONS NOT INCLUDED.
   As used in this article, assault weapon does not include any of the
following:
   (A)   All weapons that do not use fixed cartridges, all weapons that were in
production prior to 1898, all manually operated bolt-action weapons, all lever-
action weapons, all slide-action weapons, all single-shot weapons, all
multiple-barrel weapons, all revolving-cylinder weapons, all semi-automatic
weapons for which there is no fixed magazine with a capacity of 21 or more
rounds available, all semi-automatic weapons that use exclusively en bloc
clips, all semi-automatic weapons in production prior to 1954 and all rimfire
weapons that employ a tubular magazine;
   (B)   Any firearm that uses .22 caliber rimfire ammunition; or
   (C)   Any assault weapon which has been modified either to render it
permanently inoperable or to permanently make it a device no longer defined as
an “assault weapon”.
(Ord. 15(1994) § 1)
§ 6-3H-4 SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS.
   Except as specifically stated herein, the provisions of this article are
independent of and supplemental to any other provisions of law, and nothing
shall prevent a device defined as an “assault weapon” in this article from also
being regulated under other provision of law.
(Ord. 15(1994) § 1)
§ 6-3H-5 POSSESSION OF ASSAULT WEAPONS UNLAWFUL; EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to carry, store, keep, manufacture, sell or otherwise
possess within the town a weapon or weapons defined herein as “assault
weapons”, except that this section shall not apply to:
   (A)   Government officials. Any federal, state or local government agency or
to any sworn members of said agencies acting within their official capacities;
   (B)   Movie props. Any assault weapon which is being used as a movie prop
for any motion picture or television program which is being filmed in whole or
in part within the town if, prior to such use, the Police Department is
notified in advance in writing of the date, time, location, production schedule
and days upon which such use shall take place and the type and serial numbers
of the firearms; and
   (C)   Nonresidents transporting legally. The transportation of any assault
weapon through the town by a nonresident who is in legal possession of an
assault weapon or a person carrying a permit issued under §
6-3H-6 of this article.
(Ord. 15(1994) § 1)
§ 6-3H-6 CONDITIONAL EXCEPTION.
   Any person over the age of 21 years who obtained an assault weapon legally
prior to the effective date hereof may obtain a permit to keep, store and
possess said assault weapon if:
   (A)   Said weapon is properly identifiable and contains its original serial
number;
   (B)   An application for a permit for each assault weapon is filed with the
Police Department within 60 days of the effective date hereof pursuant to such
procedures as the Department may establish. The application shall contain a
description of the firearm that identifies it uniquely, including all
identification marks and numbers, the full name, address, date of birth and
fingerprints of the owner and the address where such assault weapon will be
stored and such other information as the Department may deem appropriate. The
place of storage and possession shall not be changed without notification to
the Department of the proposed change in location and when said weapon will be
transported. The Department may charge a fee for registration not to exceed the
actual processing costs of the Department;
   (C)   The Department shall issue a permit which shall identify the weapon
and where it is to be stored; and
   (D)   The information required for the registration and permitting of
assault weapons shall be treated as confidential and shall not be made
available to members of the general public. The Council finds that release of
such information would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy
and could endanger the life or safety of person at the premises where an
assault weapon is located. The information on a permit application shall be
used by the town only for law enforcement purposes.
(Ord. 15(1994) § 1)
§ 6-3H-7 SALE OR TRANSFER UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful to sell or transfer possession of an assault weapon possessed
pursuant to §
6-3H-6 of this article within the town.
(Ord. 15(1994) § 1)
§ 6-3H-8 SPECIFIC PROHIBITED ASSAULT WEAPONS.
   It is unlawful to carry, store or otherwise possess within the town any of
the following weapons which are hereby declared to be assault weapons except as
provided in and subject to all the provisions of this article:
   (A)   Rifles prohibited. All of the following specified rifles are
prohibited:
      (1)   Norinco, Mitchell and Poly Technologies Avtomat Kalashnikovs (all
models);
      (2)   Action Arms Israeli Military Industries UZI and Galil;
      (3)   Beretta AR-70 (SC-70);
      (4)   CETME G3;
      (5)   Colt AR-15 and CAR-15;
      (6)   Daewoo K-1, K-2, Max 1 and Max 2;
      (7)   Fabrique Nationale (FN/FAL, FN/LAR and FNC);
      (8)   FAMAS MAS223;
      (9)   Heckler & Koch HK-91, H-93, HK-94 and PSG-1;
      (10)   MAC 10 and MAC 11;
      (11)   SKS with detachable magazine;
      (12)   SIG AMT, SIG 500 Series and SIG PE-57;
      (13)   Springfield Armory BM59 and SAR-48;
      (14)   Sterling MK-6 and SAR;
      (15)   Steyr AUG;
      (16)   Valmet M62, M71S and M78;
      (17)   Armalite AR-180 Carbine;
      (18)   Bushmaster Assault Rifle (armgun);
      (19)   Calico M-900 Assault Carbine;
      (20)   Mandall THE TAC-1 Carbine;
      (21)   Plainfield Machine Company Carbine;
      (22)   PJK M-68 Carbine; and
      (23)   Weaver Arm Nighthawk.
   (B)   Pistols prohibited. All of the following specified pistols are
prohibited:
      (1)   Action Arms UZI;
      (2)   Encom MP-9 and MP-45;
      (3)   MAC 10 and MAC 11;
      (4)   INTRATEC TEC-9;
      (5)   Mitchell Arms Spectre Auto;
      (6)   Sterling MK-7; and
      (7)   Calico M-900.
   (C)   Shotguns prohibited. All of the following specified shotguns are
prohibited:
      (1)   Franchi SPAS 12 and LAW 12;
      (2)   Gilbert Equipment Company Striker 12; and
      (3)   Encom CM-55.
   (D)   Other models. Other models by the same manufacturer that are identical
to firearms listed in subsection (A), (B) or (C) of this section except for
slight modifications or enhancements, including, but not limited to, a folding
or retractable stock; adjustable sight; case deflector for left handed
shooters; shorter barrel; wooden, plastic or metal stock; larger clip size;
different caliber, provided the caliber exceeds .22 rimfire; or bayonet mount;
and
   (E)   Redesigned, renamed, renumbered firearms. Firearms which have been
redesigned from, renamed, renumbered or patterned after one of the listed
firearms in subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section or those described in
subsection (D) of this section regardless of the company of production or
distribution or the country of origin or any firearm which has been
manufactured or sold by another company under a licensing agreement to
manufacture or sell the identical or nearly identical firearms as those listed
in subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section or those described in
subsection (D) of this section regardless of the company of production or
distribution or the country of origin.
(Ord. 15(1994) § 1)
§ 6-3H-9 MAGAZINE CAPACITY.
   It shall be unlawful to carry, store or otherwise possess a magazine which
will hold or may be modified to hold 21 or more rounds.
(Ord. 15(1994) § 1)
§ 6-3H-10 VIOLATION; DISPOSITION OF WEAPON.
   Upon a conviction of violating any provision of this article the weapon
shall be confiscated and destroyed under §
6-3G-10 of this chapter.
(Ord. 15(1994) § 1)
§ 6-3H-11 PENALTY.
   Any person who is convicted of violating any provision of this article shall
be punished as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 14(2013) § 3)
ARTICLE 3I: VIOLATION OF RESTRAINING ORDER
Section
6-3I-1 Definitions
6-3I-2 Restraining order violation
§ 6-3I-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
   PROTECTED PERSON. The person or persons identified in the restraining order
as the person or persons for whose benefit the restraining order was issued.
   RESTRAINED PERSON. The person identified in the restraining order as the
person prohibited from doing the specified act or acts.
   RESTRAINING ORDER.
      (1)   Any order which prohibits the restrained person from contacting,
harassing, injuring, intimidating, molesting, threatening or touching any
person, or from entering or remaining on premises or from coming within a
specified distance of a protected person or premises which is issued by a court
of this state or the Municipal Court, or which is issued pursuant to any
statute within the State of Colorado or rule of civil procedure, criminal
procedure, county court procedure or municipal court procedure within the State
of Colorado; and
      (2)   Any order which prohibits the restrained person from contacting,
harassing, injuring, intimidating, molesting, threatening or touching any
person, or from entering or remaining on premises or from coming within a
specified distance of a protected person or premises which is issued as part of
the proceedings concerning criminal municipal ordinance violation; and
      (3)   Any other order of the court which prohibits a person from
contacting, harassing, injuring, intimidating, molesting, threatening or
touching any person or from entering or remaining on premises or from coming
within a specified distance of a protected person or premises.
   SUBSEQUENT ORDER. An order which amends, modifies, supplements or supersedes
a restraining order.
(Ord. 23(2005) § 1)
§ 6-3I-2 RESTRAINING ORDER VIOLATION.
   (A)   A person commits the crime of violation of a restraining order if such
person commits an act which is prohibited by any court pursuant to a valid
order issued pursuant to any statute within the State of Colorado or rule of
civil procedure, criminal procedure, county court procedure or municipal court
procedure within the State of Colorado; or an order issued by any court which
restrains and enjoins any person from threatening, beating, striking or
assaulting any other person or requires a person to leave certain premises and
refrain from entering or remaining on such premises, or a municipal ordinance
which provides for an order to issue which restrains any person from
threatening, molesting or injuring any person or entering or remaining on the
premises; or any protective order issued pursuant to C.R.S. Title 19 (or the
Children’s Code); or if such person fails to perform any act mandated by any
such order, after such person has been personally served with any such order or
otherwise has acquired from the court actual knowledge of the contents of any
such order.
   (B)   A peace officer shall arrest, or, if an arrest would be impractical
under the circumstances, seek a warrant for the arrest of, a restrained person
when the peace officer has information amounting to probable cause that:
      (1)   The restrained person has violated or attempted to violate any
provision of a restraining order; and
      (2)   The restrained person has been properly served with a copy of the
restraining order or the restrained person had received actual notice of the
existence and substance of such order.
   (C)   Any violation of this section shall be deemed a violation of this
code, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both in accordance with the
general penalty provisions of this code. Any sentence imposed for violation of
this section shall run consecutively and not concurrently with any sentence
imposed for any crime which gave rise to the issuing of the restraining order.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to alter or diminish the
inherent authority of the court to enforce its orders through civil or criminal
contempt proceedings.
   (E)   No person charged with violation of a restraining order pursuant to
this section shall be permitted, in the criminal action resulting from such
charge, to collaterally attack the validity of the order which such person is
accused of violating.
   (F)   A peace officer arresting a person for violating a restraining order
or otherwise enforcing a restraining order shall not be held criminally or
civilly liable for such arrest or enforcement unless the peace officer acts in
bad faith and with malice or does not act in compliance with rules adopted by
the Colorado Supreme Court.
(Ord. 23(2005) § 1)
CHAPTER 4: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
6-4-1 Intent
6-4-2 Definitions
6-4-3 Proof of rabies vaccination and registration
6-4-4 Dog licensing required
6-4-5 License tag attached to collar or harness
6-4-6 Failure to control animal
6-4-7 Interference with owner’s control of animal
6-4-8 Interference with animal control officer
6-4-9 Control of dangerous or potentially dangerous animals
6-4-10 Report animal bites and injury caused by animals
6-4-11 Produce biting animal for inspection or quarantine
6-4-12 Compliance with sale or adoption contract
6-4-13 Unlawful release of animal
6-4-14 Impoundment of animals
6-4-15 Disposition of impounded animals
6-4-16 Redemption or surrender of animal; payment of fees
6-4-17 Threatening of wildlife or livestock
6-4-18 Poisoning animals
6-4-19 Trapping
6-4-20 Nuisance animal noise
6-4-21 Habitual offender
6-4-22 Enforcement
6-4-23 Penalties
6-4-24 Additional penalty; destruction of dog
§ 6-4-1 INTENT.
   It is the intent of the Vail Town Council in adopting these pet animal
control and licensing regulations to declare that a pet animal owner provide
reasonable care for and must assume full responsibility and strict liability
for the action of any pet animal owned, kept, controlled, or in the custody of
the pet animal owner.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-2 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
   ABANDON. To fail to provide any necessary care for a pet animal for any
period of 24 hours or longer. Such care shall include, but not be limited to,
food, water, protection from the weather, socialization, and removal of waste
from the animal’s enclosure. For the purposes of this chapter, any pet animal
is presumed to be abandoned if, after the posting of a written notice
describing deficiencies in the animal care or the personal service of such
notice, the deficiencies are not corrected by any person other than an animal
control officer during the 24-hour period immediately following such posting or
service.
   ANIMAL. Any living dumb creature.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person empowered by Town of Vail to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, Town of Vail Police Department personnel, and peace
officers as defined in C.R.S. § 18-1-901.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any and all facilities and premises authorized by Eagle
County to care for pet animals impounded pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. Such facilities and premises shall also be considered public animal
shelters for the purpose of impounding dangerous dogs pursuant to the
provisions of C.R.S. § 18-9-204.5.
   ATTACK. Aggressive behavior resulting in bodily injury, serious bodily
injury or death to a person or another animal.
   BITE. The piercing, laceration or breaking of the skin by the teeth or jaws
of any animal.
   BODILY INJURY. Any physical injury that results in severe bruising, muscle
tears, skin lacerations requiring professional medical treatment, or fracture
of any bone or injury that requires corrective or cosmetic surgery.
   CAT. Any animal of the species Felis cattus or any hybrid thereof.
   CONTROL. Supervision of, or influence over, any pet animal sufficient to
prevent such pet animal from being in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter. CONTROL may be by other than physical means if it can be
demonstrated to be real and immediate at the time in question. For the purposes
of this chapter, failure to control shall include the criminally negligent
leaving of an animal in circumstances that result in neglect, mistreatment or
abandonment of the animal.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal that has inflicted bodily or serious bodily
injury upon or has caused the death of a person or animal.
   DOG. Any canine animal, including those related to the wolf, fox, coyote or
jackal.
   FERRET. Any animal of the species Mustala putorius or any hybrid thereof.
   HABITUAL OFFENDER. Any animal owner who has pled guilty to, or been found
guilty of, violating any provision of this chapter three times within any 18-
month period. For the purposes of this chapter, any disposition of charges
involving probation or deferred judgment and sentencing shall be considered to
be convictions.
   HUMANE TRAP. Live traps which do not cause bodily harm to the animal
intended to be captured or bodily harm to any animal or person coming in
contact with such trap.
   IMMEDIATE CONTROL. Control of an animal by the physical presence of a
responsible person, within ten feet of the animal and such responsible person
can exhibit voice control over the animal.
   MISTREATMENT. Every act or omission which causes, or unreasonably permits
the continuation of, unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering.
   NEGLECT. Failure to provide food, water, protection from the weather,
opportunity for exercise, socialization or other care consistent with the needs
of the species of the animal in question.
   PET ANIMAL. Any animal so defined in C.R.S. Title 35, Article 80, Part 102
(10).
   PET ANIMAL FACILITY. Any facility licensed as such pursuant to the
provisions of C.R.S. Title 35, Article 80, Part 1.
   PET ANIMAL OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation, or organization possessing,
keeping, having financial or property interest in, or having control or custody
of any pet animal.
   PHYSICAL CONTROL. Control of an animal by means of a tether or a leash
attached to the animal, and held by a responsible person; or, confinement
within a locked vehicle or locked enclosure sufficient to prevent the animal
from escaping.
   POISON. A substance that has an inherent tendency to destroy life or impair
health.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal that when unprovoked:
      (1)   Inflicts any laceration or bruising upon a human or another animal;
      (2)   Chases or approaches a person on any property other than the
owner’s in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack;
      (3)   Is a venomous animal; or
      (4)   Is an animal possessing physical characteristics or demonstrated
tendencies that would cause a reasonable person to conclude that the animal is
likely to inflict injury or cause the death of any person or another animal.
   PREMISES. Property owned, leased or expressly permitted to be used by an
owner. PREMISES includes any confined area or locality such as a residence,
business, room, shop, building or motor vehicle, including the open space bed
of a truck when the animal’s presence is authorized by the owner of such
confined area or locality.
   PROPER CONTROL OF A DANGEROUS ANIMAL.
      (1)   While on the owner’s premises, a dangerous animal shall be confined
indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, structure or motor vehicle
suitable to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the animal from
escaping.
      (2)   While off the owner’s premises, a dangerous animal shall be under
the physical control of the owner or other responsible person.
   PROPER CONTROL OF A POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL.
      (1)   While on the owner’s premises, a potentially dangerous animal shall
be controlled by a chain, leash, or other confinement suitable to prevent the
animal from leaving the owner’s premises; or
      (2)   While off the owner’s premises, a potentially dangerous animal
shall be under the physical control of the owner or other responsible person.
   PROTECTIVE CUSTODY. The taking of an animal into custody by an animal
control officer to prevent the mistreatment, neglect or abandonment of such
animal; or, impoundment of an animal because of the owner’s inability to care
for the animal due to incarceration or transport to a medical treatment
facility.
   QUARANTINE. The confinement of an animal for observation to detect symptoms
of disease.
   RABIES REGISTRATION. The vaccination of an animal with an anti-rabies
vaccine administered under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian, and the
retention of a rabies registration certificate by the pet animal owner.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Such injury which, either at the time of the actual
injury or at a later time, involves a substantial risk of death, a substantial
risk of serious permanent disfigurement, a substantial risk of protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any part or organ of the body, or breaks,
fractures or burns of the second or third degree.
   TETHERING. The tying and leaving of a pet animal upon any property other
than the owner’s own property.
   TRAINING. The education, instruction or discipline of a dog in accordance
with recognized methods.
   TRESPASS. The entry of an animal upon any private property other than that
of the animal’s owner or public property which is appropriately posted as not
permitting animals.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog, “dangerous
animal” or “potentially dangerous animal” as defined in this chapter.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-3 PROOF OF RABIES VACCINATION AND REGISTRATION.
   It shall be unlawful to fail to provide proof of a current rabies
vaccination and registration for any pet animal possessed in the town if the
United States Department of Agriculture has licensed a rabies vaccine for the
specific animal in question. Such rabies registration shall begin when the
animal reaches the age of three months, and shall be renewed to maintain
efficacy through the period of licensing.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-4 DOG LICENSING REQUIRED.
   (A)   Age of animal; term of license. It shall be unlawful for the owner of
any dog over the age of three months to fail to obtain a valid Eagle County dog
license after the dog has been kept in the town for any consecutive 14-day
period within any calendar year or immediately upon citation for any violation
of this chapter. The owner shall obtain a dog license for each calendar year.
Dog licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year for which they are issued.
Proof of current rabies registration with efficacy extending through the
license period and payment of the license fee shall be required before any
license is issued.
   (B)   Fees; exemption. The license fees shall be set annually by the Town
Manager. Dogs kept as part of the operation of a pet animal facility licensed
by the United States Department of Agriculture or the Colorado Department of
Agriculture pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. Title 35, Article 80 shall be
exempt from the licensing provisions of this chapter. Such dogs shall not be
exempt from the rabies registration requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-5 LICENSE TAG ATTACHED TO COLLAR OR HARNESS.
   (A)   Attachment required. It shall be unlawful to fail to attach a valid
dog license tag to the collar or harness of the dog for which the license is
issued. Such collar or harness shall be worn by the dog at all times when the
dog is off the premises of the owner.
   (B)   Exception. If any dog is unable to wear a collar or harness because of
a medical reason certified by a veterinarian, or because the dog is worked in a
capacity that makes the wearing of a collar or harness hazardous to the dog,
the owner of the dog must have the dog tattooed with a tattoo approved by the
Animal Control Department.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-6 FAILURE TO CONTROL ANIMAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and considered a failure to control an animal
when:
      (1)   Any dog is off the premises of the owner without the presence of a
responsible person having physical control of the dog on any bike path or
public park located within the town or on any area located within the town and
described in exhibit A attached to Ordinance 5, series of 1995, made a part of
this section by reference, and which can be found on file in the office of the
Town Clerk;
      (2)   (a)   Any dog is off the premises of the owner in all areas of the
town, other than as specified in subsection (A) of this section, without the
presence of a person having immediate control of the dog; and
         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation under this
subsection (A) that the responsible person accompanying and having immediate
control of the dog was actively engaged in training of the dog which caused the
distance between the responsible person and the dog to be greater than ten
feet.
      (3)   Any dog is on or within 100 feet of any athletic field or golf
course within the town while any athletic event or activity is in progress,
except that a dog may be within 100 feet of an athletic field or golf course
while any athletic event or activity is in progress if the dog is on a public
road or right-of-way;
      (4)   Any animal is allowed to become a danger to any person or property;
      (5)   Any animal trespasses on, or is tethered upon, any public property
where expressly prohibited or private property without the permission of a
person owning, leasing or otherwise controlling the property in question;
      (6)   Any dog reaches past the perimeter of the owner’s premises with its
teeth or claws;
      (7)   Any animal is allowed to excrete body waste upon public or private
property when the animal owner or other responsible person does not remove the
waste in a timely manner;
      (8)   Any female dog or cat is not confined during estrus in a house,
building or secure enclosure constructed so that the female dog or cat cannot
escape, and no male dog or cat may gain access to the enclosed animal;
      (9)   A dog is not under physical control while in the yard of any
multiple occupancy building occupied by other persons; or in the common areas
of apartments, or condominium developments;
      (10)   Any animal is not under physical control in areas posted as
requiring any animal to be on a leash/tether by any agency of the federal
government, the state or the town.
      (11)   Any animal is kept or left in circumstances which constitute
neglect, mistreatment or abandonment, if the keeping or leaving is due to
criminal negligence on the part of the animal owner; and
      (12)   Protective custody of any animal is reasonably necessary.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in subsections (A)(1) and (A)
(2) of this section, any dog in Bighorn Park and/or Stephens Park, except for
those considered as vicious, dangerous or potentially dangerous, need not be
under either physical control or immediate control of the pet animal owner if
said dog is occupying any area described in Exhibit A attached to Ordinance 1,
series of 2003 or Exhibit A attached to Ordinance 4, series of 2004, made a
part of this section by reference, and which can be found on file in the office
of the Town Clerk. Nothing in this section shall exempt a pet animal owner from
the provisions of subsections (A)(3) through (A)(12) of this section or from
exercising control over his or her dog, as defined in this chapter, at all
times.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2; Ord. 1(2003) § 2; Ord. 4(2004) §2)
§ 6-4-7 INTERFERENCE WITH OWNER’S CONTROL OF ANIMAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any act which interferes
with, prevents or hinders the efforts of an animal owner to control any of the
owner’s animals.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-8 INTERFERENCE WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder,
prevent or obstruct an animal control officer when such person can reasonably
be expected to know that the officer is in the performance of duty pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-9 CONTROL OF DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Dangerous or potentially dangerous declaration. The animal control
officer or his or her designees shall have the authority to declare any animal
as dangerous or potentially dangerous when the preponderance of evidence
indicates the animal is “dangerous” or “potentially dangerous” as defined in
this chapter.
   (B)   Owner responsibility. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal
declared to be potentially dangerous to fail to exercise “proper control of a
dangerous animal” as defined in this chapter.
   (C)   Possession prohibited. It is unlawful to possess any animal declared
to be dangerous.
   (D)   Request for hearing.
      (1)   When an animal has been designated as potentially dangerous or
dangerous and a summons and complaint has not been issued, any animal owner
shall have the opportunity to request an administrative hearing to show cause
as to why the animal in question should not have been, or should not continue
to be, declared potentially dangerous or dangerous.
      (2)   The burden of proof shall be upon the animal owner to demonstrate
beyond a reasonable doubt that the behavior of the animal in question at the
time in question did not support the declaration of “dangerous” or “potentially
dangerous” as those terms are defined in this chapter.
      (3)   The animal control officer or his or her designee shall preside at
such hearings.
      (4)   Such hearings shall be requested in writing by mailing the request
to: Animal Control Officer, 75 S. Frontage Road, Vail, Colorado 81657.
   (E)   Appeal decision. Within five days of receiving a ruling in an
administrative hearing, any animal owner shall have the opportunity to appeal
such decision to the Town Municipal Court. Such notice of appeal shall be filed
in writing with the Clerk of Court and a copy shall be forwarded to the animal
control officer.
   (F)   Affirmative defenses. An affirmative defense to the declaration of a
potentially dangerous or dangerous animal shall be that:
      (1)   The other animal was trespassing upon the premises of the animal
owner, and the attack began, but did not necessarily end, upon such premises;
      (2)   The other animal was biting or otherwise threatening or attacking
the animal owner or the animal owner’s animal;
      (3)   The person attacked was committing or attempting to commit a
criminal offense, other than a petty offense, against the animal’s owner, and
the attack did not occur upon the animal owner’s premises;
      (4)   The person attacked was committing a criminal offense, other than a
petty offense, against a person on the owner’s premises or against the premises
itself and the attack began, but did not necessarily end, upon such premises;
or
      (5)   The person attacked had tormented, provoked, abused or inflicted
injury upon the animal.
   (G)   Authority to destroy animal. When probable cause exists to indicate
that an animal is potentially dangerous and/or dangerous and is not under
proper control, any animal control officer may use any available means to
ensure that the animal does not endanger any person. Such means shall include
the destruction of the animal, if necessary.
   (H)   Impoundment. Any animal that is declared as dangerous shall be taken
into custody by the Eagle County Animal Control Department. The animal will
remain impounded at the Eagle County Animal Shelter and the owner shall be
required to post a bond to cover the anticipated expenses and costs of such
impoundment. If the owner fails to post such bond the animal shall be
destroyed.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-10 REPORT ANIMAL BITES AND INJURY CAUSED BY ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to report any known information
regarding an animal bite or injury caused by an animal to the Vail animal
control officer. The report of the incident shall be made within 24 hours after
such information is received, and shall include the name, address and telephone
number of the person making the report. The report may be made by telephone to
the animal control office on voice mail.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-11 PRODUCE BITING ANIMAL FOR INSPECTION OR QUARANTINE.
   It shall be unlawful for any animal owner to fail to make available for
inspection or quarantine any animal when probable cause exists to believe that
the animal has bitten any person. If a quarantine period is necessary, the
place of quarantine shall be at the discretion of the Eagle County Animal
Control Department. Any costs incurred as a result of a quarantine period shall
be the sole responsibility of the animal owner.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-12 COMPLIANCE WITH SALE OR ADOPTION CONTRACT.
   (A)   Sterilization requirement. It shall be unlawful to possess any
unsterilized dog or cat when such dog or cat is required to be sterilized under
the terms of any applicable sales or adoption contract, regardless of where the
contract originated; and
   (B)   Terms of contract. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with any of
the terms of an adoption or fostering contract when the animal is obtained from
the Eagle County Animal Shelter pursuant to such contract.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-13 UNLAWFUL RELEASE OF ANIMAL.
   It shall be unlawful to remove any animal from the custody of Eagle County
Animal Control, Vail Animal Control or Vail Police Department without the
consent of an animal control officer or police officer. CUSTODY as used in this
section shall be confinement of an animal at the animal shelter or in any
county vehicle.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-14 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   Noncompliance with provisions. An animal control officer may impound
any animal that is not under control under the provisions of this chapter, or
is not in conformity with any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Dangerous animal. An animal control officer may impound any
potentially dangerous or dangerous animal that is not under proper restraint.
Upon establishing probable cause to believe that an animal is dangerous or
potentially dangerous, an animal control officer may perform such impoundment
prior to notifying the owner, if such owner is not immediately present to
exercise proper control of such animal.
   (C)   Owner notification. As soon as practicable after the impoundment of
any animal, an animal control officer shall make a reasonable effort to notify
the owner of the animal of the animal’s location by telephone, posting of a
notice at the owner’s residence, or by written notice mailed to the owner’s
known address, if the identity of the animal owner is known. If needed to
establish the identity of the animal owner, information contained on any
identification, rabies or license tag found attached to the animal shall be
used.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-15 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Property of eagle county. Any animal impounded pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, shall become the property of the Eagle County
Animal Control after five days of impoundment. Each partial day of impoundment
shall count as one day.
   (B)   Early euthanization. Eagle County Animal Control may humanely
euthanize any animal at any time prior to the expiration of the five-day
impoundment period if the animal is extremely injured or ill, or if the animal
poses a risk to the health of any person.
   (C)   Owner financially responsible. The owner of any impounded animal shall
be held responsible for all the costs of impoundment and boarding and such
costs shall be fully paid prior to the release of the animal.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-16 REDEMPTION OR SURRENDER OF ANIMAL; PAYMENT OF FEES.
   It shall be unlawful for any animal owner to fail to make arrangements for
the redemption or surrender of any animal impounded pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, or to fail to pay any fees associated with the redemption or
surrender of such animal.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-17 THREATENING OF WILDLIFE OR LIVESTOCK.
   It shall be unlawful to fail to control any animal so as to prevent such
animal from running after, chasing, pursuing, biting, worrying, attacking or
threatening wildlife or livestock. Any animal threatening wildlife or livestock
may be immediately destroyed at the discretion of any animal control officer. A
violation of this section shall require a mandatory court appearance by the
animal owner. Upon conviction of any violation of this section, the animal
owner shall be required by the court to pay restitution for any livestock or
wildlife injured or killed by the owner’s animal or animals.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-18 POISONING ANIMALS.
   No person shall poison or distribute poison in any manner with the intent to
poison any animal. It is a specific defense to a charge of violating this
section that the person intended to poison mice, rats or rodents other than
hamsters, guinea pigs and squirrels by the use of a poisonous substance
approved for such use by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or
that the person was regularly engaged in the business of fumigation or pest
extermination and was so licensed by the state.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-19 TRAPPING.
   (A)   Humane trapping of nuisance animals. When deemed necessary by the
animal control officer for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the town, such officers and/or their agents may place or authorize the
placement of a humane trap on any property in the town when the resident,
property owner or property manager requests such a trap for the purpose of
capturing any wild or pet animal creating a nuisance in the town. It shall be
unlawful for any person legally responsible for the placement of a trap to fail
to monitor any trap set by such person for the presence of an animal at least
once every 12 hours.
   (B)   Prohibited traps; exception.
      (1)   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to set or cause to be set
within the town limits, any steel jaw leghold trap, lethal snare, fully body
grip trap or any trap for the purpose of capturing or killing any animal.
         (b)   This subsection (B) does not apply to public officials in the
exercise of their duties nor to licensed, recognized trapping companies
utilizing such traps in cases of disease outbreak. In such cases the express
permission of the owner of the land must be given.
      (2)   Nothing in this subsection (B) shall be deemed to prohibit the use
of snap type traps for mice or rats.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-20 NUISANCE ANIMAL NOISE.
   (A)   Owner responsibility. It is unlawful for any animal owner to fail to
prevent his or her animal from disturbing the peace of any other person by
unprovoked loud, habitual and persistent barking, howling, yelping or whining,
or any other unprovoked noise, whether the animal is on or off the animal
owner’s property.
   (B)   Conditions of complaint. No person shall be charged with a violation
of this section unless a written warning for a separate occurrence of
disturbing the peace has been given at least 72 hours prior to the issuance of
the citation. The name and address of the complainant shall appear on the
written warning.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-21 HABITUAL OFFENDER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to become an “habitual offender” as
defined in this chapter, and any person so charged may be charged in addition
to any other charges brought pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and
offending animals ordered removed from the town and/or other such remedies as
imposed by the Court.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-22 ENFORCEMENT.
   “Animal control officers” as defined in this chapter have the authority to
issue a summons and complaint or penalty assessment to any alleged violator of
this chapter. The penalty assessment shall be as set by the Municipal Judge for
the town.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4-23 PENALTIES.
   (A)   The following schedule shall apply to offenses charged pursuant to the
penalty assessment procedure:
For all violations not involving a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal
   First offense                    $40
   Second offense within one year   $100
   Subsequent offenses within one ye$150
For all violations involving a potentially dangerous animal
   First offense                    $75
   Second offense within one year   $150
   Subsequent offenses within one yeMandatory court appearance
For all violations involving a dangerous dog at large, a habitual offender
charge, poisoning, trapping, failing to redeem animal or failure to pay fine
or fees, or threatening of wildlife or livestock
                                       Mandatory court appearance; mandatory
   Any offense                      fine upon conviction of $300 plus all
                                       associated costs and restitution
 
   (B)   The above stated fines are minimum penalties and all violations are
subject to the general penalties set forth in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2; Ord. 14(2013) § 4)
§ 6-4-24 ADDITIONAL PENALTY; DESTRUCTION OF DOG.
   In addition to any penalties which may be provided for in this chapter for
violation of any provisions of this chapter, the Municipal Judge shall have the
authority, upon making a finding that the dog constitutes a nuisance or that
the dog constitutes a real and present danger to the citizens of the town, to
order that the dog be destroyed in a humane fashion.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
ARTICLE 4A: CARRIAGE OPERATIONS
Section
6-4A-1 Conditions of permit
6-4A-2 Testing
6-4A-3 Hours of operation
6-4A-4 Approved routes; exceptions
6-4A-5 Traffic laws enforced
6-4A-6 Carriages unattended
6-4A-7 Condition of carriages
6-4A-8 Required equipment
6-4A-9 Number of horsedrawn carriages
6-4A-10 Penalties
§ 6-4A-1 CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Obligation. The owners of horsedrawn carriages and their employees,
agents or subcontractors shall use and occupy the public right-of-way in a safe
and careful manner.
   (B)   Guaranteed compliance. The signature of the applicant or an authorized
representative on a permit shall indicate that all conditions of the
application and permit have been agreed upon and have been met, and the
applicant may undertake the activity specifically permitted.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4A-2 TESTING.
   Each applicant and operator shall be tested by the town or its
representative to determine the applicant’s ability to operate a horsedrawn
carriage. The applicant shall be responsible for the competency of all of his
or her operators, carriages and horses. In addition, thereto, the town reserves
the right to require testing, observation of performance of any operator,
carriage, or horse at any time. Testing shall include, but is not limited to,
the following areas:
   (A)   Carriage and harness. General mechanical condition of carriage and
harness.
      (1)   Carriage shall be in good condition with all wheels in good order
and running free. Shafts, fifth wheels and running gear shall be inspected for
condition.
      (2)   Harnesses shall be inspected for condition of worn leather,
buckles, proper fit, and adjustment on the horse.
   (B)   Driver abilities. Driver testing for ability to harness horse and
hitch to carriage, in a safe and competent manner.
      (1)   Driver shall demonstrate the ability to harness the horse and make
necessary adjustments for a proper fit.
      (2)   Driver shall hitch horse to carriage and make adjustments for
proper fit.
   (C)   Horse and driver under stress. Testing of driver and horse under
stress conditions for safe and prudent operation.
      (1)   Driver shall maneuver through cone patterns showing his or her
ability to perform “figure eight”, turns right and left, backing and
maintaining a prolonged stop.
      (2)   Driver shall drive the above described patterns again while
undergoing stress testing. The stress testing may include, but is not limited
to, the following:
         (a)   Banners;
         (b)   Balloons;
         (c)   Rattling tin;
         (d)   Black plastic;
         (e)   Firecrackers;
         (f)   Umbrellas;
         (g)   Various noise makers;
         (h.   Sirens.
         (i)   Fuses;
         (j)   Rolling innertubes; and
         (k)   Dogs and/or other animals.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4A-3 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Horsedrawn carriages are permitted to operate at any time seven days a week
except:
   (A)   Between the hours of 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Bridge Street; or
   (B)   In the village core or Lionshead Village areas on those days or those
times as deemed by the Town Manager and/or the Chief of Police when such
operation would constitute a hazard to the public safety; for example, July 4,
New Year’s Eve and the like, and with consideration of extreme weather
conditions.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2; Ord. 2(2005) § 1)
§ 6-4A-4 APPROVED ROUTES; EXCEPTIONS.
   Horsedrawn carriages may operate on any street within the town with the
following exceptions:
   (A)   Excepted areas.
      (1)   On any “gated” area commonly found on town bus routes or bus stops;
      (2)   On any area commonly referred to as a “frontage road”;
      (3)   On any portion of I-70; and
      (4)   On any recreation path.
   (B)   Excluded from restricted areas. The use of the east side gate on West
Meadow Drive and the walking path which exists between West Meadow Drive and
East Lionshead Circle, running between the Dobson ice arena and the Evergreen
lodge will not be included in the restricted areas.
   (C)   Entries and exitways. Horsedrawn carriages may not impede any entry
and/or exit way of any building.
   (D)   Amend section regulations. The Town Manager and/or the Chief of Police
may temporarily amend, waive or suspend the provisions of this section at any
time for the town’s convenience or in the event of extraordinary circumstances,
as determined by the Town Manager or Chief of Police.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2; Ord. 2(2005) § 2)
§ 6-4A-5 TRAFFIC LAWS ENFORCED.
   All state and municipal traffic laws are held to apply to the operation of
any carriage within the town. Any infraction of said laws can result in loss or
suspension of certificate for operation for the subject driver or revocation of
any horsedrawn carriage agreement that has been entered into with the town.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2)
§ 6-4A-6 CARRIAGES UNATTENDED.
   Carriages shall not be left unattended and drivers will remain with the
carriage and in control at all times. Should it be necessary for the driver to
leave the carriage unattended, the carriage shall be unoccupied and the horses
shall be securely tied to designated fixed objects. Compliance with this
section shall not constitute a chargeable offense under §
6-4-6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2; Ord. 2(2005) § 3)
§ 6-4A-7 CONDITION OF CARRIAGES.
   All carriages used within the town shall be well maintained, in neat
appearance and hitched appropriately with safe and serviceable harnesses.
Lights are to be of such luminance as to be readily visible at 500 feet front
and rear, with signals for turns and stops. A braking system independent of the
horse(s) is to be installed and serviceable on any carriage operating within
the town. A sounding device, either horn or bell, is to be available on each
carriage. The horse(s) should be familiar with said device and demonstrate no
adverse reaction to such device when used.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2; Ord. 2(2005) § 4)
§ 6-4A-8 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
   The following equipment is required:
   (A)   Buckles (no snaps) on harness ends;
   (B)   Throat latch;
   (C)   Blinders;
   (D)   Nose band;
   (E)   Brichen;
   (F)   Buckle safes or keepers behind all buckles;
   (G)   Whip;
   (H)   Round collar or breast collar style harness;
   (I)   Kickstrap;
   (J)   Diapers;
   (K)   Sharp knife, with a blade length less than four and one-half inches;
   (L)   Harness bells; and
   (M)   Reflectors on front of hitch.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2; Ord. 2(2005) § 5)
§ 6-4A-9 NUMBER OF HORSEDRAWN CARRIAGES.
   It is the judgment of the Town Council that in order to enable the town bus
system to function properly and to protect pedestrians within the town that
controlling the number of horsedrawn carriages operating within the town is
within the public interest. To this end, the maximum number of horsedrawn
carriages to be operated regularly on the streets of Vail is a total of six to
be allocated to all approved companies. The Town Manager has the authority to
specify the locations of operation of the horsedrawn carriages. The maximum and
minimum number of horsedrawn carriages operated by any approved company shall
at all times be within the limits determined by the Town Council and Town
Manager applying the principles of a public convenience and necessity.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2; Ord. 2(2005) § 6)
§ 6-4A-10 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Schedule of penalties. The following schedule shall apply to offenses
charged pursuant to the penalty assessment procedure for all offenses involving
a carriage operation violation:
 
First offense                     $50
Second offense within 1 year      $150
Subsequent offenses within 1 year Mandatory court appearance
 
   (B)   Imposition of penalty; revocation of permit. The above stated fines
are minimum penalties and all violations are subject to the general penalties
set forth in §
1-4-1 of this code. There shall be a mandatory revocation of a carriage
operation’s permit upon a third violation of this article within an 18-month
period of time.
(Ord. 5(1995) § 2; Ord. 2(2005) § 7; Ord. 14(2013) § 5)
ARTICLE 4B: PET SHOPS
Section
6-4B-1 Definitions
6-4B-2 Pet shop regulations
6-4B-3 Violation and penalty
§ 6-4B-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
   ANIMAL. As defined in §
6-4-2 of this code.
   ANIMAL CARE FACILITY. An animal control center or animal shelter, as defined
in §
6-4-2 of this code, maintained by or under contract with any state, county or
municipality, with a mission and practice of, in whole or significant part, to
rescue and place animals in permanent homes.
   ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION. A nonprofit organization with tax-exempt status
under § 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, with a mission or
practice, in whole or significant part, to rescue or place animals in permanent
homes.
   CAT. As defined in §
6-4-2 of this code.
   DOG. As defined in §
6-4-2 of this code.
   PET SHOP. A retail establishment where animals are sold, exchanged, bartered
or offered for sale as pets to the general public at retail, but excluding an
animal care facility or animal rescue organization.
(Ord. 4(2021) § 1)
§ 6-4B-2 PET SHOP REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No pet shop shall sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, auction or
otherwise dispose of a dog or a cat.
   (B)   A pet shop that offers space for the adoption of dogs or cats shall
post, in a conspicuous location on the enclosure of each such animal, a sign
listing the name of the animal care facility or animal rescue organization from
which the pet shop acquired each dog or cat.
   (C)   It is unlawful for a pet shop to offer for adoption any sick or
injured dog or cat, or to offer for adoption any dog or cat that is so young or
weak that its sale would be injurious to the animal.
   (D)   It is unlawful for a pet shop to offer any of the following for sale,
barter or auction: a sick or injured animal; an animal that is so young or weak
that its transfer would be injurious to the animal; or an animal that has been
inhumanely bred or raised.
(Ord. 4(2021) § 1)
§ 6-4B-3 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this
article. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall
be punished as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code, and each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (B)   The operation of a pet shop in violation of this article is declared
to be a public nuisance and is subject to abatement as provided by law. In any
case in which the town prevails in a nuisance abatement action initiated
pursuant to this chapter, the town may recover its reasonable attorney fees
plus costs of the proceeding.
(Ord. 4(2021) § 1)
CHAPTER 5: SPECIAL EVENT DESIGNATIONS
Section
6-5-1 Intent
6-5-2 Juvenile curfew
6-5-3 Special event district created
6-5-4 Special event designation discretionary
§ 6-5-1 INTENT.
   It is the intent of the Vail Town Council in adopting these holiday specific
regulations, to establish strict control of access to certain parts of the town
by underage youth and to curtail the growing number of unsupervised juveniles
who descend on Vail Village at these times. In the interest of public safety,
the goals of the Council are to:
   (A)   Protect citizens from the physical injury and harm due to excessively
large crowds;
   (B)   Reduce juvenile violence and crime within the town during these
events;
   (C)   Protect juveniles from being swept up in unlawful activities and from
falling prey to older perpetrators of crime; and
   (D)   Strengthen parental responsibility for children.
(Ord. 12(2001) § 1)
§ 6-5-2 JUVENILE CURFEW.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to be or remain
upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot or any public place or
right-of-way between 10:30 p.m. on July 4 and 5:00 a.m. on July 5, and between
10:30 p.m. on December 31 and 5:00 a.m. on January 1 of every year, except as
provided in subsection (B) of this section.
   (B)   In the following exceptional cases, a person under 18 years of age may
be or remain in a public place beyond the hours set forth in subsection (A) of
this section:
      (1)   When accompanied by a parent or legal guardian;
      (2)   When conducting a legitimate errand for a parent or guardian, and
with written authorization from that parent or guardian;
      (3)   When commuting between the person’s place of employment and legal
residence;
      (4)   When returning to the person’s temporary or permanent residence
from events such as movies, theater or sporting events;
      (5)   When involved in an emergency, referring to unforeseen
circumstances, or the status or condition resulting therefrom, requiring
immediate action to safeguard life, limb or property; and
      (6)   When exercising first amendment rights under the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, speech and assembly.
   (C)   A police officer who has probable cause to believe that a person is in
violation of this section may take him or her into custody and either
immediately contact the person’s parent or guardian, or turn the person over to
the custody of the designated juvenile authorities until a parent or guardian
can take custody of the juvenile.
(Ord. 12(2001) § 1)
§ 6-5-3 SPECIAL EVENT DISTRICT CREATED.
   (A)   District boundaries. Due to the large crowds, potential for injury and
in the interest of public safety, a special event district is created from 10:
30 p.m. on July 4 to 5:00 a.m. on July 5, and from 10:30 p.m. on December 31 to
5:00 a.m. on January 1 of every year. This special event district is bounded
by:
      (1)   Slifer Plaza to the north;
      (2)   The south edge of Seibert Circle to the south;
      (3)   Mill Creek to the east;
      (4)   The eastern curb line of Willow Bridge Road from Gore Creek Drive
through the International Bridge; and
      (5)   The district is inclusive of Wall Street from Gore Creek Drive
through One Vail Place and the Gore Creek Promenade from Willow Bridge Road
through the Children’s Fountain.
   (B)   Violation of special event district boundaries. It is unlawful for any
person under 21 years of age to be or remain upon any public street, alley,
walk, parking lot or any other public property or place or in or upon those
portions of any private property upon which the public has an expressed or
implied license to enter or remain, within the boundaries established in
subsection (A) of this section.
   (C)   Exceptions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, persons under 21 years of
age may enter the designated special event area for the following purposes:
      (1)   Accessing their temporary or permanent residence; and
      (2)   When accompanied by their parent or legal guardian.
(Ord. 12(2001) § 1)
§ 6-5-4 SPECIAL EVENT DESIGNATION DISCRETIONARY.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the juvenile curfew and
the special event district provided for in this chapter shall be imposed at the
sole discretion of the Town Council.
(Ord. 15(2011) § 2)
TITLE 7: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1: TRAFFIC CODE
Section
7-1-1   Model Traffic Code Adopted
7-1-2    Amendments
7-1-3   Applicability
7-1-4   Penalties
§ 7-1-1 MODEL TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED.
   The Town hereby adopts by reference the 2024 edition of the Model Traffic
Code promulgated and published by the Colorado Department of Transportation,
Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 2829 W. Howard Place, Denver, CO 80204
(the "Model Traffic Code"). The Model Traffic Code provides a system of traffic
regulation for the Town. Three (3) copies of the Model Traffic Code shall be
filed with the Town Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours.
(Ord. 19(2025) § 1)
§ 7-1-2 AMENDMENTS.
   The Model Traffic Code is amended as follows:
   (A)   Section 109(9) is amended to read as follows:
      "(9) No person shall use a roadway for traveling on skis, toboggans,
coasting sleds, skates, or similar devices. No person shall enter a roadway on
roller skates or riding in any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, except
while crossing a roadway in a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person shall
be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to pedestrians. This subsection shall not apply upon any street or
portion thereof designated as a limited play street for use of roller skates,
skateboards or similar devices."
   (B)   Section 110.5(2) is amended to read as follows:
      "(2) The Town may adopt an ordinance authorizing the use of an automated
vehicle identification system to detect violations of traffic regulations
adopted by the Town, or the Town may utilize an automated vehicle
identification system to detect traffic violations under state law, subject to
the following conditions and limitations and, as applicable, the requirements
for state highways set forth in and any rules adopted by the department of
transportation pursuant to subsection (2.5) of this section.
      (a)(I) If the Town detects any alleged violation of a district court or
Town traffic regulation or a traffic violation under state law through the use
of an automated vehicle identification system, then the Town shall issue, or
cause its vendor to issue, to the registered owner of the motor vehicle
involved in the alleged violation, by first-class mail, personal service, or by
any mail delivery service offered by an entity other than the United States
postal service that is equivalent to or superior to first-class mail with
respect to delivery speed, reliability, and price, a notice of violation."
   (C)   Section 110.5(4.5) is amended to read as follows:
      "(4.5)(a)   If the Town detects a violation of a district court or Town
traffic regulation or traffic violation under state law for disobedience to a
traffic control signal through the use of an automated vehicle identification
system, the maximum civil penalty that the Town may impose for such violation,
including any surcharge, is seventy-five ($75) dollars.
      (b)   Subsection (4.5)(a) of this section does not apply within a
maintenance, construction, or repair zone designated pursuant to section 42-4-
614, C.R.S., or a school zone, as defined in section 42-4-615(2), C.R.S."
   (D)   Section 110.5(4.7) is amended to read as follows:
      "(4.7) If a registered owner fails to pay a penalty imposed for a
violation of a district court or Town traffic regulation or a traffic violation
under state law detected using an automated vehicle identification system, the
Town shall not attempt to enforce such a penalty by immobilizing the registered
owner's vehicle."
   (E)   Section 117(3) is amended to read as follows:
      "(3)   Unless otherwise authorized, an EPAMD shall not be operated:
         (a)   On a limited-access highway;
         (b)   On a bike or pedestrian path; or
         (c)   At a speed of greater than twelve and one-half miles per hour."
   (F)   Sections 801 through 808 shall not apply on streets or rights-of way
designated by the Town as pedestrian malls pursuant to Chapter 11 of Title 7 of
this Code.
   (G)   Section 1101(2) is amended to read as follows:
      "(2)   Except when a special hazard exists that requires a lower speed,
the following speeds shall be lawful:
         (a)   Fifteen (15) miles per hour in any business district;
         (b)   Fifteen (15) miles per hour in any residential district;
         (c)   Twenty (20) miles per hour on narrow, winding mountain roadways
and blind curves, and fifteen (15) miles per hour on the same when pedestrians
are present;
         (d)   Forty (40) miles per hour on open mountain roadways;
         (e)   Forty-five (45) miles per hour for all single rear-axle vehicles
in the business of trash disposal that exceed twenty thousand (20,000) pounds,
where higher speeds are posted, when said vehicle is loaded as an exempted
vehicle pursuant to Section 507(3);
         (f)   Fifty-five (55) miles per hour on open highways which are not on
the interstate system, as defined in C.R.S. § 43-2-101(2);
         (g)   Sixty-five (65) miles per hour on surfaced highways which are on
the interstate system, as defined in C.R.S. § 43-2-101(2); and
         (h)   Any speed not in excess of a speed limit designated by an
official traffic control device."
(Ord. 19(2025) § 1)
§ 7-1-3 APPLICABILITY.
   The Model Traffic Code shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk,
driveway, park, public way, private way and public or private parking area
within the corporate limits of the Town, the use of which the Town has
jurisdiction and authority to regulate.
(Ord. 19(2025) § 1)
§ 7-1-4. PENALTIES.
It is unlawful to violate any provision of this Chapter or the Model Traffic
Code. Violations of this Chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
Section
7-2A-4 of this Code.
(Ord. 19(2025) § 1)
CHAPTER 2: TRAFFIC INFRACTIONS, VIOLATIONS
ARTICLE 2A: TRAFFIC INFRACTIONS CLASSIFIED; PENALTIES
Section
7-2A-1 Traffic infractions and misdemeanors
7-2A-2 Reserved
7-2A-3 Conviction; penalty
7-2A-4 Penalty assessment
7-2A-5 Municipal Court jurisdiction
7-2A-6 Collateral attacks
7-2A-7 Penalty assessment notices
7-2A-8 Failure to pay penalty; procedures
7-2A-9 Violations
7-2A-10 Failure to appear
7-2A-11 Jury trial
§ 7-2A-1 TRAFFIC INFRACTIONS AND MISDEMEANORS.
Any violation of the Model Traffic Code shall be a traffic infraction, except
for the following sections which shall be misdemeanors:
   (A)   Section 607, Interference with Official Devices;
   (B)   Section 707, Stopping Requirements at Railroad Crossings;
   (C)   Section 1101, Speed Limits: Driving twenty-five (25) or more miles per
hour in excess of the reasonable and prudent speed or in excess of the maximum
lawful speed limit of seventy-five (75) miles per hour;
   (D)   Section 1105, Speed Contests;
   (E)   Section 1401, Reckless Driving;
   (F)   Section 1402, Careless Driving;
   (G)   Section 1413, Eluding or Attempting to Elude; and
   (H)   Section 1903, Stopping for School Buses.
(Ord. 2(1993) § 1; Ord. 5(2024) § 2)
§ 7-2A-2 RESERVED.
Reserved by Ord. 5(2024) § 3.
§ 7-2A-3 CONVICTION; PENALTY.
   (A)   Conviction. Except as provided in §
7-2A-4(A) of this article, every person who is convicted of, who admits
liability for, or against whom a judgment is entered for commission of a
traffic infraction shall be fined or penalized as set forth in the penalty
assessment schedule as adopted and amended from time to time by the town; or,
if no penalty is specified therein, the penalty shall be $15. These penalties
shall apply whether the defendant acknowledges guilt or liability, is found
guilty or liable by a court of competent jurisdiction, or has judgment entered
against said defendant by the Municipal Court.
   (B)   Penalty. Except as provided in subsection (A) of this section, traffic
infractions shall be subject to a minimum penalty of $5 and a maximum penalty
of $100 which is authorized upon entry of judgment against the defendant.
(Ord. 2(1993) § 1)
§ 7-2A-4 PENALTY ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Schedule. The town’s adopted penalty assessment schedule shall not
apply when the provisions of subsection (B)(3) of this section prohibit the
issuance of a penalty assessment notice.
   (B)   Notice.
      (1)   At any time that a person is charged with the commission of a
traffic infraction, the peace officer shall, except when the provisions of
subsection (B)(3) of this section prohibit it, give a penalty assessment notice
to the defendant. Such penalty assessment notice shall contain all the
information required by §
7-2A-7 of this article. The peace officer shall advise the person cited of the
points to be assessed in accordance with applicable state law. The penalty
specified in the penalty assessment schedule for the violation charged may be
paid at the office of the Municipal Court Clerk, either in person or by
postmarking such payment within 20 days from the date the penalty assessment
notice is served upon the defendant. Acceptance of a penalty assessment notice
and payment of the prescribed penalty thereon to the Municipal Court shall be
deemed a complete satisfaction for the violation. Checks tendered by the
defendant to and accepted by the Municipal Court and on which payment is
received by the Municipal Court shall be deemed sufficient receipt.
      (2)   Should the defendant charged with a traffic infraction accept the
penalty assessment notice but fail to post the prescribed penalty thereon
within 20 days thereafter, said defendant shall be allowed to pay such penalty,
plus court costs, to the Clerk of the Municipal Court prior to the time for
appearance as specified in the notice. If the penalty, and court costs, are not
timely paid, the case shall thereafter be heard in the Municipal Court in
accordance with applicable Municipal Court rules of procedure. In such case,
the maximum penalty which may be imposed shall not exceed the penalty set forth
in the penalty assessment schedule.
      (3)   The penalty assessment schedule shall not apply to traffic
infractions specified in the schedule when it appears that:
         (a)   The alleged violation has caused, or contributed to the cause
of, an accident resulting in appreciable damage to property of another or an
injury or death to any person; and
         (b)   The defendant is charged with two or more violations, arising
out of the same transaction, any one of which is a criminal violation requiring
a court appearance. In such cases, the procedures for criminal violations shall
apply.
      (4)   In all cases where subsection (B)(3) of this section prohibits the
issuance of a penalty assessment notice, the penalty contained in the schedule
shall be inapplicable.
(Ord. 2(1993) § 1)
§ 7-2A-5 MUNICIPAL COURT JURISDICTION.
   (A)   Jurisdiction. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over all
traffic infractions arising under this code and the Model Traffic Code for
Colorado municipalities, which has been adopted by reference herein, with power
to assess and collect civil penalties, costs and enter judgments for violations
thereof.
   (B)   Noncriminal traffic infractions. If the only violations charged
constitute noncriminal traffic infractions, no warrant or arrest may issue.
Instead the court may enter a judgment of liability by default against the
defendant; assess any penalty and costs established by law; and report the
judgment to the state motor vehicle division which may access points against
the defendant’s driving privileges and may deny an application or renewal of a
defendant’s driver’s license until the judgment and all other lawful costs are
satisfied.
   (C)   Hearing. Every hearing upon a traffic infraction shall be held before
the Municipal Court pursuant to applicable Municipal Court rules of procedure.
Whenever an infraction and a misdemeanor are charged in the same summons and
complaint, all charges may be adjudicated simultaneously as a criminal matter
by the Municipal Court and the Municipal Court rules and procedures shall
apply.
   (D)   Determination of Court. When the Municipal Court determines that a
person charged with a misdemeanor is guilty of a lesser included traffic
infraction, the court may enter a judgment as to such lesser charge.
   (E)   Burden of proof. The burden of proof for infractions shall be upon the
town, and the court shall enter judgment in favor of the defendant unless the
town proves the liability of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. The Town
Attorney may, in his or her discretion, enter traffic infraction cases to
engage in plea discussions or stipulations to deferred judgment and sentence
but shall not be required to so enter. The Municipal Court Judge shall be
permitted to call and question witnesses and shall also act as the fact finder
at hearings on traffic infraction matters.
   (F)   Appeal. An appeal from a final judgment on an infraction shall be made
in accordance with the Municipal Court rules of procedure.
(Ord. 2(1993) § 1)
§ 7-2A-6 COLLATERAL ATTACKS.
   (A)   Time limit. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person
against whom a judgment has been entered for an infraction shall collaterally
attack the validity of that judgment unless such attack is commenced within six
months after the date of entry of judgment.
   (B)   Litigation of stale claims; exceptions to time limitations. In
recognition of the difficulties attending the litigation of stale claims and
the potential for frustrating various ordained provisions and statutes directed
at repeat offenders, former offenders and habitual offenders, the only
exceptions to the time limitations specified in subsection (A) of this section
shall be:
      (1)   A case in which the Municipal Court of the town did not have
jurisdiction over the subject matter of the alleged infraction;
      (2)   A case in which the Municipal Court of the town did not have
jurisdiction over the person of the violator;
      (3)   Where the Municipal Court of the town, after hearing the collateral
attack, finds by a preponderance of evidence that the failure to seek relief
within the applicable time period was caused by an adjudication of incompetence
or by commitment of the violator to an institution for treatment as a mentally
ill person; or
      (4)   Where the Municipal Court of the town, after hearing the collateral
attack, finds that the failure to seek relief within the applicable time period
was a result of circumstances amounting to justifiable excuse or excusable
neglect.
(Ord. 2(1993) § 1)
§ 7-2A-7 PENALTY ASSESSMENT NOTICES.
   (A)   Notice issued. At the time a person is charged with a traffic
infraction, the police officer shall issue or tender the defendant a penalty
assessment notice.
   (B)   Information required. The penalty assessment notice shall be signed
and served on or tendered to the defendant by a peace officer and shall contain
the name and address of the defendant; the license number of the vehicle
involved, if any; the number of defendant’s driver’s license, if any; a
citation of the Model Traffic Code or ordinance section alleged to have been
violated; a brief description of the infraction; the date and approximate
location thereof, the amount of penalty prescribed; the number of points, if
any, prescribed for such infraction pursuant to C.R.S. § 42-2123; and the date
the penalty assessment notice is served on the defendant.
   (C)   Court appearance required if penalty not paid. The notice shall direct
the defendant to appear in the Municipal Court on a specified date, time and
place in the event the prescribed penalty is not paid, shall be signed by the
peace officer, and shall contain a place for the defendant to elect to execute
a signed acknowledgment of liability and an agreement to pay the penalty on or
before the appearance date. The notice shall also contain any additional
information which shall be required by law to convert the penalty assessment
notice into a summons and complaint should the penalty not be paid within the
time allowed.
   (D)   Copies sent. One copy of the penalty assessment notice shall be served
upon the defendant by the peace officer and one copy sent to the Chief of
Police and such other copies as may be required by the Municipal Court and Town
Attorney.
   (E)   Time limit. The time specified in the summons portion of the penalty
assessment notice shall be at least 30 days and not more than 90 days after the
date the penalty assessment notice is served, unless the defendant shall demand
an earlier hearing.
   (F)   Refusal to accept service of notice. Whenever the defendant refuses to
accept service of the penalty assessment notice, tender of such notice by the
peace officer to the defendant shall constitute service thereof upon the
defendant.
(Ord. 2(1993) § 1)
§ 7-2A-8 FAILURE TO PAY PENALTY; PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The fine or penalties specified in the penalty assessment notice may
be paid at the office of the Clerk of the Municipal Court, either in person or
by mail, before the appearance date specified on the penalty assessment notice.
If a person pays the fine and surcharge for the violation before the appearance
date, the points assessed for the violation are reduced as follows:
      (1)   For a violation having an assessment of three or more points under
C.R.S. § 42-2-127(5), as amended, the points are reduced by two points; and
      (2)   For a violation having the assessment of two points under C.R.S. §
42-2-127(5), as amended, the points are reduced by one point.
   (B)   If the defendant fails to pay the penalty on the penalty assessment
notice on or before the appearance date, then said defendant shall appear at
the Municipal Court on the date and time specified in the notice and answer the
complaint against him or her. If the defendant answers that he or she is liable
or if he or she fails to appear for the hearing, judgment shall be entered
against said defendant.
   (C)   If the defendant denies the allegations in the notice or complaint, a
final hearing shall be held subject to the provisions of the Colorado Municipal
Court Rules of Procedure, regarding a speedy trial. If the defendant is found
guilty or liable or if he or she fails to appear at such final hearing,
judgment shall be entered against said defendant.
   (D)   If judgment is entered against a defendant, he or she shall be
assessed an appropriate penalty plus applicable court costs. The penalty shall
be no more than the amount specified in the penalty assessment notice.
   (E)   A defendant’s failure to appear upon a penalty assessment notice for a
traffic infraction shall not constitute a criminal offense.
   (F)   If the defendant fails to satisfy the judgment in the time allowed,
such failure shall be treated as a default. In addition to the procedure of
notification to the State Motor Vehicle Division of such default pursuant to
this title, the Town Attorney is hereby authorized to file a civil action with
any state court having appropriate jurisdiction, which filing shall include the
record of the case certified by the Clerk of the Municipal Court, praying for
judgment based thereon. Upon the entry of such judgment the Town Attorney shall
be authorized to proceed with all judgment execution and collection procedures
authorized by law for the amount of the judgment, costs, legal interest and
fees incurred in the proceedings.
(Ord. 2(1993) § 1; Ord. 37(2003) § 1)
§ 7-2A-9 VIOLATIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided in §
7-2A-1 of this chapter, any person violating provision of this title shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in
accordance with §
1-4-1 of this code unless a different penalty is provided in this title for
violation of a particular provision.
(Ord. 2(1993) § 1)
§ 7-2A-10 FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   No punishment shall be imposed upon a defendant who fails to appear or fails
to satisfy a judgment for any noncriminal traffic infraction but judgment costs
and interest and other civil remedies may be assessed for failure to satisfy a
judgment for noncriminal traffic infractions, in accordance with the penalty
assessment schedule of the town, as the same may be amended from time to time;
and the town shall report the judgment to the State Motor Vehicle Division
which may assess points against the defendant’s driving privilege and may deny
an application for renewal of a defendant’s driver’s license until the judgment
and all other lawful costs are satisfied.
(Ord. 2(1993) § 1)
§ 7-2A-11 JURY TRIAL.
   (A)   No defendant shall have a right to a trial by jury for any noncriminal
traffic infraction.
   (B)   In the event that the defendant is charged with more than one traffic
offense arising out of the same incident and at least one of the charged
offenses is a criminal traffic infraction, as defined in this title, or if the
defendant is charged with any other criminal violation arising out of the same
incident, the defendant shall have the right to demand and, if such demand is
in conformance with state law and this code, receive a trial by jury as to all
such offenses, which shall be consolidated for purposes of trial.
(Ord. 2(1993) § 1)
ARTICLE 2B: TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS
Section
7-2B-1 Roundabouts and/or rotary traffic islands and one-way roadways
7-2B-2 Failure to provide complying policy or certificate of self-insurance
7-2B-3 Dismount zones
§ 7-2B-1 ROUNDABOUTS AND/OR ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS AND ONE-WAY ROADWAYS.
   (A)   A vehicle passing around a roundabout and/or rotary traffic island
shall be driven only to the right of such roundabout and/or rotary traffic
island.
   (B)   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be
driven only in the direction designated at all or such times as shall be
indicated by official traffic control devices.
   (C)   The Department of Transportation and the town, with respect to
highways under their respective jurisdictions, may designate any roadway, part
of a roadway or specific lanes upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in
one direction at all or such times as shall be indicated by official traffic
control devices. In the case of streets which are part of the state highway
system, the regulation shall be subject to the approval of the Department of
Transportation pursuant to C.R.S. § 43-2-135(1)(g).
(Ord. 16(1995) §§ 1 - 3)
§ 7-2B-2 FAILURE TO PROVIDE COMPLYING POLICY OR CERTIFICATE OF SELF-INSURANCE.
   (A)   Vehicle owner liability. No owner of a motor vehicle required to be
registered in this state shall operate the vehicle or permit it to be operated
on the public highways of the town when the owner has failed to have a
complying policy or certificate of self-insurance in full force and effect as
required by C.R.S. §§ 10-4-705 and 10-4-716.
   (B)   Operator liability. No person shall operate a motor vehicle on the
public highways of the town without a complying policy or certificate of self-
insurance in full force and effect as required by C.R.S. §§ 10-4-705 and 10-4-
716.
   (C)   Proof of insurance. When an accident occurs, or when requested to do
so following any lawful traffic contact or during any traffic investigation by
a peace officer, no owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall fail to present
to the requesting officer immediate evidence of a complying policy or
certificate of self-insurance in full force and effect as required by C.R.S. §§
10-4-705 and 10-4-716.
   (D)   Traffic offense committed. Any person who violates the provisions of
subsection (A), (B) or (C) of this section commits a traffic offense.
   (E)   Prima facie evidence. Testimony of the failure of any owner or
operator of a motor vehicle to present immediate evidence of a complying policy
or certificate of self-insurance in full force and effect as required by C.R.S.
§§ 10-4-705 and 10-4-716 when requested to do so by a peace officer, shall
constitute prima facie evidence, at a trial concerning a violation charged
under subsection (A) or (B) of this section, that such owner or operator of a
motor vehicle violated subsection (A) or (B) of this section.
   (F)   Rebuttable defense. No person charged with violating subsection (A),
(B) or (C) of this section shall be convicted if such person produces in court
a bona fide complying policy or certificate of self-insurance which was in full
force and effect, as required by C.R.S. §§ 10-4-705 and 10-4-716, at the time
of the alleged violation.
(Ord. 8(1997) § 1)
§ 7-2B-3 DISMOUNT ZONES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive, ride or operate a bicycle,
electric assisted bicycle, lightweight electric vehicle, or non-motorized
vehicle in any area posted as a dismount zone by a traffic control sign, except
for licensed or authorized pedicabs, as defined in §
7-5-7 of this code.
   (B)   Violations of this section shall be subject to the following
penalties:
 
First offense       $50
Second offense      $75
Subsequent offenses Penalties set forth in §
                    1-4-1 of this code
 
(Ord. 19(2021) § 2)
CHAPTER 3: PARKING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3A: IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
Section
7-3A-1 Parking to obstruct traffic
7-3A-2 Compliance required
7-3A-3 Impoundment
7-3A-4 Notice; hearing
7-3A-5 Unknown owner; notice to state
7-3A-6 Disposal of unclaimed vehicle
7-3A-7 Sale of impounded vehicle
7-3A-8 Proceeds of sale
7-3A-9 Sale to town
7-3A-10 No right of redemption
7-3A-11 Bus stops
7-3A-12 Violation; penalty
7-3A-13 Parking emergency
7-3A-14 Right to contract
§ 7-3A-1 PARKING TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.
   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or at any other place
within this municipality in such a manner or under such conditions as to
interfere with the free movement of vehicular traffic or proper street or
highway maintenance.
   (B)   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or at any other place
within the commercial cores and areas immediately adjacent thereto of this
municipality at any place where official signs prohibit or regulate parking or
stopping and as such areas are depicted on a map maintained in the office of
the Town Clerk.
   (C)   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or at any other place
within this municipality in such a manner or under such conditions as to cause
interference of proper street or highway maintenance including the removal of
snow at a time that such maintenance is actually underway.
(Ord. 2(1968) § 1; Ord. 17(1997))
§ 7-3A-2 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   On any street or at any place within this municipality, including, without
limitation, within municipally owned or operated parking lots, where official
signs are posted giving notice of stopping or standing restrictions or
prohibitions, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any manner in
violation of the provisions contained on such sign or signs except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
(Ord. 2(1968) § 2)
§ 7-3A-3 IMPOUNDMENT.
   Any vehicle presumed to be abandoned under C.R.S. § 42-4-1802, as amended,
shall be subject to removal and storage by an operator designated by the Town.
Removal of the vehicle shall comply with the procedure provided by C.R.S. § 42-
4-1803, as amended. The operator may determine the charges for towing and
storage of the vehicle to the extent that those charges comply with C.R.S. §
40-10.1-405, as amended.
(Ord. 28(1981) § 1; Ord. 2(1968) § 3; Ord. 12(2002) § 1; Ord.13(2022) § 1)
§ 7-3A-4 NOTICE; HEARING.
   (A)   Notice: When a vehicle is impounded as authorized by law, and the
officer, agent, or other employee responsible for the impoundment knows or is
able to ascertain the name and address of the owner, the officer, agent, or
employee shall immediately give notice or arrange for notice to be given in
writing to the owner of the fact of the removal, the reason for it and the
place to which the vehicle has been removed.
   (B)   Post-seizure Hearing:
      (1)   A person with legal entitlement to possession of an impounded
vehicle has the right to a post-seizure administrative hearing to determine
whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle. The request for a
hearing shall be in writing, and sent within ten (10) days after the notice of
impoundment.
      (2)   A hearing shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated by
the Town within forty eight (48) hours of receipt of a written demand from the
person seeking the hearing. The sole question before the hearing officer shall
be whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle.
      (3)   "Probable cause to impound" means a state of facts that would lead
a person of ordinary care and prudence to believe that there was sufficient
breach of local, state or federal law to authorize the removal of the vehicle.
      (4)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal manner
and shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence. The person demanding the
hearing shall carry the burden of establishing that such person had the right
to possession of the vehicle. The police department shall have the burden of
establishing that there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question.
Failure to attend a scheduled hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to
such hearing.
      (5)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare
a written decision. A copy of such decision shall be provided to the person
demanding the hearing and the registered owner of the vehicle (if not the
person requesting the hearing). The decision of the hearing officer is final.
      (6)   If the hearing officer determines that there was no probable cause,
the hearing officer shall prepare and date a certificate of no probable cause,
copies of which shall be given to the possessor of the vehicle and the police
department. Upon receipt of the certificate, the garage or impound lot having
custody of the vehicle shall release the vehicle to its possessor. Towing and
storage fees shall be paid by the Town in accordance with the arrangements made
between the Town and the garage or impound lot. If the possessor fails to
present such certificate to the garage or impound lot within twenty four (24)
hours of receipt, excluding such days when the garage or impound lot is closed,
the possessor shall assume liability for all subsequent storage charges. The
certificate shall advise the possessor of such requirement.
(Ord. 2(1968) § 9-3-5; Ord. 20(1976) § 10; Ord. 7(1983) § 1; Ord. 13(2022) § 2)
§ 7-3A-5 UNKNOWN OWNER; NOTICE TO STATE.
   If an officer, agent, or employee of the Town removes a vehicle from a
public way and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner thereof, or for
any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as provided in
Section
7-3A-4, and the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three
(3) days, the Town Manager shall immediately send a notice to the Colorado
Department of Motor Vehicles. The notice shall include a complete description
of the vehicle, the date, time and place of removal, the reason for removal,
and the name of the place where the vehicle is stored, with a request that the
owner of the vehicle be notified immediately. If an officer, agent, or employee
of the Town removes a vehicle from a public way and is not able to ascertain
the name of the owner thereof, or for any other reason is unable to give the
notice to the owner as provided in Section
7-3A-4, and the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three
(3) days, the Town Manager shall immediately send a notice to the Colorado
Department of Motor Vehicles. The notice shall include a complete description
of the vehicle, the date, time and place of removal, the reason for removal,
and the name of the place where the vehicle is stored, with a request that the
owner of the vehicle be notified immediately.
(Ord. 2(1968) § 9-3-6; Ord. 20(1976) § 10; Ord. 13(2022) § 2)
§ 7-3A-6 DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.
   (A)   Time limit; disposal. Whenever, pursuant to the terms of this article,
a vehicle has been impounded by the town for a period of 30 days and no claim
of ownership or the right to possession thereof has been made, or when a claim
has been made but not established to the satisfaction of the Town Manager, and
no suit or action to determine the claim has been instituted, the Town Manager
may dispose of the vehicle in the manner set out in subsection (B) of this
section.
   (B)   Written notice. The Town Manager shall cause written notice to be
given to all persons known by the Manager to claim an interest in the vehicle.
The notice shall be given by delivery in person, or by registered mail,
addressed to the last known address of the business or residence of the person
to be notified. The notice shall contain the following:
      (1)   An itemized statement of the amount due to the town for removal of
and storage of the vehicle, showing the amount due at the time of notice;
      (2)   A description of the vehicle;
      (3)   A demand that the amount due the town, as stated in the notice, and
such further claims as shall accrue, shall be paid and the right to possession
of the vehicle be established to the satisfaction of the Town Manager on or
before a date mentioned, being not less than ten days from the delivery of the
notice if it is personally delivered, or from the date of registration of the
letter, and statement that unless the amount due the town is paid and the right
to possession of the vehicle is established to the satisfaction of the Town
Manager within the time specified, the vehicle will be advertised for sale and
sold at a specified time and place.
(Ord. 2(1968) § 9-3-7; Ord. 20(1976) § 10; Ord. 28(1983) § 1)
§ 7-3A-7 SALE OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   In accordance with the terms of the notice provided for in §
7-3A-6(B)(3) of this article, a sale of the vehicle may be had to satisfy the
claim of the town for the storage and removal of the vehicle and to discharge
the town from further responsibility in connection with the vehicle and from
any duty to further retain or store the vehicle. The sale shall be held at the
place where the vehicle is stored or impounded or, if it is manifestly
unsuitable for the purpose, at the nearest suitable place. After the time for
the payment of the claim and the establishment to the satisfaction of the Town
Manager of the right to possession of the vehicle has elapsed and notice was
given as required, an advertisement of the sale, describing the vehicle to be
sold and stating the names of all persons known by the Town Manager to claim an
interest in the vehicle, if any, and the time and place of the sale, shall be
published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper published in the
county. The sale shall be held not less than 15 days from the date of the first
publication.
(Ord. 2(1968) § 9-3-8; Ord. 20(1976) § 10; Ord. 28(1983) § 2)
§ 7-3A-8 PROCEEDS OF SALE.
   From the proceeds of the sale provided for in §
7-3A-7 of this article, the Town Manager shall satisfy the claim of the town
for the charges for removal and storage of the vehicle, and for the reasonable
charges or expenses for or of the notice, advertising and sale. The balance, if
any, of the proceeds will be paid into the treasury of the town and
appropriated to the General Fund. No claim for refund shall be made by any
person entitled to it except if the claim is made within one year from the date
of any sale resulting in the payment of any such proceeds into the treasury. A
claim for refund shall be made to the Town Manager, who shall make a thorough
examination of the claim. The failure on the part of any person to request the
initiation of a refund to him or her within one year from the date of sale
shall be conclusive of the fact that said person has no meritorious claim for
the refund within the set period of one year from the date of sale and shall
not thereafter commence any action, suit or proceeding whatsoever to obtain the
refund and the town shall be under no liability to said person whatsoever by
reason of the sale for the payment of any part of the proceeds of the sale or
the entire proceeds of the sale in the treasury of the town.
(Ord. 2(1968) § 9-3-9; Ord. 20(1976) § 10)
§ 7-3A-9 SALE TO TOWN.
   When any vehicle is offered for sale pursuant to the terms of this article
and there is no bid or offered bid for the vehicle, the Town Manager shall
declare the vehicle to be sold to the town for the amount of the charges for
the removal and storage of the vehicle, and the charges and expenses of notice,
advertisement, and sale, and shall place the vehicle in the custody of such
department of the town as the Manager in his or her sole discretion may
determine, for the sole benefit and use of the town.
(Ord. 2(1968) § 9-3-10; Ord. 20(1976) § 10; Ord. 28(1983) § 3)
§ 7-3A-10 NO RIGHT OF REDEMPTION.
   There shall be no right of redemption from any sale made pursuant to the
terms of this article, and after a vehicle has been sold pursuant to such
terms, neither the town nor any officer, agent or employee of the town shall be
liable for failure to deliver the vehicle to anyone other than the purchaser or
purchasers at the sale.
(Ord. 2(1968) § 9-3-11; Ord. 20(1976) § 10)
§ 7-3A-11 BUS STOPS.
   Buses or other vehicles carrying the public shall be permitted to stop and
engage and discharge passengers only at points designated by the Chief of
Police.
(Ord. 2(1968) § 4; 1997 Code)
§ 7-3A-12 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300, provided that each separate
act in violation of the provisions of this article or each and every day or
portion thereof during which any separate act in violation of this is
committed, continued or permitted, shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 2(1968) § 5)
§ 7-3A-13 PARKING EMERGENCY.
   The Town Manager, the Chief of Police or their designee has the authority to
declare a parking emergency and thereby suspend the prohibition of on street
parking in designated areas.
(Ord. 17(1997))
§ 7-3A-14 RIGHT TO CONTRACT.
   Notwithstanding the procedures set out in §§
7-3A-3 through
7-3A-8 of this article, the town, at its discretion, may forgo said procedures
and execute a contract or contracts for the removal, storage and/or disposal of
abandoned motor vehicles in accordance with C.R.S. § 42-4-1814, as amended.
(Ord. 12(2002) § 2)
ARTICLE 3B: PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Section
7-3B-1 Restrictions
7-3B-2 Authority of owner
7-3B-3 Posting of signs
7-3B-4 Signing of complaint
7-3B-5 Police Department notification
7-3B-6 Court cost upon dismissal
7-3B-7 Violation; penalty
7-3B-8 Booting
§ 7-3B-1 RESTRICTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle upon
any private parking lot or any other private property within the town without
the consent of the owner or the tenant or person in possession or control of
the private parking lot or private property.
(Ord. 34(1983) § 1)
§ 7-3B-2 AUTHORITY OF OWNER.
   Whenever the owner or person in possession or control of the private
property finds a vehicle parked thereon without his or her consent, such owner
or person shall have the authority to tow such vehicle provided the appropriate
sections of this article are complied with.
(Ord. 34(1983) § 2)
§ 7-3B-3 POSTING OF SIGNS.
   Any owner, tenant, or person in possession or control of a private parking
lot or private property wishing to avail himself or herself of the provisions
of this article shall post on such property in a conspicuous place so that it
can be seen by an ordinarily observant person, a sign which reads as follows:
   PRIVATE PARKING
   UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES
   WILL BE TOWED BY OWNER
Said sign shall comply in all respects with Title 11 of this code. This sign
may be purchased from the town or may be obtained privately by the owner,
tenant or person in control of such property.
(Ord. 34(1983) §3)
§ 7-3B-4 SIGNING OF COMPLAINT.
   No complaint shall be issued for any violation of this article unless it is
signed by the owner, tenant or person in possession or control of the private
parking lot or private property within or upon which violation of this article
may have occurred.
(Ord. 34(1983) § 4)
§ 7-3B-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT NOTIFICATION.
   In the event the owner, tenant or person in control of such property has a
vehicle towed in accordance with this article, he or she shall immediately
notify the Police Department of the town and indicate the name of the towing
company which towed the vehicle and the location of the storage of the vehicle.
(Ord. 34(1983) § 5)
§ 7-3B-6 COURT COST UPON DISMISSAL.
   At such time as the Municipal Court grants the request of a complainant who
has signed a complaint under this article to dismiss said complaint, the Court
shall assess court costs against complainant in an amount not less than $5 and
not to exceed $50 for each complaint so dismissed.
(Ord. 18(1987) § 1)
§ 7-3B-7 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Every person, upon conviction of a violation of this article, shall, upon
first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $5, or by
imprisonment of not more than five days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Upon a second conviction of a violation of this article, within one year of a
prior conviction, the fine shall not be less than $10, or imprisonment of not
less than ten days, or such fine and imprisonment. Upon a third and subsequent
conviction within one year from a prior conviction, the fine, therefore, shall
not be less than $20 or imprisonment for not more than 20 days or both such
fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 34(1983))
§ 7-3B-8 BOOTING
   (A)   For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
   BOOT or BOOTING. To place a wheel immobilization device upon a motor vehicle
for the purpose of prohibiting the operation of a motor vehicle.
   CHIEF. The Chief of Police or designee.
   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS. Eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. to five o’clock (5:00)
p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding Town-recognized holidays.
   VEHICLE BOOTING COMPANY. A private corporation, partnership, sole
proprietor, limited liability company or other entity in the business of
immobilizing a motor vehicle through the use of a boot.
   (B)   License Requirements:
      (1)   No vehicle booting company shall engage in booting without a valid
license from the Town.
      (2)   No vehicle booting company shall operate within the Town without
first obtaining a permit from the Colorado Public Utilities Commission (the
"PUC") pursuant to 4 CCR § 723-6812, as amended.
   (C)   Application:
      (1)   An application for a license shall be made on forms provided by the
Town Clerk. There shall be no fee required for the application.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a complete application, the Town Clerk or designee
shall forward the application to the Chief, who shall conduct such
investigation and criminal background check as is necessary to determine
whether:
         (a)   The applicant has been convicted of theft or embezzlement, any
offense involving the unlawful use, taking or conversion of a vehicle belonging
to another person, or a felony; or, if the applicant is a corporation, that its
officers, directors and principal stockholders are of good business repute and
have not been convicted of theft or embezzlement, a felony or any offense
involving the unlawful use, taking or conversion of a vehicle belonging to
another person;
         (b)   The applicant has received and has currently in force a permit
to operate as a vehicle booting company from the Colorado Public Utilities
Commission (the "PUC").
         (c)   The applicant has adequate, safe equipment and an adequate
recordkeeping system and can otherwise comply with the rules and regulations
provided herein; and
         (d)   The applicant has public liability and property damage insurance
or a surety bond providing coverage of at least one million dollars
($1,000,000) per occurrence.
   (D)   Issuance or Denial:
      (1)   Within fifteen (15) days, the Chief shall recommend, in writing,
that the Town Clerk issue or deny the license. The Chief shall state the
reasons for a recommendation of denial.
      (2)   The Town Clerk shall then issue the license or deny the license.
   (E)   Suspension or Revocation: The Town Clerk may suspend or revoke a
license if the vehicle booting company violates any provision of this Code or
provides false information to the Town Clerk or to the Chief in an application
for a license. Prior to any suspension or revocation, the Town Clerk shall
provide at least ten (10) days' prior written notice to the vehicle booting
company. Such notice shall state the grounds for suspension or revocation and
shall be mailed by first class U.S. Mail to the vehicle booting company's last
known address. The Town Clerk shall consider any response submitted by the
vehicle booting company prior to their decision.
   (F)   Renewal: Licenses must be renewed on or before the anniversary date of
the license, and requests for renewal shall be accompanied by the renewal fee
set by resolution of the Town Council.
   (G)   Equipment: Vehicle booting company vehicles shall be clearly marked
with the business name and PUC license number and shall have a blinking amber
light on the top of or above the vehicle when engaged in booting operations.
   (H)   Personnel: All employees of a vehicle booting company shall be
qualified to participate in booting operations within the Town. Employees shall
always have on their person a picture identification card containing: the
employee's picture, the employee's name, the employer's name and the license
number. Every employee shall wear reflective traffic safety vests while
booting.
   (I)   Rates:
      (1)   The Town shall enforce a schedule of reasonable rates and charges
consistent with those set forth by the PUC under 4 CCR § 723-6817(b), as
amended.
      (2)   A vehicle booting company shall not charge a boot removal fee
higher than seventy-five percent (75%) of the rate allowed by the PUC for the
nonconsensual tow of a motor vehicle with a GVWR of less than ten thousand
(10,000) pounds when requested to remove the boot.
      (3)   If the owner, authorized operator or authorized agent of the owner
of a motor vehicle that is parked without the authorization of the property
owner attempts to retrieve the motor vehicle while the booting operator is
still with the vehicle, a "drop charge" shall not be higher than what is
established by the PUC.
      (4)   There shall not be any boot removal fee assessed if the boot cannot
be removed within ninety (90) minutes from the time of the request for removal
by the vehicle owner or vehicle owner's designee. Any dispute regarding this
timeframe may be refuted based on the phone records from the vehicle booting
company.
      (5)   A boot applied at the direction of a Town police officer shall only
be released at the direction of a Town police officer.
      (6)   A vehicle booting company shall accept payment by cash or by credit
card for the boot removal fee. The vehicle booting company shall obtain, carry
and maintain in working order such portable credit card payment equipment as
may be necessary to accept payment by credit card at the location of the
placement and removal of a boot.
   (J)   Written Authorization: No vehicle booting company shall commence or
originate the booting of a vehicle in the Town without the written consent of
the registered owner, legal owner, person in control or other having a legal
right to possession of the vehicle, or upon direction from a police officer,
except when the owner or person in lawful possession of private property, or
their agent, gives written consent to a vehicle booting company to boot a
vehicle. A copy of the written consent shall be given to the Police Department
upon request.
   (K)   Other Booting Regulations:
      (1)   Vehicle booting companies shall not boot vehicles based on expired
license plates.
      (2)   Each vehicle booting company operator shall maintain a daily log of
the cars that are booted, by license plate, VIN number if legible, location,
date and time, and shall, upon request, provide that log to the Police
Department before the end of the business day following the boot of a vehicle
during normal business hours.
      (3)   Private parking lots that contain one (1) or more parking spaces
and for which the property owner uses vehicle booting for parking enforcement
shall have posted a conspicuous sign near each entrance to the parking lot.
Such sign shall comply with the Town's sign code, and shall provide notice,
with reflective background, that unauthorized vehicles will be booted.
      (4)   After a boot is placed on any vehicle, the vehicle booting company
shall:
         (a)   Affix a conspicuous and obvious notice to the vehicle that
contains the name, address, telephone number and license number of the vehicle
booting company that placed the boot on the vehicle, the amount of the boot
removal fee, the right to have the boot removed within ninety (90) minutes of
contacting the vehicle booting company, the name and telephone number of the
property owner or manager authorizing the boot, the signature of the vehicle
booting company operator or designee, a description of the right to request a
post-seizure hearing under this Section and the following written statement:
"The vehicle was booted by the property owner for a private property parking
violation as outlined in Vail Town Code, Section
7-3B-8. The Town of Vail was not involved in the action.";
         (b)   Maintain personnel authorized to remove any boot and release any
vehicle to its owner or driver upon the payment of any boot removal fee during
such times as required in this Section;
         (c)   Accept payment by cash or by credit card; and
         (d)   Provide a receipt upon payment for removal of the boot, listing
the fees and advisement of the right to request a post-seizure hearing for
vehicle immobilization pursuant to this Section.
      (7)   Charges for damage to booting equipment shall not be governed by
this Section and shall not prevent the vehicle's release if scheduled fees are
satisfied.
   (L)   Post-Seizure Hearing:
      (1)   The owner or operator of a previously booted vehicle may request a
"post-seizure" hearing by providing a written request to the Town Clerk within
ten (10) days of the date the vehicle was booted.
      (2)   The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer designated by
the Town in the same manner as outlined in Article 3A of Chapter 3 of this
Code. The vehicle booting company shall have the burden to establish that there
was probable cause to immobilize the vehicle.
      (3)   The hearing officer shall determine whether a violation of this
Section occurred. The hearing officer may reverse or reduce any fees charged.
   (M)   Appeals. Any decision of the hearing officer under this Section may be
appealed as follows:
      (1)   A written appeal shall be filed with the Town Clerk within ten (10)
days of the date of the decision being appealed, including the basis for the
appeal.
      (2)   The Town Council shall consider the appeal, on a de novo basis, at
a public meeting held within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of the appeal.
The decision of the Town Council shall be final, subject only to judicial
review.
   (N)   Violation; Penalty.
      (1)   Violation: It is unlawful to violate any provision of this Section.
Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
      (2)   Civil Enforcement:
         (a)   If the Town chooses civil enforcement, a citation may be served
by posting on the front door of the business in violation, or by personal
service on the alleged violator, or by mailing first-class U.S. Mail to the
last known address of the alleged violator.
         (b)   Civil violations shall be subject to the following fines and
penalties:
            1.   First violation in any twelve (12) month period: $500.
            2.   Second violation in any twelve (12) month period: $1,500.
            3.   Third and subsequent violations in any twelve (12) month
period: $2,500.
         (c)   All penalties shall be paid within fourteen (14) days of the
date of the citation. If the civil violation is paid, there shall be no
opportunity to challenge or otherwise appeal the violation. If the violation is
contested, a written protest shall be filed with the Town within fourteen (14)
days of the date of the citation, and the Town shall cancel the citation and
proceed to criminal enforcement.
      (3)   Criminal Enforcement: If the Town chooses criminal enforcement or a
protest is filed and the civil citation is canceled, a summons and complaint
may be served as provided in the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure.
The penalties shall be as set forth in Section
1-4-1  of this Code.
      (4)   Other Remedies: In addition to the penalties described above, the
Town shall have any and all remedies provided by law and in equity for a
violation of this Chapter, including without limitation: damages; specific
performance; and injunctive relief.
(Ord. 19(2016) § 1; Ord. 15(2023) § 1)
ARTICLE 3C: PARKING PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
Section
7-3C-1 Regulations
§ 7-3C-1 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Definition; parking spaces identified. As used in this section, a
HANDICAPPED PERSON means a person so severely handicapped that such person is
unable to move from place to place without the aid of a mechanical device or
who has a physical impairment verified, in writing, by the Director of the
Division of Rehabilitation or a physician licensed to practice medicine in this
state, that such impairment limits substantially such person’s ability to move
from place to place. A handicapped person may park in a parking space
identified as being reserved for use by the handicapped whether on public
property or private property available for public use. The owner of private
property available for public use may request the installation of official
signs identifying parking spaces reserved for use by the handicapped. Such a
request shall be a waiver of any objection the owner may assert concerning
enforcement of this section by peace officers of the town and such officers are
hereby authorized and empowered to so enforce this section, provisions of the
law to the contrary notwithstanding.
   (B)   Handicapped license plate displayed. A placard or wheelchair license
plate issued to a handicapped person by the State Motor Vehicle Division shall
be displayed on the vehicle while parked in such space.
   (C)   Reserved parking. It is unlawful for any person other than a
handicapped person to park in a parking space on public or private property
which is clearly identified by an official sign as being reserved for use by
the handicapped unless such person is parking the vehicle for the benefit of a
handicapped person.
(Ord. 2(1985) § 1)
ARTICLE 3D: PARKING INFRACTIONS
Section
7-3D-1 Penalties
7-3D-2 Late fees
7-3D-3 Time limited parking
7-3D-4 Abuse of parking facilities
7-3D-5 Unauthorized parking prohibited
7-3D-6 Parking in space required
7-3D-7 Driver and owner liable for violation
7-3D-8 Initiation
§ 7-3D-1 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Every person who is convicted of, who admits liability for, or against
whom a judgment is entered for a parking violation other than a violation of §§
7-3C-1 or 7-3D-1(C) shall be fined as follows:
 
First offense                               $50
Second similar offense within one year      $75
Subsequent similar offenses within one year $150
 
   (B)   Every person who is convicted of, who admits liability for, or against
whom a judgment is entered for a violation of §
7-3C-1 of this chapter (unlawfully parking in a parking space reserved for
handicapped persons or persons with disabilities), shall be fined as follows:
 
First offense                     $100
Second offense within 1 year      $150
Subsequent offenses within 1 year $200
 
   (C)   There shall be two special enforcement zones: (1) the Booth Lake
Trailhead Parking Zone, which shall include Mann’s Ranch Road, Booth Falls
Road, Booth Falls Court, and the 2800 - 3700 block of the North Frontage Road;
and (2) the South Frontage Road East Parking Zone, which shall include the
South Frontage Road East from Vail Road to West Vail Valley Drive and the 000-
300 block of the South Frontage Road East. Every person who is convicted of,
who admits liability for, or against whom a judgment is entered for a parking
violation in the Booth Lake Trailhead Parking Zone or the South Frontage Road
East Parking Zone shall be fined as follows:
 
First offense                               $150
Second similar offense within one year      $250
Subsequent similar offenses within one year $350
 
(Ord. 22(2017) § 2; Ord. 10(2021) § 1; Ord. 16(2024) § 1)
§ 7-3D-2 LATE FEES.
   Whenever enforcement is initiated by the issuance of a parking ticket and a
fine or a penalty is not received by the Municipal Court, or the owner or
driver does not appear in the Municipal Court to set a hearing on the
allegation within 21 days of the date of issue, the fine or penalty as set
forth in §
7-3D-1 of this article shall be increased by a late fee to be set by the
Municipal Court.
(Ord. 43(2007) § 1)
§ 7-3D-3 TIME LIMITED PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any time limited
parking space for a consecutive period of time longer than that limit posted
period of time for which parking is lawfully permitted, irrespective of the
amount of money deposited into the parking management system.
(Ord. 43(2007) § 1)
§ 7-3D-4 ABUSE OF PARKING FACILITIES.
   No person shall park a vehicle in a town parking facility for a free period
of time, exit the facility and reenter the facility, and park for a second free
period of time within 30 minutes of the person’s first exit from the parking
facility.
(Ord. 43(2007) § 1)
§ 7-3D-5 UNAUTHORIZED PARKING PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle shall be parked upon any public property contrary to the
direction or intended function of any of the following:
   (A)   A parking attendant, a card or coin operated gate, parking meters, pay
and display station or any other means calculated to bar or otherwise control
entrance onto or use of the property by unauthorized vehicles; or
   (B)   Signs or pavement markings located on the property indicating a
limitation or prohibition on parking thereupon or that a parking fee must be
paid; and
   (C)   Any other method of express revocation of consent communicated
directly to the owner or driver of the vehicle by the owner of the property or
the owner’s authorized agent.
(Ord. 43(2007) § 1)
§ 7-3D-6 PARKING IN SPACE REQUIRED.
   Every vehicle parked in a metered parking zone, a space governed by a pay
station, or in a parking lot or public structure shall be parked entirely
within one individual parking space as indicated by traffic control markings.
(Ord. 43(2007) § 1)
§ 7-3D-7 DRIVER AND OWNER LIABLE FOR VIOLATION.
   Both the owner and the driver are jointly and severally liable for any such
violation(s) of this chapter.
(Ord. 43(2007) § 1)
§ 7-3D-8 INITIATION.
   (A)   Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter may be initiated in any
of the following ways:
      (1)   A parking ticket may be served by leaving it under the windshield
wiper or otherwise attached to the vehicle, or handing it to the driver or
owner if the driver or owner is present, or mailing it by first class or
certified mail to the address of the owner of the vehicle as shown in the motor
vehicle ownership records of the state of registration;
      (2)   A summons and complaint may be served on the driver of the vehicle
as provided in the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Civil Procedure; or
      (3)   A summons and complaint may be served on the owner of the vehicle
as provided in the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Civil Procedure.
   (B)   No more than one fine or penalty may be collected for each infraction.
(Ord. 43(2007) § 1)
CHAPTER 4: BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN PATHS
Section
7-4-1 Definitions
7-4-2 Use of paths designated
7-4-3 Right-of-way
7-4-4 EPAMDs
7-4-5 Electric assisted bicycles
7-4-6 Violation; penalty
§ 7-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this chapter, the words and phrases defined in this section
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows.
   BICYCLE. Every device, propelled by human power and upon which any person
may ride, having two wheels in tandem.
   BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN PATHS. That portion of the public domain specifically
dedicated and designed for the exclusive use of bicycles and pedestrians and so
described on the official bicycle and pedestrian path map on file with the Town
Clerk, and excluding therefrom all portions of the bicycle and pedestrian paths
which may otherwise be dedicated as public streets.
   ELECTRIC ASSISTED BICYCLE. A vehicle having three wheels or less, fully
operable pedals and an electric motor not exceeding 750 watts of power rating,
and conforming to one of the classes as follows.
      (1)   CLASS 1 ELECTRIC ASSISTED BICYCLE. Means an electrical assisted
bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is
pedaling and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed
of 20 mph.
      (2)   CLASS 2 ELECTRIC ASSISTED BICYCLE. Means an electrical assisted
bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance regardless of whether
the rider is pedaling but ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches
a speed of 20 mph.
      (3)   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC ASSISTED BICYCLE. Means an electrical assisted
bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is
pedaling and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed
of 28 mph.
   ELECTRONIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE (EPAMD). A self-balancing,
non-tandem two wheeled device, designed to transport only one person, which is
powered solely by an electronic propulsion system producing an average power
output of no more than 750 watts.
   LIGHTWEIGHT ELECTRIC VEHICLE. Any device capable of moving itself, or of
being moved, from place to place upon a wheel or wheels that is powered by a
battery and weighing less than 50 pounds, including without limitation an
electric scooter, an electric skateboard, an electric unicycle, and a self-
balancing single-wheel electric personal transport board.
   LIVESTOCK. Horses, cattle, sheep, goats, pigs and any other farm animal.
   MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle, including every motorscooter, bicycle
with motor attached, trail bikes, minibikes, go-carts, golf carts and similar
vehicles.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle, other than an electric assisted
bicycle or electronic personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD), which is
designed primarily for travel on the public streets and highways and which is
generally and commonly used to transport persons and property over the public
streets and highways.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three
wheels in contact with the ground.
   NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE. Any wheeled vehicle used for transporting a person,
other than a bicycle or electric assisted bicycle, which is not propelled by a
motor or engine, including without limitation roller skates, skateboards, and
roller skis.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PEOPLE POWERED VEHICLE. Every vehicle propelled by human power, having a
body, three or more wheels, and a seat or seats for two or more persons.
   PUBLIC STREETS. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open for the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the bicycle and
pedestrian path, this being the right of one bicycle or pedestrian to proceed
in a lawful manner in preference to another bicycle or pedestrian approaching
under such circumstances or direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to
danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
(Ord. 13(1973) § 1; Ord. 12(1974) § 4(A); Ord. 13(2011) § 1; Ord. 9(2016) §§ 1,
2; Ord. 5(2018) §1; Ord. 19(2021) § 1)
§ 7-4-2 USE OF PATHS DESIGNATED.
   (A)   Exclusive use. The access to and use of the “bicycle and pedestrian
paths” within the town, as defined in §
7-4-1 of this chapter, shall be restricted to the exclusive use of persons
operating bicycles thereon and pedestrians.
   (B)   Vehicles prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to operate a “motor
vehicle”, “motorcycle”, “motor driven cycle” or “people powered vehicle”, as
defined in §
7-4-1 of this chapter, upon or across any bicycle and pedestrian path in the
town.
(Ord. 13(1973) § 2; Ord. 12(1974) § 4(B))
§ 7-4-3 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Operators of bicycles along, across or upon bicycle and pedestrian paths
shall at all times yield the “right-of-way”, as defined in §
7-4-1 of this chapter to pedestrians using the bicycle and pedestrian paths.
(Ord. 13(1973) § 3)
§ 7-4-4 EPAMDS.
   (A)   General prohibition. It is unlawful for the owner of an EPAMD to rent
the EPAMD to any person in the town unless the owner of the EPAMD has obtained
a permit from the town in compliance with this section.
   (B)   Permit. The town will issue one permit to a commercial enterprise
owning EPAMDs and offering to the general public guided EPAMD tours to groups
of ten persons or less. As a condition of the permit, the permittee shall:
maintain the EPAMDs in safe working condition; require that all EPAMD tour
guides are certified EPAMD operators; ensure that the EPAMDs operated by tour
guides are equipped with operational audible warning devices at all times; and
ensure that the EPAMDs are operated in compliance with all applicable law.
   (C)   Prohibited areas. EPAMDs are prohibited in or on the following:
      (1)   Vail Nature Center;
      (2)   Betty Ford Alpine Garden;
      (3)   Village Streamwalk;
      (4)   Children’s playgrounds;
      (5)   Turf areas or soft-surface trails;
      (6)   Natural/unimproved areas;
      (7)   Streets and highways that are parts of the state highway system;
      (8)   Bridge Street; and
      (9)   Gore Creek Drive.
   (D)   Minimum age. An EPAMD shall only be operated by persons 12 years of
age or older.
(Ord. 5(2018) § 2; Ord. 15(2022) § 1)
§ 7-4-5 ELECTRIC ASSISTED BICYCLES.
   (A)   Model Traffic Code.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the operation of
electric assisted bicycles in the town shall be exempt from the Model Traffic
Code adopted by the town as well as such other town ordinances that regulate
motorized vehicles in the town.
      (2)   For purposes of operation, parking, and equipment, electric
assisted bicycles shall be considered bicycles and shall be subject to the
provisions and regulations concerning bicycles contained in the Model Traffic
Code adopted by the town.
   (B)   Bicycle and pedestrian paths. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this chapter to the contrary, a person may operate a Class 1 or Class 2
electric assisted bicycle, with the motor activated, on any bicycle and
pedestrian path in the town, other than a bicycle and pedestrian path in any of
the prohibited areas set forth below. Class 3 electric assisted bicycles are
prohibited on all bicycle and pedestrian paths.
   (C)   Prohibited areas. It is unlawful for a person to operate an electric
assisted bicycle with the motor activated in or on the following:
      (1)   Vail Nature Center;
      (2)   Betty Ford Alpine Garden;
      (3)   Village Streamwalk;
      (4)   Children’s playgrounds;
      (5)   Turf areas or soft-surface trails;
      (6)   Natural/unimproved areas; or
      (7)   Sidewalks that are not part of a designated bicycle and pedestrian
path.
   (D)   Minimum age. An electric assisted bicycle shall only be operated by
persons 16 years of age or older.
   (E)   Exception. The provisions of this section limiting the use of electric
assisted bicycles shall not apply to a person with a mobility impairment caused
by physical disability that uses the device to enhance that person’s mobility.
   (F)   Equipment. All electric assisted bicycles operated in the town shall
be equipped with audible warning devices.
   (G)   Rules. To allow for safe integration of electric assisted bicycles on
bicycle and pedestrian paths, the Town Manager may prescribe, adopt, promulgate
and enforce reasonable rules that restrict or otherwise limit the time, place
or manner of operation or use of electric assisted bicycles.
(Ord. 9(2016) § 4; Ord. 5(2018) § 3)
§ 7-4-6 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter, and upon conviction of any violations of any provision of this chapter
such person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $300 or by imprisonment in
the municipal jail for a period of not more than 90 days or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
(Ord. 13(1973) § 4; Ord. 13(2011) § 2; Ord. 9(2016) § 3)
CHAPTER 5: PEOPLE-POWERED VEHICLES
Section
7-5-1 Title
7-5-2 Definition
7-5-3 Amendments
7-5-4 Section 25-2 amended; definitions
7-5-5 Section 23-12(b) amended; use restrictions
7-5-6 Section 23-9(b) amended; street signs
7-5-7 Pedicabs allowed
§ 7-5-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the CHAPTER PROHIBITING PEOPLE-POWERED
VEHICLES FROM USE OF STREETS AND BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN PATHS IN THE TOWN OF
VAIL. (Ord. 12(1974) § 1)
§ 7-5-2 DEFINITION.
   PEOPLE-POWERED VEHICLE means a vehicle propelled by human power, having a
body, three or more wheels, and a seat or seats for two or more persons.
(Ord. 12(1974) § 2)
§ 7-5-3 AMENDMENTS.
   The Municipal Traffic Code is amended as provided in §§
7-5-4 through
7-5-6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 12(1974) § 3)
§ 7-5-4 SECTION 25-2 AMENDED; DEFINITIONS.
   Subparagraph (kk) is added to § 25-2 of the Municipal Traffic Code to read
as follows:
   People-powered vehicle - Every vehicle propelled by human power having a
body, three or more wheels, and a seat or seats for two or more persons.
(Ord. 12(1974) § 3(A))
§ 7-5-5 SECTION 23-12(B) AMENDED; USE RESTRICTIONS.
   Subparagraph (11) is added to § 23-12(b) of the Municipal Traffic Code to
read as follows:
   (11)   People-powered vehicles shall be prohibited from using the highways,
roads, streets, and alleys in the Town of Vail, Colorado.
(Ord. 12(1974) § 3(B))
§ 7-5-6 SECTION 23-9(B) AMENDED; STREET SIGNS.
   Subparagraph (26) is added to Section 23-9(b) of the Municipal Traffic Code
to read as follows:
   (26)   Designate and sign the streets in the Town of Vail, Colorado,
indicating prohibition of use by people-powered vehicles.
(Ord. 12(1974) § 3(C))
§ 7-5-7 PEDICABS ALLOWED.
   (A)   Pedicabs defined. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit
licensed or authorized pedicabs from operating on the streets of the town. For
the purpose of this chapter, PEDICABS shall be defined as a multi-wheeled
hooded or unhooded vehicle that is propelled by human power and is used in the
transport of passengers and is available for hire on the streets of the town
with a pedicab driver.
   (B)   License required. Before any such pedicab may lawfully operate on the
streets of the town, the operator must obtain the appropriate license or
authorization from the Town Council.
(Ord. 1(1984) § 1)
CHAPTER 6: PARKING FACILITIES
Section
7-6-1 Definitions
7-6-2 Prohibited activities
7-6-3 Storage prohibited
7-6-4 Penalties
§ 7-6-1 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this title, the words and phrases contained in this chapter
shall have the specific meanings as defined in this chapter.
   PARKING FACILITY. Any structure or surface, owned and/or operated by the
Town of Vail, in or upon which vehicles are parked for a given duration of
time.
   VEHICLE. Shall be defined as provided in the Model Traffic Code for Colorado
municipalities as adopted by the Vail Town Council.
(Ord. 26(2003) § 2)
§ 7-6-2 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Seasonal or parking pass. It is unlawful for any holder of a Town of
Vail seasonal or other parking pass to:
      (1)   Park or leave one or more vehicles in a Town of Vail parking
facility and, while said vehicle or vehicles are in the facility, to use the
same parking pass to park another vehicle in a parking facility;
      (2)   Lend or give a season parking pass or daily ticket to another
person to use the same to remove the vehicle previously parked by that person
in a parking facility; and
      (3)   Use a parking pass to remove the vehicle of another from a parking
facility that was previously parked in the facility without use of a parking
pass.
   (B)   Vehicle used for residential purposes. No person may use a vehicle
parked in a parking facility for residential purposes, including, but not
limited to, cooking, sleeping, eating or other similar activities.
   (C)   Vehicle towing trailer, boat or other vehicle. No vehicle towing a
trailer of any size, other vehicle, or boat shall be parked in a parking
facility.
   (D)   Size of vehicle limited. No vehicles exceeding seven feet four inches
in height or seven feet in width or 15 feet in length shall be parked in a
parking facility except in areas specifically designated therefor.
   (E)   Pressurized tanks prohibited; exception. No vehicle carrying propane
or other flammable material in pressurized tanks shall be parked in a parking
facility except in areas designated therefor.
(Ord. 26(2003) § 2)
§ 7-6-3 STORAGE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any owner, operator or other person having possession or
control of a vehicle to store the same in a parking facility.
   (A)   Continuous parking limited; accrued fees. A vehicle which has been
parked for a continuous period in a parking facility without being removed from
the parking facility for a period of more than 14 days shall be deemed to have
been stored in the parking facility contrary to the provisions of this section.
Any person removing his or her vehicle from a parking facility shall pay all
accrued fees for parking in the facility, and failure to pay said fees shall be
unlawful.
   (B)   Impoundment for failure to pay accrued fees. If a vehicle has been
left in a parking facility for a period in excess of 14 days without removal
and payment of fees as required in subsection (A) of this section, then the
parking supervisor, or a police officer of the town, upon his or her request,
shall cause the vehicle to be impounded in accordance with the provisions of
the applicable Model Traffic Code as adopted by the town.
   (C)   Vehicle reclaimed. Any vehicle impounded in accordance with subsection
(B) of this section may be reclaimed by the owner thereof, upon payment of
those costs imposed by the Model Traffic Code, and in addition thereto, the
parking fees and charges incurred for parking in a parking facility.
   (D)   Impoundment fee in addition to penalty. The impoundment of a vehicle
shall not be deemed an exclusive penalty but shall be in addition to any
penalties that may be imposed in accordance with §
7-6-4 of this chapter.
(Ord. 26(2003) § 2)
§ 7-6-4 PENALTIES.
   A violation of this chapter shall be punished by the revocation of the
parking pass or the imposition of a fine not to exceed $300 or both such
revocation and fine.
(Ord. 26(2003) § 2)
CHAPTER 7: SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLERBLADES AND BICYCLES
Section
7-7-1 Helmets required
7-7-2 Activities prohibited
7-7-3 Penalty
§ 7-7-1 HELMETS REQUIRED.
   Protective helmets are required to be used in the skateboard park located at
the Lionshead parking structure.
(Ord. 13(1998))
§ 7-7-2 ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   Skateboarding, roller skating, rollerblading and bicycling are prohibited in
the Vail Transportation Center and in the Lionshead parking structure except
regular patrol and official duties of the Vail Police Department.
(Ord. 13(1998))
§ 7-7-3 PENALTY.
   Penalties for violations shall be pursuant to §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 13(1998))
CHAPTER 8: LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC VEHICLES AND GOLF CARTS
Section
7-8-1 Definitions
7-8-2 Golf carts
7-8-3 Low speed electric vehicles
7-8-4 Designated areas
7-8-5 Exemptions
7-8-6 Prohibitions
7-8-7 Violation; penalty
§ 7-8-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   GOLF CAR. A self-propelled vehicle with: a design speed of less than 20 mph;
at least three (3) wheels in contact with the ground; an empty weight of not
more than one thousand three hundred (1,300) pounds; and a carrying capacity of
not more than eight (8) individuals.
   LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC VEHICLE (LSEV). A vehicle that: is operated by a licensed
driver; is self-propelled utilizing electricity as its primary propulsion
method; has at least three (3) wheels in contact with the ground;
with 49 C.F.R. Part 565 or displays a vehicle identification number pursuant to
49 C.F.R. Part 565; and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 571.500.
(Ord. 26(2025) § 1)
§ 7-8-2 GOLF CARTS.
   The Vail Golf Course and its employees may use and operate golf cars at the
Vail Golf Course for loading and delivery operation and golf operations and
maintenance. Persons playing golf at Vail Golf Course are permitted to use golf
cars on the Vail Golf Course, but individual use of golf cars outside of Vail
Golf Course operations is prohibited. Golf cars shall at all times yield to
pedestrians, bicycles and motor vehicles.
(Ord. 16(2018) § 1)
§ 7-8-3 LOW SPEED ELECTRIC VEHICLES.
   (A)   An LSEV shall only be used for the transportation of persons on town
streets with speed limits not exceeding 35 mph.
   (B)   An LSEV may only be operated on town streets if:
      (1)   The operator holds a valid driver’s license;
      (2)   The LSEV is properly equipped and registered as provided by law;
      (3)   The owner of the LSEV holds a complying insurance policy or
certificate of self-insurance;
      (4)   The LSEV is not carrying a greater number of passengers or load
than that specified by the manufacturer;
      (5)   The driver and passengers are all seated in seats designed and
intended for such purpose; and
      (6)   The driver and all passengers comply with the Model Traffic Code,
this code and other applicable law.
(Ord. 16(2018) § 1)
§ 7-8-4 DESIGNATED AREAS.
   (A)   Golf cars. Other than their permitted uses on Vail Golf Course
property, employees of Vail Golf Course may operate golf cars as follows
related to Vail Golf Course operations:
      (1)   On Sunburst Drive from the Vail Golf Course Clubhouse to Vail
Valley Drive;
      (2)   On Vail Valley Drive from Sunburst Drive to the crossover from Hole
6 to Hole 7; and
      (3)   Crossing Sunburst Drive between Holes 1 and 2 and Holes 8 and 9.
   (B)   LSEVs. An LSEV may be operated upon any public street in the Town
where the posted speed limit is thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less, except
as otherwise provided in this Chapter, and except in any area marked "No
Vehicles Allowed" or "LSEVs Prohibited" on maps maintained by the Vail Police
Department, which areas shall be appropriately signed.
   (C)   Ford Park. LSEVs and golf cars may travel on the paved paths
immediately surrounding Ford Park and the Gerald Ford Amphitheater, including
the two (2) paved parking lots, but may not travel on any sidewalk bordering
the South Frontage Road. The Town may limit the total number of golf cars or
LSEVs allowed in Ford Park at any time.
(Ord. 26(2025) § 2)
§ 7-8-5 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The town recognizes that golf cars and LSEVs can be useful tools to
assist the elderly and handicapped in certain situations, and grants the Chief
of Police or designee the power to approve limited, controlled use of golf cars
when specially requested in other areas of the town. Such uses shall not
include travel on any frontage road, Interstate 70 or Bighorn Road, and may not
exceed a distance of one-quarter mile from their point of origin when in
operation.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or designee may also designate a section of Vail
Valley Drive from Northwoods condominiums to the east end of the soccer field
as open to approved golf car travel during special community events for
associated travel.
(Ord. 16(2018) § 1)
§ 7-8-6 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   The following acts are prohibited in the operation of golf cars:
      (1)   Engaging in the transport of either passengers or goods, which are
neither employees or patrons of Vail Golf Course nor property belonging to the
same;
      (2)   Picking up or dropping off employees along any public roadway;
      (3)   Traveling on any dedicated recreation path or sidewalk not
specifically indicated in this chapter; and
      (4)   Traveling on any portion of roadway not specifically permitted by
this chapter.
   (B)   The following acts are prohibited in the operation of LSEVs:
      (1)   Traveling on any dedicated recreation path or sidewalk not
specifically permitted by this chapter;
      (2)   Traveling on any roadway not specifically permitted by this
chapter;
      (3)   Operating a LSEV on a state highway in the town, except that a LSEV
may be operated to directly cross a state highway that has a speed limit
greater than 35 mph at an at-grade crossing to continue traveling along a
roadway with a speed limit equal to or less than 35 mph; and
      (4)   Operating a LSEV for the purpose of transporting or delivering
goods in the areas designated as pedestrian malls under the Pedestrian Mall
Ordinance codified in this division (B)(4) and §
7-8-4, except pursuant to a written agreement with the town expressly
authorizing the operator to provide such services.
   (C)   It is unlawful for a person under the age of 18 to operate or ride in
a golf car or LSEV on a public street without being secured by at least a two-
point safety harness (seat belt), except for a person with a physically or
psychologically disabling condition whose physical or psychological disability
prevents appropriate restraint by a safety harness.
(Ord. 16(2018) § 1; Ord. 20(2021) §2)
§ 7-8-7 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in §
7-1-6 of this title.
(Ord. 16(2018) § 1)
CHAPTER 9: OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES
Section
7-9-1 Authorization
7-9-2 Exclusion
7-9-3 Violation
§ 7-9-1 AUTHORIZATION.
   The Town of Vail is hereby authorized to operate off highway vehicles, as
defined by C.R.S. § 33-14.5-101, over and upon all roads and streets within the
Town of Vail except for the North and South Frontage Roads and Interstate 70.
(Ord. 6(2007) § 1)
§ 7-9-2 EXCLUSION.
   The authority granted by this chapter expressly excludes the South Frontage
Road, except for crossing said road in the manner provided for in C.R.S. § 33-
14-112.
(Ord. 6(2007) § 2)
§ 7-9-3 VIOLATION.
   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
penalties as set forth in C.R.S. §§ 33-14.5-101 et seq., as amended.
(Ord. 6(2007) § 3)
CHAPTER 10: COMMERCIAL TRANSPORTATION REGULATIONS
Section
7-10-1 Purpose
7-10-2 Definitions
7-10-3 Permit required
7-10-4 Documents required
7-10-5 Insurance
7-10-6 Indemnification
7-10-7 Conduct
7-10-8 AVI transponders
7-10-9 Violation; penalty
§ 7-10-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the safety of pedestrians and
motorists in the town by reducing congestion in skier drop off locations and
monitoring the significant increase in hotel and motel shuttles.
(Ord. 15(2012) § 1)
§ 7-10-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMATED VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION TRANSPONDER (AVI). A transponder issued by
the town to each motor vehicle in a commercial operator’s fleet, which allows
the town to record the timing of and the number of trips made by each motor
vehicle through the town.
   BUS OPERATORS. Commercial operators engaged in the business of providing
passenger transportation in motor vehicles having a capacity of 26 or more
persons, or as otherwise defined by the Colorado Public Utilities Commission,
except for  vehicles operated by the Town and commercial operators regulated by
the federal government.
   COMMERCIAL OPERATOR. A person or entity operating motor vehicles upon town
roadways in connection with any activity involving passenger transportation for
a profit, regardless of whether operating as an employee or independent
contractor, or whether operating under a company name, including, without
limitation, bus operators, hotel and motel operators, luxury limousine
operators and taxis; but excluding universities, nonprofit organizations,
hospitals, ambulance services or governmental units (including local, state and
federal agencies), construction and maintenance contractors, suppliers and
service providers not primarily engaged in passenger transportation, and mail
delivery systems such as Federal Express, United Parcel Service and the U.S.
post office. For purposes of this chapter, transportation companies with common
ownership or common control, or those acting on behalf of or in concert with
another company, will be treated as one COMMERCIAL OPERATOR.
   CRUISING. Operation of a motor vehicle upon town roadways or facilities by a
commercial operator for the purposes of soliciting or attempting to solicit
passengers in any location other than in the loading or staging areas
specifically authorized for such use in these regulations.
   DWELL TIME. The period of time during which a motor vehicle remains upon
areas specifically authorized for loading or staging.
   HOTEL AND MOTEL OPERATORS. Commercial operators engaged in the business of
providing temporary or short term lodging and associated services to the public
and transporting passengers to facilities used for temporary or short term
lodging.
   LOADING AND UNLOADING AREAS. Those areas authorized for passenger loading
and unloading as shown on the Loading and Unloading Areas map on the Town
website.
   LUXURY LIMOUSINE OPERATORS. Commercial operators engaged in the business of
providing charter transportation to the public in vehicles with a
manufacturer’s rated maximum capacity of six to 12 persons including the
driver, or as defined by the Colorado Public Utilities Commission.
   REPLACEMENT VEHICLE. A vehicle intended by a commercial operator to replace
a vehicle that had been registered for that transportation year, but was
subsequently destroyed or sold.
   TRANSPORTATION YEAR. November 1 through October 31 of the following year.
(Ord. 15(2012) § 1; Ord. 11(2024) §§ 1, 2)
   (A)   Every commercial operator shall register with the Town and obtain a
permit for each vehicle in the commercial operator's fleet at least 30 days
prior to each transportation year. The Town shall issue a permit to the
vehicles of any commercial operator who agrees to continuously satisfy the
terms and conditions of this Chapter.
   (B)   A permit fee, in an amount set annually by the Town Manager, shall be
required with every application.
   (C)   The permit shall be permanently affixed to the vehicle front
windshield on the lower passenger's side window for each permit and visible to
the public.
   (D)   If a permit is damaged, a new permit will be issued only when the
remains of the damaged permit are returned to the Town.
(Ord. 15(2012) § 1; Ord. 11(2024) § 3)
§ 7-10-4 DOCUMENTS REQUIRED.
   Commercial operators requiring authorization by or registration with the
Colorado Public Utilities Commission or the federal government shall submit to
the town current copies of such authorizations, registrations and tariffs
issued to the commercial operator by those agencies.
(Ord. 15(2012) § 1)
§ 7-10-5 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Policies. Commercial operators shall submit certificates of insurance
in a form acceptable to the town with the following coverages: comprehensive
general liability insurance policy with limits of not less than $150,000 for
any one person injured in any one accident and $600,000 for injury to two or
more persons in a single occurrence; motor vehicle insurance in such minimum
amounts as required by the Colorado Public Utilities Commission; and the
statutory required workers’ compensation insurance coverages.
   (B)   Additional insured. The town shall be named as an additional insured
on the general liability and motor vehicle liability policies.
   (C)   Certificates. The commercial operator shall furnish certificates to
the town prior to commencing operations evidencing that the insurance is in
full force and effect during the term of the operating privilege and that the
town shall be notified by the insurers, in writing, at least ten days prior to
any cancellation of the policy.
(Ord. 15(2012) § 1)
§ 7-10-6 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By registering with the town, each commercial operator agrees to indemnify,
defend and save the town and its respective agents, officers and
representatives and employees harmless from and against any and all judgments,
penalties, liability or loss, including costs and reasonable attorney fees
resulting from claims or court actions, whether civil, criminal or in equity,
arising directly or indirectly out of acts of the commercial operator, its
agents, employees or servants, or through any injury or casualty occurring in
the town as a result of said loss.
(Ord. 15(2012) § 1)
§ 7-10-7 CONDUCT.
   Commercial operators shall abide by the following rules of conduct.
   (A)   Demeanor. Commercial operators shall be courteous to the public and to
other commercial operators and their employees. The commercial operator’s
employees shall be clean, efficient and neat in appearance. Commercial
operators shall not allow employees in public to use improper language or to
act in a loud or boisterous or otherwise improper manner. Commercial operators
shall not engage in open, notorious and public disputes, disagreements or
conflicts tending to deteriorate the quality of passenger transportation
services of commercial operators or their competitors or incompatible with the
best interests of customer service in the town.
   (B)   Deception. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a commercial
operator to deceive or attempt to deceive the public through false
representations concerning its prices or services or those of any other
passenger transportation provider.
   (C)   Obedience to signs. Commercial operators shall obey all posted
regulatory signs in the town.
   (D)   Unattended vehicles. It is unlawful for any commercial operator to
leave a motor vehicle unattended upon town streets or facilities. A motor
vehicle left without a driver or that causes an obstruction of traffic may be
immediately towed at the commercial operator’s expense. In addition, the town
shall have the authority to require a commercial operator to move its motor
vehicle for efficient traffic movement or pedestrian safety.
   (E)   Passenger loading, pick up and drop off. The town may designate
specific pick up and drop off locations and times at town facilities such as
the village transportation center and Lionshead parking structure. The town may
restrict waiting, parking of commercial operator’s vehicles, pick up and drop
off locations on town streets. These areas will be in a map maintained on file
in the office of the Town Manager and available for inspection during regular
business hours.
   (F)   Cruising. It is unlawful for commercial operators to engage in
cruising.
   (G)   Double parking. Double parking of motor vehicles by commercial
operators on town roadways is prohibited.
   (H)   Commercial operator. To ensure efficient traffic movement and protect
pedestrian safety, the Town may restrict Commercial Operators from certain
areas of the Town as detailed on the Loading and Unloading Areas map on the
Town Website.
   (I)   Identification. Commercial Operators shall conspicuously display the
name of the company to which the permit applies on each vehicle.
(Ord. 15(2012) § 1; Ord. 12 (2022) § 4; Ord. 11 (2024) § 4)
§ 7-10-8 AVI TRANSPONDERS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police may, at any time after the effective date hereof,
determine that each vehicle in every commercial operator’s fleet should be
equipped with an AVI transponder. If such a determination is made, the town
shall provide written notice to all permitted commercial operators that an AVI
transponder will be required by a date certain, not less than 30 days following
the date of the notice.
   (B)   An AVI transponder may be purchased from the town for a fee
established by the Town Manager.
   (C)   The commercial operator is responsible for the care, maintenance, and
upkeep of each of its AVI transponders.
   (D)   Except as otherwise permitted, an AVI transponder shall remain affixed
to the vehicle to which it is assigned. An AVI transponder may only be
transferred to a replacement vehicle upon written approval of and reassigned by
the town. An AVI transponder shall not be transferred between or among vehicles
within the fleet of a commercial operator and the use by a commercial operator
of an AVI transponder issued to a different commercial operator is strictly
prohibited.
   (E)   The town may deactivate an AVI transponder in the event of misuse.
(Ord. 15(2012) § 1)
§ 7-10-9 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation. It is unlawful to violate any provision of this Chapter.
Violations of this Chapter shall be civil infractions. Each day of violation
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Civil enforcement.
      (1)   If the Town chooses civil enforcement, a citation may be served by
posting on the front door of the business in violation, or by personal service
on the alleged violator, or by mailing first-class U.S. Mail to the last known
address of the alleged violator.
      (2)   Civil violations shall be subject to the following fines and
penalties:
         (a)   First violation in any twelve (12) month period: $500 fine.
         (b)   Second violation in any twelve (12) month period: $750 fine.
         (c)   Third violation in any twelve (12) month period: $1,000 fine.
         (d)   Fourth violation in any twelve (12) month period: $1,000 fine
and permit revocation for one (1) year from the date of the violation.
      (3)   All penalties shall be paid within fourteen (14) days of the date
of the citation. If the civil violation is paid, there shall be no opportunity
to challenge or otherwise appeal the violation. If the violator disputes the
violation, a written protest shall be filed with the Town within fourteen (14)
days of the date of the citation.
      (4)   If the citation is protested, the Town shall cancel the citation
and proceed to criminal enforcement.
   (C)   Criminal enforcement. If the Town chooses criminal enforcement or a
protest is filed and the civil citation is canceled, a summons and complaint
may be served as provided in the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure.
The penalties shall be as set forth in Section
1-4-1  of this Code.
   (D)   Other remedies. In addition to the penalties described herein, the
Town shall have any and all remedies provided by law and in equity for a
violation of this Chapter, including without limitation damages, specific
performance, and injunctive relief.
(Ord. 15(2012) § 1; Ord. 9(2023) § 1; Ord. 11(2024) § 5)
CHAPTER 11: VEHICULAR TRAFFIC IN PEDESTRIAN MALL AREAS
Section
7-11-1 Purpose
7-11-2 Pedestrian Mall Areas
7-11-3 Vehicular Traffic
7-11-4    xceptions
§ 7-11-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to increase the safety of pedestrian traffic
in pedestrian mall areas, improve the guest experience, and reduce
environmental impacts caused by vehicular traffic in pedestrian mall areas.
(Ord. 15(2022) § 3)
§ 7-11-2 PEDESTRIAN MALL AREAS.
   Pedestrian mall areas shall be those areas designated as a pedestrian mall
on the Vail Village Pedestrian Mall Map and Lionshead Pedestrian Mall Map, both
on file with the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk may amend such maps upon a
determination that such amendment is of a technical nature and consistent with
the purposes of this Chapter.
(Ord. 15(2022) § 3; Ord. 18(2023) § 1)
§ 7-11-3 VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.
   (A)   Unless expressly permitted by this Chapter, all vehicular traffic is
prohibited from accessing or using a pedestrian mall area.
   (B)   All vehicular traffic permitted by Section
7-11-4 shall comply with Chapter 12 of this Title and the requirements of the
Vail Village Loading and Delivery Map and Lionshead Loading and Delivery Map,
both on file with the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk may amend such maps upon a
determination that such amendment is of a technical nature and consistent with
the purposes of this Chapter.
(Ord. 15(2022) § 3; Ord. 18(2023) § 1)
§ 7-11-4 EXCEPTIONS.
   In all pedestrian mall areas, the following vehicular traffic is permitted:
   (A)   Vehicles issued a permit by the Town in accordance with Chapter 12 of
this Title;
   (B)   Public transportation vehicles operated by the Town;
   (C)   Emergency vehicles;
   (D)   Armored money vehicles;
   (E)   Waste and recycling collection vehicles;
   (F)   Vehicles entering or exiting a parking structure located within a
pedestrian mall area to access a business or residence when there is no other
means of vehicular access;
   (G)   Property owners and their guests actively loading or unloading when
there is no other means of vehicular access;
   (H)   Guests checking in or out of any accommodation establishment located
within a pedestrian mall area; and
   (I)   Vehicles that are inseparable from and necessary to an active repair
or maintenance service being performed within a pedestrian mall area.
(Ord. 17(2024) § 1)
CHAPTER 12: PEDESTRIAN MALL VEHICULAR ACCESS PERMITS
Section
7-12-1 Purpose
7-12-2 Pedestrian mall areas
7-12-3 Access permit required
7-12-4 Violation and penalty
§ 7-12-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to increase the safety of pedestrian traffic,
reduce environmental impacts, allow for better emergency vehicle access by
reducing congestion, and provide for a coordinated permitting process for
certain low-impact vehicles to access pedestrian mall areas in accordance with
section
7-11-4(A).
(Ord. 17(2024) § 2)
§ 7-12-2 PEDESTRIAN MALL AREAS.
   Pedestrian mall areas shall be those areas designated as a pedestrian mall
by chapter 11 of this title.
(Ord. 17(2024) § 2)
§ 7-12-3 ACCESS PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   An access permit shall be required for all vehicles seeking access to
a pedestrian mall area except for those vehicles exempted by section
7-11-4(B) - (I).
   (B)   The Vail police department shall issue a pedestrian mall permit only
when the final destination of the goods to be delivered is in a pedestrian mall
area and the size and weight of the goods make delivery impractical by any
other means as determined by the Vail police department.
(Ord. 17(2024) § 2)
§ 7-12-4 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation: It is unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter.
Violations of this chapter shall be civil infractions. Each day of violation
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Civil Enforcement:
      (1)   If the town chooses civil enforcement, a citation may be served by
posting on the front door of the business in violation, or by personal service
on the alleged violator, or by mailing first-class U.S. mail to the last known
address of the alleged violator.
      (2)   Civil violations shall be subject to the following fines and
penalties:
         (a)   First violation in any twelve (12) month period: Five hundred
dollars ($500).
         (b)   Second violation in any twelve (12) month period: One thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500).
         (c)   Third and subsequent violations in any twelve (12) month period:
Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500).
      (3)   All penalties shall be paid within fourteen (14) days of the date
of the citation. If the civil violation is paid, there shall be no opportunity
to challenge or otherwise appeal the violation. If the violator disputes the
violation, a written protest shall be filed with the town within fourteen (14)
days of the date of the citation.
      (4)   If the citation is protested, the town shall cancel the citation
and proceed to criminal enforcement.
   (C)   Criminal Enforcement: If the town chooses criminal enforcement or a
protest is filed and the civil citation is canceled, a summons and complaint
may be served as provided in the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure.
The penalties shall be as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   (D)   Other Remedies: In addition to the penalties described herein, the
town shall have any and all remedies provided by law and in equity for a
violation of this chapter, including without limitation damages, specific
performance and injunctive relief.
(Ord. 17(2024) § 2)
CHAPTER 13: LOADING DOCK PERMITS
Section
7-13-1 Purpose
7-13-2 Loading dock permit required
7-13-3 Permit fees
7-13-4 Violation and penalty
§ 7-13-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to allow for the efficient use of loading
docks in the town through a coordinated permitting system.
(Ord. 17(2024) § 3)
§ 7-13-2 LOADING DOCK PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   A loading dock permit shall be required for any person or business
seeking access to a loading dock in the town.
   (B)   An application for a loading dock permit shall be submitted to the
Vail police department, on forms provided by the Vail police department.
Permits shall be issued when the application conforms with all requirements of
this code including payment of the applicable permit fee.
(Ord. 17(2024) § 3)
§ 7-13-3 PERMIT FEES.
   Permit fees shall be set forth in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of
the town council. Permit fees shall be calculated on an annual basis beginning
in October of each year and shall be prorated on a monthly basis.
(Ord. 17(2024) § 3)
§ 7-13-4 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation: It is unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter.
Violations of this chapter shall be civil infractions. Each day of violation
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Civil Enforcement:
      (1)   If the town chooses civil enforcement, a citation may be served by
posting on the front door of the business in violation, or by personal service
on the alleged violator, or by mailing first-class U.S. mail to the last known
address of the alleged violator.
      (2)   Civil violations shall be subject to the following fines and
penalties:
         (a)   First violation in any twelve (12) month period: Five hundred
dollars ($500).
         (b)   Second violation in any twelve (12) month period: One thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500).
         (c)   Third and subsequent violations in any twelve (12) month period:
Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500).
      (3)   All penalties shall be paid within fourteen (14) days of the date
of the citation. If the civil violation is paid, there shall be no opportunity
to challenge or otherwise appeal the violation. If the violator disputes the
violation, a written protest shall be filed with the town within fourteen (14)
days of the date of the citation.
      (4)   If the citation is protested, the town shall cancel the citation
and proceed to criminal enforcement.
   (C)   Criminal Enforcement: If the town chooses criminal enforcement or a
protest is filed and the civil citation is canceled, a summons and complaint
may be served as provided in the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure.
The penalties shall be as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   (D)   Other Remedies: In addition to the penalties described herein, the
town shall have any and all remedies provided by law and in equity for a
violation of this chapter, including without limitation damages, specific
performance and injunctive relief.
(Ord. 17(2024) § 3)
CHAPTER 14: CHAIN LAW
Section
7-14-1 Purpose
7-14-2 Definitions
7-14-3 Chain law
7-14-4 Violation; penalty
§ 7-14-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to increase public safety on public streets
and highways within the town.
(Ord. 7(2025) § 1)
§ 7-14-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   TIRE CHAINS. Metal chains consisting of two (2) circular metal loops, one
(1) on each side of the tire, connected by no fewer than nine (9) evenly spaced
chains across the tire tread.
(Ord. 7(2025) § 1)
§ 7-14-3 CHAIN LAW.
   (A)   Between September 1 and May 31 of each calendar year, all commercial
vehicles must carry tire chains when operating in the town.
   (B)   When deemed necessary for public safety, the Vail police department is
authorized to restrict any portion of a public street or highway within the
town by placing a chain law into effect. A chain law is in effect when signs or
emergency notification systems, including without limitation temporary and
electronic signs, notify the drivers of the chain law.
   (C)   When a chain law is in effect:
      (1)   The driver of a commercial vehicle with four (4) or more drive
wheels, other than a bus, shall affix tire chains to at least four (4) of the
drive-wheel tires; and
      (2)   The driver of a bus shall affix tire chains to at least two (2) of
the drive-wheel tires.
(Ord. 7(2025) § 1)
§ 7-14-4 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation. It is unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter.
Each incident of violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Penalty. Violations of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) per violation, provided that, if the
Vail police department officer determines that the vehicle is blocking any
portion of the roadway so as to impede vehicular travel, the fine shall be two
thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650) per violation. In addition to the
fine, Vail police department officers may take any or all of the following
actions:
      (1)   Officers may prohibit vehicles in violation of this chapter from
further travel; and
      (2)   Officers may require towing of a vehicle in violation of this
chapter by a private towing company at the driver's expense.
(Ord. 7(2025) § 1)
CHAPTER 15: AUTOMATED VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION SYSTEMS
Section
7-15-1 Definitions
7-15-2 Notice of violation
7-15-3 Speeding
7-15-4 Disobedience to a traffic control signal
7-15-5 Automated vehicle identification system corridors
7-15-6 Penalty assessment notices
7-15-7 Data retention
§ 7-15-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   AUTOMATED VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM. A machine used to automatically
detect a traffic violation and simultaneously record a photograph of the
vehicle and the license plate of the vehicle.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A notice to a registered owner of a vehicle involved in
a traffic violation detected by an automated vehicle identification system
advising that the violation has been detected, or a similar notice mailed to
the operator of the vehicle identified by the registered owner of said vehicle.
   PENALTY ASSESSMENT NOTICE. A notice to a registered owner of a vehicle
involved in a traffic violation that has previously received a notice of
violation.
   RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD. A block on which a majority of the improvements
along both sides of the street are residential dwellings and the speed limit is
thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less.
(Ord. 6(2025) § 1)
§ 7-15-2 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   If the town detects any alleged traffic violation through the use of
an automated vehicle identification system, the town may issue to the vehicle's
registered owner a notice of violation.
   (B)   The town may only issue a notice of violation for violations that
occur:
      (1)   Within a school zone;
      (2)   Within a residential neighborhood;
      (3)   Within a maintenance, construction, or repair zone designated
pursuant to C.R.S. § 42-4-614;
      (4)   Along a street that borders a town park; or
      (5)   Along a street, or portions of a street designated as an automated
vehicle identification system corridor as set forth in section 7-14-5.
   (C)   The notice of violation shall be served:
      (1)   Within thirty (30) days after the alleged violation if the vehicle
involved in the alleged violation is registered in the state; or
      (2)   Within sixty (60) days after the alleged violation if the vehicle
involved in the alleged violation is registered outside the state.
   (D)   The notice of violation shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the registered owner of the motor vehicle
involved in the alleged violation;
      (2)   The license plate number of the motor vehicle involved in the
alleged violation;
      (3)   The date, time, and location of the alleged violation;
      (4)   The amount of the civil penalty prescribed for the alleged
violation;
      (5)   The deadline for payment of the prescribed civil penalty and for
disputing the alleged violation; and
      (6)   Information on how the registered owner may either dispute the
alleged violation at a hearing or pay the prescribed penalty.
   (E)   To protest a notice of violation, the registered owner shall request a
hearing in writing within forty-five (45) days after the date of the notice of
violation. At the hearing, the town may not require the registered owner to
disclose the identity of the driver of the vehicle, but may require the
registered owner to submit evidence that the owner was not the driver at the
time of the alleged violation.
(Ord. 6(2025) § 1)
§ 7-15-3 SPEEDING.
   (A)   Signage. The town shall place a sign in a conspicuous place not fewer
than three hundred (300) feet before the area in which the automated vehicle
identification system is used, to notify the public that an automated vehicle
identification system is in use immediately ahead.
   (B)   Violations.
      (1)   For a speeding violation of less than ten (10) miles per hour over
the speed limit, the violation may be cited as follows:
         (a)   For the first offense, a written warning with no penalty or
surcharge; or
         (b)   For the second or subsequent offense, a notice of violation.
      (2)   For a speeding violation of more than ten (10) miles per hour over
the speed limit, the town may issue the registered owner a notice of violation.
   (C)   Penalty. The maximum penalty, including any surcharge, is forty
dollars ($40.00), unless the violation is within a school zone or a designated
construction zone, in which case the maximum penalty is eighty dollars
($80.00).
(Ord. 6(2025) § 1)
§ 7-15-4 DISOBEDIENCE TO A TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL.
   (A)   For traffic control signals, the town shall post a sign notifying the
public that an automated vehicle identification system is in use immediately
ahead. Such sign shall:
      (1)   Be placed in a conspicuous location not less than two hundred (200)
feet and not more than five hundred (500) feet before the automated vehicle
identification system; and
      (2)   Use lettering that is at least four (4) inches high for upper case
letters and two and nine-tenths (2-9/10) inches high for lower case letters.
   (B)   The maximum penalty, including any surcharge, is seventy-five dollars
($75.00).
(Ord. 6(2025) § 1)
§ 7-15-5 AUTOMATED VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM CORRIDORS.
   (A)   The town identifies the following corridors as automated vehicle
identification system corridors:
      (1)   East and Westbound South Frontage Road from 1000 South Frontage
Road West to 700 South Frontage Road East; and
      (2)   East and Westbound North Frontage Road from 2293 North Frontage
Road West to 1300 North Frontage Road West.
   (B)   Prior to using an automated vehicle identification system on an
automated vehicle identification system corridor, the town shall post a sign
not fewer than three hundred (300) feet before the beginning of the corridor
and a sign not fewer than three hundred (300) feet before each camera within
the corridor.
(Ord. 6(2025) § 1)
§ 7-15-6 PENALTY ASSESSMENT NOTICES.
   (A)   If the town has not received the prescribed civil penalty or written
notice requesting a hearing by the deadline, then the town may issue a penalty
assessment notice to be served on the registered owner either by first class
United States mail or personal service.
   (B)   The penalty assessment notice shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the registered owner of the motor vehicle
involved in the alleged violation;
      (2)   The license plate of the motor vehicle involved in the alleged
violation;
      (3)   The date, time, and location of the alleged violation;
      (4)   The amount of the civil penalty prescribed for the alleged
violation;
      (5)   The deadline for payment of the prescribed civil penalty; and
      (6)   Information on how to pay the prescribed civil penalty.
   (C)   If the registered owner fails to pay the full penalty by the deadline,
a final order of liability shall be entered against and personally served on
the registered owner.
   (D)   The town may initiate or pursue a collection action against the
registered owner for debt resulting from the final order of liability.
   (E)   The town shall not report to the Colorado department of transportation
any conviction or final order if the violation was detected through the use of
an automated vehicle identification system.
   (F)   If the registered owner fails to pay the full penalty, the town shall
not attempt to enforce the penalty by immobilizing the vehicle.
   (G)   No portion of any fine collected through the use of an automated
vehicle identification system may be paid to the manufacturer or vendor of the
automatic vehicle identification system equipment. The compensation shall be
based on the value of equipment and services provided, and may not be based on
the number of traffic citations issued or the revenue generated by such
equipment or services.
(Ord. 6(2025) § 1)
§ 7-15-7 DATA RETENTION.
   (A)   The town shall program the automated vehicle identification system to
retain data only when a traffic violation occurs.
   (B)   The town shall treat all photographs and video collected by the
automated vehicle identification system as confidential and exempt from
disclosure and inspection pursuant to the Colorado open records act, C.R.S. §
24-72-200.1, et seq.
   (C)   The town shall not use, disclose, sell, or permit access to
photographs, video, or personal identifiable data collected by the automated
vehicle identification system except to the extent necessary to operate the
program, including for purposes of processing violations, for other law
enforcement purposes, for transferring data to a new vendor or operating
system, or pursuant to a court order.
   (D)   The town shall destroy any photographs and video of a violation
collected by the automated vehicle identification system within three (3) years
after the final disposition of the violation, unless the photographs or video
are maintained in a separate system for other purposes allowed by law.
(Ord. 6(2025) § 1)
TITLE 8: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1: STREET OPENINGS, EXCAVATIONS, PAVEMENT CUTS AND USE WITHIN THE
PUBLIC WAY
Section
8-1-1 Definitions
8-1-2 Permit required
8-1-3 Application for permit; fee
8-1-4 Utilities exempt from deposit
8-1-5 Town nonliability
8-1-6 Retention of permit at site
8-1-7 Limit on amount of work
8-1-8 Permit nontransferable
8-1-9 Permit expiration; extension
8-1-10 Revocation of permit; notice
8-1-11 Size restriction
8-1-12 Exposure of utilities
8-1-13 Protection
8-1-14 Signs
8-1-15 Survey markers and monuments
8-1-16 Street drainage system
8-1-17 Excess excavated material removal
8-1-18 Safety devices
8-1-19 Access to driveways and fire hydrants
8-1-20 Storage of excavated material
8-1-21 Time work may be performed
8-1-22 Additional regulations; Public Works authority
8-1-23 Time for completion of work
8-1-24 Restoration of paved streets required
8-1-25 Materials for paved street restoration
8-1-26 Construction methods for paved street restoration
8-1-27 Materials for unpaved street restoration
8-1-28 Construction methods for unpaved street restoration
8-1-29 Unpaved nonvehicular public places restoration
8-1-30 Asphaltic concrete or oil-and-chip surface restoration
8-1-31 Portland cement concrete surfaces, curbs and gutters
8-1-32 Cost assessment when resurfacing necessary
8-1-33 Settling
8-1-34 Town restoration; request and agreement
8-1-35 Fees
8-1-36 Multiple openings for single deposit
8-1-37 Liability insurance
8-1-38 Map of underground facilities required
8-1-39 Map corrected annually
8-1-40 Abandoned underground facilities
8-1-41 Appeal
8-1-42 Violation; penalty
§ 8-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
   EMERGENCY. Any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the existence of which
constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or property.
   PUBLIC WAY. Means and includes a public street, easement, right-of-way,
highway, alley, way, place, road or bike path; and any nonexclusive utility
easement.
   PUBLIC WORKS. The Public Works Director of the town or designated
representative.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 1; Ord. 43(1978) § 2; Ord. 20(1981) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 8-1-2 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to make any tunnel, opening, boring,
excavation of any kind in or under the surface of a public way, or occupy/use
the public way for any other purpose than for travel or other permitted uses,
without first securing a permit from the town for each separate undertaking;
provided, that any person maintaining pipes, lines or other underground
facilities in or under the surface of any street may proceed without a permit
when emergency circumstances demand the work be done immediately and the permit
cannot reasonably and practically have been obtained beforehand. Such person
shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which
the town offices are open for business. All permit applications are subject to
approval and conditions by Public Works. If the application is denied the
applicant may appeal the decision, as set forth in §
8-1-41 of this chapter.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 2(A); Ord. 43(1978) § 2; Ord. 7(2006) § 2)
§ 8-1-3 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE.
   (A)   Notify utilities and city of commencement of work. Each application
for a permit shall be made three business days, unless otherwise approved by
Public Works, before the work authorized by the permit is to begin. Each
permittee shall notify all utilities operating in the town, the Police
Department and the Fire Department of the nature and location of the work
authorized by the permit and the time that the work shall begin, at least 24
hours before the work authorized by the permit is to begin. Such application
and notice shall be made during the normal office hours of the utilities, the
town and the Fire Department.
   (B)   Contents. An application shall be filed on such forms as shall be
furnished by Public Works. The applicant shall, in addition, present
information that all materials, labor and equipment which may be required to
complete the proposed work are available.
   (C)   Fee.
      (1)   Fee required. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by
a permit fee as determined by Public Works, as provided in §
8-1-35(A) of this chapter. The permit fee and all other charges or costs shall
be paid at the time the permit is issued. The permit fee shall be charged,
separate and apart from any bond and security required for mitigation and
restoration of the public way, and shall not be included in the bond or
security amount.
      (2)   More than one permit. Public works may accept an initial permit fee
from any applicant to cover more than one permit, provided that the permittee
pays for the actual cost of each permit within a specified time as designated
by the Town Finance Director. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as exempting anyone from obtaining a permit for each separate
undertaking.
   (D)   Bond and security. The applicant shall provide a bond or security in
the amount of 125% of the cost of full restoration of the area that may be
damaged during permit activity as calculated by Public Works. The bond or
security shall be submitted in the form of a bond or certified check prior to
the approval of the permit application and release of the permit, and shall be
held by the Town of Vail until the two- year warranty period has expired and
Public Works has accepted the work.
   (E)   Exemptions. Public Works may, at its sole discretion, waive any
portion of any fee if the permitted use is deemed a public benefit or as
provided for in §
8-1-4 of this chapter.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 2(B,C,E); Ord. 43(1978) §§ 1, 2; Ord. 20(1981) § 1; Ord. 7
(2006) § 3)
§ 8-1-4 UTILITIES EXEMPT FROM DEPOSIT.
   Any utility companies providing electric, telephone, gas, water, sewer or
communication service on a regular basis to the residents of the town are
exempted from posting a bond or security on street excavation work or use of
the public way, provided the utility company files a letter with Public Works,
signed by the appropriate officers of the company, agreeing to reimburse the
town for all costs incurred in repairing street openings made by the utilities,
any costs incurred in repairing other utilities which may be damaged in the
excavation, and agreeing to abide by all the terms of this chapter. Each
utility company shall submit a list of persons authorized to sign permit
applications and to keep that list current.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 2(F); Ord. 43(1978) § 2; Ord. 20(1981) § 2; 1997 Code; Ord. 7
(2006) § 4)
§ 8-1-5 TOWN NONLIABILITY.
   Prior to the issuance of any permit under this chapter, every applicant
shall agree to hold the town, its officers, employees and agents harmless from
any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to
have accrued by reason of any work performed under a permit issued under this
chapter. The acceptance of a permit shall constitute such an agreement by the
applicant.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 2(G); Ord. 43(1978) § 2)
§ 8-1-6 RETENTION OF PERMIT AT SITE.
   Every permit holder shall retain the permit at the location of the work
while it is in progress and shall present the permit upon demand by appropriate
town officials.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 2(H))
§ 8-1-7 LIMIT ON AMOUNT OF WORK.
   No person to whom a permit has been granted shall perform any of the work
authorized by the permit in any amount or quantity greater than that specified
in the permit; except that, upon the approval of Public Works, additional work
may be done under the provisions of the permit in an amount not greater than
10% of that specified in the permit.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 2(I); Ord. 43(1978) § 1; Ord. 7(2006) § 5)
§ 8-1-8 PERMIT NONTRANSFERABLE.
   Permits under this chapter are not transferable, and the work shall not be
made in any place other than the location specifically designated in the
permit, or by any person, agent or independent contractor other than the
permittee unless specifically provided in the permit. The permit shall be
issued and held only by the permittee making the street cut or using the public
way. All billing shall be sent to the permittee.
(Ord. 20(1981) § 1; Ord. 7(2006) § 6)
§ 8-1-9 PERMIT EXPIRATION; EXTENSION.
   Every permit shall expire at the end of the period of time set out in the
permit. If the permittee is unable to commence or to complete the work within
the specified time, such person shall, prior to the expiration date, present in
writing to Public Works a request for an extension of time, setting forth the
reasons for the requested extension. If, in the opinion of Public Works, such
an extension is necessary and not contrary to the public interest, the
permittee may be granted additional time for the completion of the work being
done.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 2(K); Ord. 43(1978) § 1; Ord. 7(2006) § 7)
§ 8-1-10 REVOCATION OF PERMIT; NOTICE.
   (A)   Grounds. Any permit may be revoked by Public Works, after notice to
the permittee, for the following grounds:
      (1)   Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of
this chapter;
      (2)   Violation of any provision of any other applicable ordinance or law
relating to the work; and
      (3)   Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting a
nuisance or endangering lives or properties of others.
   (B)   Notice served; contents. Written notice of any of the violations or
conditions designated in subsection (A) of this section shall be served upon
the holder of the permit or agent engaged in the work. The notice shall contain
a brief statement of the reason for the revocation and shall also indicate the
time at which the violation may be corrected and work resumed. The notice shall
be given either by personal delivery to the person to be notified or by
certified or registered mail addressed to the person. When any permit has been
revoked and the work authorized by the permit has not been completed, Public
Works is authorized to take the steps necessary to immediately restore the
public way to as good a condition as existed before the opening was made. The
permittee shall be responsible for all replacement costs.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 3; Ord. 43(1978) § 1; Ord. 7(2006) § 8)
§ 8-1-11 SIZE RESTRICTION.
   The opening which may be made in the street at any one time shall be no
greater than will permit the reasonable use of the street by the public and
will not endanger the public or workers, or cause substantial hazards in the
use of the street by the public or town emergency services. Reasonable and
adequate provisions shall be made for use of the street by the public, and the
use of the street by the public may not be blocked entirely unless prior
approval has been granted by Public Works, the Police Department and the Fire
Department.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 4(A); Ord. 43(1978) § 2; 1997 Code; Ord. 7(2006) § 9)
§ 8-1-12 EXPOSURE OF UTILITIES.
   All utility facilities shall be exposed sufficiently ahead of trench
excavation work to avoid damage to those facilities and to permit their
relocation, if necessary.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 4(B))
§ 8-1-13 PROTECTION.
   All inlets, storm sewers, curb and gutter drainage facilities, cross pans,
culverts or other drainage facilities encountered shall be protected by the
permittee. The permittee shall be responsible for all replacement costs.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 4(C); Ord. 7(2006) § 10)
§ 8-1-14 SIGNS.
   No signs or traffic control devices shall be removed without consent and
approval from the Department of Public Works and the Police Department. All
signs and traffic control devices disturbed by the permittee shall be replaced
to the satisfaction of Public Works. The permittee shall be responsible for all
replacement costs.
(Ord. 20(1981) § 2; Ord. 7(2006) § 11)
§ 8-1-15 SURVEY MARKERS AND MONUMENTS.
   Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the purpose of
locating or preserving the lines of any street or property subdivision, or a
precise survey reference point, or a permanent survey bench mark within the
town, shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed
unless permission to do so is first obtained in writing from Public Works.
Permission shall be granted only upon condition that the permittee shall pay
all expenses incident to the proper replacement of the monument by a registered
Colorado professional land surveyor.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 4(D); Ord. 43(1978) § 1; Ord. 7(2006) § 12)
§ 8-1-16 STREET DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
   When work performed by the permittee interferes with the established
drainage system of any street, provision shall be made by the permittee to
provide proper drainage and erosion control to the satisfaction of Public
Works.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 4(E); Ord. 43(1978) § 1; Ord. 7(2006) § 13)
§ 8-1-17 EXCESS EXCAVATED MATERIAL REMOVAL.
   All excess excavated material shall be removed from the site by the
permittee after the work has been completed. In the event the earth, gravel or
other excavated material so deposited is not removed, Public Works shall cause
the removal, and the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 4(F); 1997 Code; Ord. 7(2006) § 14)
§ 8-1-18 SAFETY DEVICES.
   Every permittee shall provide a construction traffic control plan in
accordance with the most recent “Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices”
(MUTCD) published by the United States Department of Transportation Federal
Highway Administration for each situation, phase or part of the work. This plan
shall have Public Works’ approval before the permit is issued. Every permittee
shall provide and maintain all suitable traffic control devices as prescribed
on the approved construction traffic control plan for the duration of the
project. Additional safety regulations and the employment of a certified
traffic control supervisor (TCS) may be prescribed by Public Works. Whenever
any person fails to provide or maintain adequate safety devices, such devices
may be installed and maintained by the town, and the amount of the cost thereof
shall be paid by the person obtaining the permit. It shall be unlawful to
willfully move, remove, injure, destroy or extinguish any barrier, warning
light, sign, or notice erected, placed or posted in accordance with this
section.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 4(G); Ord. 43(1978) § 2; Ord. 20(1981) § 2; Ord. 8(1991) § 1;
Ord. 7(2006) § 15)
§ 8-1-19 ACCESS TO DRIVEWAYS AND FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Access to private driveways shall be provided, except during working hours
when construction operations prohibit provisions of such access; provided,
however, that access to private driveways shall be restored promptly, and the
blocking of private driveways shall be only for such a period of time as is
necessary to complete the work immediately in front of the private driveway.
Unobstructed access must be provided at all times to fire hydrants.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 4(H); Ord. 43(1978) § 2; Ord. 7(2006) § 16)
§ 8-1-20 STORAGE OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL.
   Excavated materials shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench in
a manner so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to public travel.
In order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate a dirt or dust nuisance,
Public Works may require the permittee to provide toe boards or bins, and if
the excavated area is muddy and causes inconvenience to pedestrians, temporary
walks shall be installed by the permittee as directed by Public Works.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 4(I); Ord. 43(1978) § 1; Ord. 7(2006) § 17)
§ 8-1-21 TIME WORK MAY BE PERFORMED.
   (A)   Hours of operation. Work authorized by a permit shall be performed
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, or as
provided in the annual “Vail Construction Hours Policy” handout, unless the
permittee obtains written consent from Public Works.
   (B)   Winter months prohibition; exception. No street cut permit authorized
under this chapter shall be issued so as to allow a street opening or pavement
cut between November 15 and April 15, except in an emergency and in accordance
with the following:
      (1)   Public works may issue a permit for a street opening or pavement
cut between November 15 and December 15 if it is determined that special or
unforeseen circumstances require the issuance of the permit or if the applicant
for the permit is a public utility. If Public Works determines that an
extension should be allowed, the applicant may be required to comply with any
of the following additional items:
         (a)   Post an additional sum to pay the costs of cold patching the
cut, maintenance of the cut, or possible damage to the public way that may
occur over the winter;
         (b)   To temporarily cold patch the excavation; or
         (c)   To take any other reasonable measures that Public Works
determines is necessary to protect the public way until the excavation is
permanently closed. In addition, any applicant requesting an extension shall
agree to provide a permanent patch or closure for the street cut the following
summer when the ground and weather permit the same.
      (2)   In no event shall a permit for a street cut be issued after
December 15 except in the case of an emergency or upon specific approval by a
resolution of the Town Council.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 4(J); Ord. 43(1978) § 2; Ord. 20(1981); 1997 Code; Ord. 7(2006)
§ 18)
§ 8-1-22 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS; PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Conditions for granting permit. In granting any permit, Public Works
may attach such other conditions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent
damage to public or private property or to prevent the operation from being
conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner likely to
create a nuisance. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to,
the following:
      (1)   Equipment. Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment;
      (2)   Routes. Designation of routes upon which materials may be
transported;
      (3)   Disposal. The place and manner of disposal of excavated materials;
      (4)   Offensive, injurious practices. Requirements as to the cleaning of
streets, the prevention of noise and other results offensive or injurious to
the neighborhood, the general public or any portion thereof;
      (5)   Restricted access. Regulations as to the use of streets in the
course of the work;
      (6)   Burial depth. Minimum depth of any utility or service line shall be
18 inches below grade or deeper if required by the applicable code;
      (7)   Temporary remedies. Temporary patches or other measures that may be
necessary to protect the public and the public way;
      (8)   Guarantees. Deposits, securities or performance bonds shall be
necessary to ensure that the cost of repair or maintenance is paid by the
permittee;
      (9)   Public accommodation. Mitigation of the public way to maintain a
level of service equal to the existing level of service to the public; and
      (10)   Streetscape and heated streets. Public Works may require the
applicant to use alternative means when streetscape or heated streets are
requested to be impacted; when no alternative means are possible, then total
reconstruction may be required of the improvements such as, but not limited to,
planters, paver walks and streets, heat tubing (by zone or loop), stairways and
the like.
   (B)   Alternative to street cuts. When a reasonable alternative exists as
determined by Public Works, street cut permits requiring the cutting of
pavement shall not be issued on town streets which have been reconstructed as a
part of the town street improvement program. The town shall maintain and have
publicly available an updated record of all town street improvement projects.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 4(K); Ord. 43(1978) § 2; Ord. 8(1991) §§ 2, 4; Ord. 7(2006) §
19)
§ 8-1-23 TIME FOR COMPLETION OF WORK.
   Any permittee shall warranty all work completed pursuant to this chapter for
two full years from the date of the completion of the work. The town shall hold
all deposits, securities or performance bonds deposited by the permittee as a
condition of granting any permit during the period of the two-year warranty.
One month prior to the expiration of the two year warranty, Public Works shall
inspect the street cut. If the work is acceptable to Public Works and to
utility companies who serve the town, the security will be returned to the
permittee at the end of the two year period, provided the street cut remains
acceptable in the twenty-fourth month, and the necessary soils compaction tests
are provided, as required by §
8-1-26 of this chapter.
(Ord. 8(1991) § 3; Ord. 3(2003) § 1; Ord. 7(2006) §20)
§ 8-1-24 RESTORATION OF PAVED STREETS REQUIRED.
   All pavement costs, openings and excavations shall be backfilled, surfaced
and restored according to this chapter and as provided in Title 13, Chapter 10
of this code. Final surfacing shall be made within 30 days from the date the
street cut permit is issued. Failure to complete surfacing within the 30-day
period shall deem the street cut permit null and void. The performance bond or
security will also become due at this time. Public Works shall then take steps
necessary to complete the unfinished work. The original permittee may also
complete the work upon obtaining a new permit and performance bond. In the case
of street cut permits issued after October 15, the permittee shall completely
restore the paved surface by November 15 without exception. Failure to do so
will also result in the permit becoming null and void. The performance bond
will become due on November 15, and Public Works shall take the necessary steps
to complete the work. Backfilling under paved streets shall be in accordance
with the specifications in §§
8-1-25 and
8-1-34 of this chapter.
(Ord. 20(1981) § 1; Ord. 8(1991) § 5; Ord. 7(2006) § 21)
§ 8-1-25 MATERIALS FOR PAVED STREET RESTORATION.
   (A)   Backfill gradation requirements. Material shall be granular,
consisting essentially of sand, gravel, rock, slag, disintegrated granite or a
combination of such materials. It shall be a well graded mixture containing
sufficient soil mortar, crusher dust or other binding materials which, when
placed and compacted, will result in a firm, stable foundation. Material
composed of uniformly sized particles or which contains pockets of excessively
fine or excessively coarse material will not be acceptable. The backfill
material shall meet the following gradation:
 
Sieve Designation Percent By Weight Passing
2.5 inch          100
2 inch            95—100
No. 40            30—60
No. 20            5—15
 
   (B)   Liquid and plasticity standards.
      (1)   All material passing the No. 40 sieve shall have a liquid limit of
not over 35 and a plasticity index of not over six. Test for a liquid limit and
plasticity index shall be in accordance with AASHTO designations T-89 and T-91
respectively.
      (2)   Six inches of Colorado Department of Highway’s class 6 aggregate
base course will be required on top of the subgrade material. The class 6 ABC
shall meet the following gradation:
 
Sieve Designation Percent By Weight Passing
1 inch            100
3/4 inch          95—100
1/2 inch          20—55
3/8 inch          0—15
No. 4             0—5
 
(Ord. 7(1971) § 5(A)(1)(a); Ord. 8(1991) § 6)
§ 8-1-26 CONSTRUCTION METHODS FOR PAVED STREET RESTORATION.
   (A)   Strict rules for compaction; penalty. The bottom 12 inches and the top
18 inches of the subgrade backfill shall be the same type of backfill material
specified in §
8-1-25 of this chapter. The excavated material may be used for the remainder of
the backfill, provided that no materials greater than six inches in diameter
shall be used for backfill. The material shall be deposited in layers not
exceeding 12 inches in thickness prior to compacting. Each layer shall be
compacted with suitable mechanical tamping equipment. It shall be compacted
sufficiently to obtain a field density which is at least 95% of theoretical
density as determined by AASHTO method T-147. The permittee shall be required
to obtain geotechnical test inspections by a certified technician and reports
reviewed by a professional engineer. Public Works shall require all permittees
to contact Public Works 24 hours in advance of commencement of backfill
operations to allow the Department time to arrange for additional inspection.
Failure to obtain proper inspections or contact the Department will result in
forfeiture of the street cut bond monies. The cost of compaction tests will be
paid by the town. The costs of retests will be paid by the permittee.
Compaction methods not authorized herein must be approved by Public Works prior
to their use by the permittee.
   (B)   Longitudinal cuts; special methods. All longitudinal cuts that are
located four feet or more into the paved area and exceeding 15 feet in length
shall be patched and the entire street overlaid with asphaltic concrete a
minimum of one and one-half inches thick. This requirement shall not be
applicable to cuts for the installation of structures that extend four feet or
more into the paved area, unless otherwise required by Public Works.
(Ord. 20(1981) § 1; Ord. 8(1991) § 7; Ord. 7(2006) § 22)
§ 8-1-27 MATERIALS FOR UNPAVED STREET RESTORATION.
   The bottom six inches and the top 12 inches of subgrade backfill shall be
the same type of backfill material specified in §
8-1-25 of this chapter. Six inches of class 6 ABC as specified in §
8-1-25 of this chapter will be required on top of the subgrade material. The
excavated material may be used for the remainder of the backfill, provided that
no materials greater than 18 inches in diameter shall be used for backfill.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 5(A)(2)(a); Ord. 8(1991) § 8)
§ 8-1-28 CONSTRUCTION METHODS FOR UNPAVED STREET RESTORATION.
   The backfill material shall be deposited in layers not exceeding 18 inches
in thickness prior to compacting. Each layer shall be compacted with suitable
mechanical tamping equipment. It shall be compacted sufficiently to obtain a
field density which is at least 90% of theoretical density as determined by
AASHTO method T-99. Field density shall be determined by AASHTO method T-147.
In no event shall water jetting be allowed for compaction of backfill material.
(Ord. 20(1981) § 1; Ord. 8(1991) § 9)
§ 8-1-29 UNPAVED NONVEHICULAR PUBLIC PLACES RESTORATION.
   (A)   Relaxed standards. Excavations in unpaved public places not used as
vehicular ways may be backfilled with suitable material and shall be compacted
in lifts not to exceed 18 inches in depth to sufficiently obtain a field
density which is at least 85% of theoretical density as determined by AASHTO
method T-99. Field density shall be determined by AASHTO method T-147. The top
six inches shall be a topsoil material meeting the following specification:
   Topsoil: Natural, friable, fertile soil characteristic of productive soil in
the vicinity, reasonably free of stones, clay lumps, roots and other foreign
matter.
   (B)   Landscaping restored. All vegetated areas shall be returned to their
original condition. This includes grasses, sod, shrubs, trees, flowers and any
irrigation system disturbed during the excavation process per Public Works’
standard landscaping restoration specifications. The lines and grades of the
completed grading shall meet the original lines and grades prior to
commencement of work.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 5(A)(3); Ord. 43(1978) § 1; Ord. 8(1991) § 10; Ord. 7(2006) §
23)
§ 8-1-30 ASPHALTIC CONCRETE OR OIL-AND-CHIP SURFACE RESTORATION.
   The cut and restoration of asphaltic concrete or oil-and-chip surface shall
be made in the following manner.
   (A)   Cut. The initial pavement cut shall be made a minimum of one foot
wider than the trench on all sides of the trench, a minimum of three feet wide,
and the cut in the paving shall be made with a power circular saw or other
method as specifically approved in writing by Public Works.
   (B)   Restoration.
      (1)   The asphaltic concrete or oil-and-chip surface shall be of grade S,
S(x) or equivalent hot bituminous pavement (HBP). The asphalt cement shall be
PG 58-28. The minimum depth of asphalt concrete pavement placed over the six
inches of class 6 ABC shall be as follows or match the depth of the existing
surface surrounding the excavation, whichever is greater:
 
Bike paths                     3 inches
Local streets (public/private) 3 inches
Collector streets              5 inches
Arterial streets               6 inches
 
      (2)   The minimum lift shall not be less than one and one-half inches
thick and the maximum lift shall be two and one-half inches.
      (3)   The new surface shall meet the lines, grades, quality and
appearance of the existing surface surrounding the excavation, and be sealed
with a chemical as approved by Public Works.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 5(A)(4); Ord. 43(1978) § 2; Ord. 8(1991) § 11; Ord. 7(2006) §
24)
§ 8-1-31 PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE SURFACES, CURBS AND GUTTERS.
   (A)   Surface cut and restoration. The cut and restoration of portland
cement surfaces shall be made in the following manner.
      (1)   The initial pavement cut shall be made a minimum of one foot wider
than the trench on all sides of the trench, a minimum of five feet wide, and
the cut in the paving shall be made with a power circular saw or other method
as specifically approved in writing by Public Works.
      (2)   The minimum pavement section shall be six inches or match existing,
whichever is greater, on top of the six inches of ABC. The concrete
specifications shall meet the Colorado Department of Highways’ specifications
for portland cement concrete pavements.
   (B)   Curb and gutter specifications. Concrete for gutters and curb and
gutter shall be reinforced with fibrous concrete reinforcing at the rate of one
and one-half lb/CY. Fibers shall be 100% virgin polypropylene fibrillated
fibers. Add fibrous concrete reinforcement to concrete materials at the time
concrete is batched in amounts in accordance with approved submittals for each
type of concrete required. Mix batched concrete in strict accordance with
fibrous concrete manufacturer’s instructions. The new surface shall meet the
lines, grades, quality and appearance of the existing surface surrounding the
excavation, and be sealed with a chemical as approved by Public Works.
(Ord. 8(1991) § 12)
§ 8-1-32 COST ASSESSMENT WHEN RESURFACING NECESSARY.
   If Public Works finds that paving surfaces adjacent to the street opening
may be damaged where trenches are made parallel to the street, or where a
number of cross trenches are laid in close proximity to one another, where the
equipment used may cause such damage, the permittee shall be required to pay
the cost of resurfacing. The cost of resurfacing shall be charged to the
permittee on a time and materials basis. Public Works may require the permittee
to deposit with the town an estimated sum to pay for the cost of resurfacing as
required herein prior to the issuance of a permit. If a deposit is filed with
the town for the cost of resurfacing, and the cost thereof exceeded the amount
of the deposit, the additional cost shall be paid by the permittee within ten
days of being billed therefor by the town or, in any event, prior to the
issuance of any additional permits. If the cost of resurfacing was less than
the amount of the deposit, the town shall return to the permittee the remainder
of the deposit within ten days of the work being done. If no deposit is made by
the permittee, the cost of resurfacing shall be paid by the permittee within
ten days of being billed therefor by the town or, in any event, prior to the
issuance of any other permits.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 5(A)(5); Ord. 43(1978) § 2)
§ 8-1-33 SETTLING.
   If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of two years
from the date of completion of the permanent restoration, any expense incurred
by the town in correcting the settlement shall be paid by the permittee, unless
proof is submitted by the permittee, satisfactory to Public Works, that the
settlement was not due to defective backfilling. Failure to backfill properly
may be grounds for revocation of the permittee’s contractor’s license. It shall
be the duty of the permittee to submit to the town sufficient proof as to the
date of completion if there is a disagreement as to the date of completion for
the purposes of this section.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 5(A)(6); Ord. 43(1978) § 2; Ord. 3(2003) § 2)
§ 8-1-34 TOWN RESTORATION; REQUEST AND AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Permittee responsible. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee
to restore and repair street cuts and make backfills on any street cut or
excavation.
   (B)   Permittee pays costs. Upon the request of the permittee and the
agreement of the town, the town may repair the street cuts and make backfills
for the permittee, and permittee shall pay to the town the cost of restoration.
The permittee shall relinquish the right to restore street cuts and make
backfills after the expiration of the permit (30 days after date of issue) or
until November 15, if no extension for time has been granted to the permittee
by Public Works.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 5(A)(7); Ord. 43(1978) § 2; Ord. 20(1981) § 1; Ord. 7(2006) §
25)
§ 8-1-35 FEES.
   (A)   Fees determined. Upon receipt of a properly completed application,
Public Works shall determine the amount of the fee which shall be paid by the
holder of any permit under this chapter, which fee shall cover the cost of the
applicant’s use of the public way including, but not limited to, application
administration, pavement degradation, use of the public way, inspection of
work/use, coordination of work/use, and the mitigation of public impacts. These
fees shall be as currently adopted via resolution by the Town Council and shall
be set forth on the schedule of fees maintained in the Public Works Department.
      (1)   Any rework or additional work agreed upon between the town and
permittee and done by the town shall be a time and material charge.
      (2)   Salaries and equipment rates will be charged by the town to the
permittee in accordance with the prevailing schedule on file in the Public
Works Department.
   (B)   Form of payment. The fee shall be either in the form of a certified
treasurer’s or cashier’s check, cash, or other, if approved by the Finance
Director.
   (C)   Deficient fee. If any fee or deposit is less than sufficient to pay
all costs, the permittee shall, upon demand, no later than ten days after being
billed by the town, or prior to the issuance of any further permits, pay to the
town an amount equal to the deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to
pay the deficiency, the town may institute an action to recover the amount in
any court of competent jurisdiction, refuse to issue any subsequent permits, or
revoke the permittee’s contractor’s license. Until the deficiency is paid in
full, no additional permits shall be issued to the permittee. The remedies
herein are in the alternative and are not exclusive.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 6(A–C); Ord. 43(1978) § 2; Ord. 20(1981) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 7
(2006) § 26)
§ 8-1-36 MULTIPLE OPENINGS FOR SINGLE DEPOSIT.
   Whenever any person or company anticipates more than five street openings,
excavations, or uses per year, the utility or authority may post a single
deposit for the entire year or part thereof to cover the cost of any and all
such work. The amount of the deposit shall be determined by Public Works.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 6(D); Ord. 43(1978) § 2; Ord. 7(2006) § 27)
§ 8-1-37 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   No person shall be issued a permit under this chapter without first
obtaining a contractor’s license from the town, at which time such contractor
shall submit proof that there is being maintained and carried liability
insurance covering personal injury and property damage which may arise from or
out of the performance of the proposed work. The insurance shall cover
collapse, explosive hazards and underground coverage and shall include
protection against liability arising from completed operations. The insurance
for personal injury shall be in an amount not less than $1,000,000 for each
person and not less than $2,000,000 for each accident and, for property damage,
shall be in an amount not less than $1,000,000, and not less than $2,000,000
for all accidents. A certified copy or certificate of insurance policies,
together with the certificate of the insurer that each policy is in full force
and effect and that the insurance will not be altered, amended, terminated or
ended without a ten-day written notice having first been given to the town,
shall be filed prior to the issuance of a contractor’s license.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 7; 1997 Code; Ord. 7(2006) § 28)
§ 8-1-38 MAP OF UNDERGROUND FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in pipes,
conduits, ducts or other structures under the surface of any street used for
the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity, communication, water,
sewer or steam to or from the town, or to or from its inhabitants, or for any
other purpose, shall file with Public Works, within 120 days after the adoption
of this chapter, a map or set of maps, each drawn to a scale of not less than
one inch to 400 feet, showing the location, size and description of all such
installations. The owner agrees upon reasonable notice from the town or any
permittee to accurately locate such owner’s installations upon the ground as
shown on the maps.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 8(A); Ord. 43(1978) § 2; Ord. 7(2006) § 29)
§ 8-1-39 MAP CORRECTED ANNUALLY.
   By March 1 of each year, such person shall file with Public Works a
corrected map or set of maps, drawn to the scale designated in §
8-1-38 of this chapter, showing such installations, including all such
installations made during the previous year; provided, however, if no further
installations have been made during the previous year, there may be filed with
Public Works a written statement to that effect.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 8(B); Ord. 43(1978) § 1)
§ 8-1-40 ABANDONED UNDERGROUND FACILITIES.
   Whenever any pipe, manhole, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure located
under the surface of any street is abandoned, the person owning, using,
controlling or having an interest therein shall, within 30 days after such
abandonment, file with Public Works a statement in writing showing the location
of the abandoned structure. The abandoned facility shall be removed and the
site restored by the owner within 30 days of notice from the town, or the town
may remove the facility at the owner’s expense.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 9(A); Ord. 43(1978) § 1; Ord. 7(2006) § 30)
§ 8-1-41 APPEAL.
   (A)   Filing of appeal; schedule hearing. Any applicant which is denied the
issuance of a street cut permit, or which has a street cut permit revoked may
appeal such denial or revocation by filing an appeal in writing within five
days of such revocation or denial with the Town Manager. The Town Manager will
schedule a hearing within ten days of the receipt of the appeal, and provide
notice of such hearing to the applicant. The Town Manager, after hearing
evidence presented by the applicant and the town may confirm, amend or modify
the action of Public Works.
   (B)   Utility company representation; appeal to Council. Whenever an
applicant’s street cut revocation or denial is being heard by the Town Manager,
a representative of the utility companies servicing the town shall be entitled
to sit with the Town Manager and cast a vote. The representative of the utility
companies, who shall be entitled to sit with the Town Manager when he or she
hears the appeal of a revocation or denial of the issuance of a street cut
permit, shall be chosen by a vote of all the utility companies serving the
town. The town shall be notified by a joint letter signed by all the utility
representatives not later than February 1 of each year, as to whom the utility
company representative shall be for the current year. Any utility company whose
street cut permit has been revoked or denied by Public Works may appeal any
decision of the Town Manager relating to the revocation or denial of the street
cut permit by filing a written appeal to the Town Council within 30 days
following such decision. The Town Council shall hear the appeal in accordance
with its rules and procedures. The Town Council may confirm, reverse or modify
the action of the Town Manager.
(Ord. 8(1991) § 13; 1997 Code; Ord. 7(2006) § 31)
§ 8-1-42 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   Responsibility for compliance shared. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished for such offense as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code. Each day the violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as set
forth in §
1-4-1 of this code. Both the licensed contractor and the person the work is
for, are responsible for the compliance with this chapter, and any or all of
the same may be summoned into Municipal Court, and any or all may be found
guilty of a violation hereof.
   (B)   Cumulative grievances. The sanctions, remedies or penalties available
under this chapter are deemed cumulative, and any or all may be pursued by the
town to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any two violations in a
building season (April 15 through November 15) shall constitute grounds for
automatic revocation of the contractor’s license.
   (C)   Agreement of noncompliance. In addition to the penalty set forth
above, any person found violating §
8-1-2 of this chapter shall be required to stop work or use, apply for a public
way permit, and pay double the amount of all applicable fees.
(Ord. 7(1971) § 10; Ord. 43(1978) § 2; Ord. 20(1981) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 7
(2006) § 32)
CHAPTER 2: MANDATORY UTILITY CONNECTION
Section
8-2-1 Abutting property owners; connection required
8-2-2 Assessment
8-2-3 Payment
8-2-4 Installment payments
8-2-5 Default
8-2-6 Sale of property
§ 8-2-1 ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS; CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   Whenever any paving of the street is authorized or ordered by the Town
Council its agents or employees, the Town Council may order the owners of the
abutting property to connect their premises with the gas, sewer or water main,
or with any other utility in the street right-of-way. If connecting to
utilities is not feasible, the Town Council may order owners to share in the
cost of constructing main line improvements outside of the paved street right-
of- way. Upon default of any owner for 20 days after such an order to make the
connections, the Town Manager may contract for and make the connections or
improvements at the same distance under the regulations and in accordance with
the specifications as may be prescribed. The whole cost of each connection or
improvement including labor, material, equipment, necessary engineering, legal
and publication expenses, shall be ascertained by the town and the cost to each
owner shall be determined according to the material used and worked on under
the contract in connecting or improving such property to said utilities. The
engineering, legal and publication expenses shall be charged in such proportion
as each connection or improvement bears to the whole.
(Ord. 14(1988) § 1; Ord. 8(1991) § 14)
§ 8-2-2 ASSESSMENT.
   Upon the final completion of the work, the governing body shall accept the
same by ordinance and provide for an assessment against the properties
connected. Thirty days after the last publication of said ordinance, a
certified copy of it shall be filed with the County Treasurer of Eagle County,
and when so filed, shall operate as a perpetual tax lien in favor of the town
and shall be superior to all other liens except general tax liens.
(Ord. 14(1988) § 1)
§ 8-2-3 PAYMENT.
   (A)   Installment option. The assessment shall be due and payable within 30
days after final publication of the assessing ordinance without demand except
that all assessments at the election of the owner may be paid in installments.
   (B)   Installments automatic unless paid in full. Failure to pay the whole
assessment within said 30 days shall be conclusively considered and held to be
an election on the part of the persons interested, whether under disability or
not, to pay in such installments. All persons so electing to pay in
installments shall be conclusively held and considered as consenting to said
improvements and such election shall be conclusively held and considered as a
waiver of any right to question the power or jurisdiction of the municipality
to construct the improvement, the quality of work, the regularity or
sufficiency of the proceedings, or the validity or the correctness of the
assessments or the validity of the lien therefor.
(Ord. 14(1988) § 1)
§ 8-2-4 INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS.
   In a case of an election to pay in installments, the cost shall be payable
in annual installments over a period not to exceed five years in length and the
interest rate shall be the rate charged to large commercial borrowers by major
United States banking institutions as reported in the Wall Street Journal on
the day of the final reading of the ordinance accepting the work and levying
the assessments pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 14(1988) § 1)
§ 8-2-5 DEFAULT.
   Failure to pay any installment, whether principal or interest, when due,
shall cause the whole of the unpaid principal to become due and collectible
immediately, and the whole amount of the unpaid principal and accrued interest
shall thereafter draw interest at the rate of 1.5% per month or fraction of a
month until the date of sale, as provided hereinafter. At any time prior to the
date of sale, the owner may pay the amount of all unpaid installments with
interest and all penalties accrued, and shall thereupon be restored to the
right thereafter to pay in installments in the same manner as if default had
not been suffered. The owner of any property not in default as to any
installment or payment may at any time pay the whole of the unpaid principal
with the interest accruing to the maturity of the next installment of interest
or principal.
(Ord. 14(1988) § 1)
§ 8-2-6 SALE OF PROPERTY.
   The County Treasurer shall receive payment of all assessments on the
assessment roll, with interest, and, in the case of default in the payment of
any installment of principal or interest when due, shall advertise and sell any
and all property concerning which such default is suffered for the payment of
the whole of the unpaid assessments thereon. The advertisements and sales shall
be at the same times and in the same manner under all the same conditions and
penalties and with the same effect as is provided by general laws for sales of
real property in default of payment of general taxes.
(Ord. 14(1988) § 1)
CHAPTER 3: REVOCABLE RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS
Section
8-3-1 Permit required; fee
8-3-2 Revocation of permits
§ 8-3-1 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)   Encroachments identified. No person shall erect or maintain any
building, structure, stand, cart, fence, barrier, post, hedge or other
obstruction or encroachment under or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other
public property without first obtaining a permit from the Department of Public
Works under this section.
   (B)   Procedure. An applicant for a right-of-way permit shall:
      (1)   File a written application on forms furnished by the Department of
Public Works that include the following: the date, the name of the applicant,
the location of the proposed encroachment or obstruction, the type of
encroachment or obstruction, and such other information as the Department of
Public Works may deem necessary;
      (2)   File a site plan showing the location of the encroachment and how
it relates to the public right-of-way and, where relevant, a survey may be
required;
      (3)   File evidence of adequate public liability insurance naming the
town as an additional insured. Minor landscaping encroachments, such as
landscaping between the property line and the edge of asphalt on the right-of-
way may be excluded from this requirement; and
      (4)   Pay such fee as currently adopted by the Town Council and set forth
on the schedule of fees maintained in the Public Works Department and stated on
the right-of-way permit.
   (C)   Criteria for granting. Before issuing a right- of-way permit under
this section, the Department of Public Works shall consult with relevant town
departments which may include the Fire, Police, Community Development
Departments and all public utilities to determine whether the permit meets all
the requirements of this code and other ordinances of the town. The Department
of Public Works shall issue each permit upon a finding that in view of the
location or area proposed to be used and the type of encroachment or
obstruction proposed to be carried on, the proposed encroachment or obstruction
does not constitute a traffic hazard or destroy or impair the use of the right-
of-way or land by the public or serves a purpose that cannot otherwise be
accomplished and is a temporary obstruction of the right-of-way.
   (D)   Permit termination procedure. For any encroachment, obstruction or
other structure which is:
      (1)   Recommended by the town streetscape plan;
      (2)   The Town of Vail Village Master Plan; or
      (3)   The Lionshead urban design guide plan, or other plans which are a
part of the town’s comprehensive plan, the following process shall be utilized
for the termination of any revocable right-of- way permit for such improvement.
         (a)   Prior to installation, the improvement shall be presented to the
Town Council at a work session or regular Town Council meeting. The Town
Council shall establish an amortization schedule providing for specific
payments to the permittee upon the termination by the town of the permit. In
determining the maximum length of time for the amortization schedule, the Town
Council shall use the public interest as a guideline. However, in no event
shall the amortization schedule extend for a period greater than eight years.
The amortization schedule shall be based on the hard costs of the improvement.
The permittee may make application to include the design and/or labor costs in
the amortization schedule. The costs and maintenance agreement shall be set
after a review of the Town Council.
         (b)   Should the town terminate any revocable right-of-way permit for
any improvement set forth in this subsection (D), the town shall pay the
permittee the funds provided therefor in the amortization schedule for the year
in which the improvement is terminated.
         (c)   In the event the improvement is destroyed or eliminated for any
reason or any cause other than the town’s revocation of the permit, the town
shall not be liable for any damages or payment to the permittee. Additionally,
the permittee agrees that the improvement will be returned to the condition
that was in existence pursuant to the permit prior to its destruction or
elimination at the expense of the permittee.
(Ord. 6(1993) § I; Ord. 5(2001) § 8)
§ 8-3-2 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Determination; notice. A permit may be revoked whenever the Town
Manager determines that the encroachment, obstruction or other structure
constitutes a nuisance, destroys and impairs the use of the right-of-way by the
public, constitutes a traffic hazard, or the property on which the
encroachment, obstruction or structure exists is required for use by the
public; or it may be revoked at any time for any reason deemed sufficient by
the town. The permittee will remove, at such permittee’s expense, the
encroachment, obstruction or other structure, within such period of time as
specified by the Town Manager, not to exceed 60 days after receiving notice of
revocation of permit.
   (B)   Failure to comply with order. If a person is notified under subsection
(A) of this section and fails to comply with the order to remove the
encroachment or obstruction, the Town Manager may cause the encroachment or
obstruction to be removed and charge the cost thereof, plus up to 15% of such
cost for administration to the person so notified. If any person fails or
refuses to pay when due any charge imposed under this section, the Town Manager
may, in addition to taking other collection remedies, certify due any unpaid
charges, including interest, to the Eagle County Treasurer to be levied against
the person’s property for collection by the county in the same manner as
delinquent general taxes upon such property are collected.
(Ord. 6(1993) § H)
CHAPTER 4: LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
Section
8-4-1 Purpose
8-4-2 Definitions
8-4-3 Initiation
8-4-4 Notice requirements; Town Manager duties
8-4-5 Hearing
8-4-6 Order of improvements; prerequisites
8-4-7 Costs when above estimate
8-4-8 Improvement construction
8-4-9 Limitation on actions against project
8-4-10 Assessment procedure
8-4-11 Bonds
8-4-12 Limitation on actions against bonds or ordinance
8-4-13 Hearing notice
8-4-14 Objections; time limit
8-4-15 Participation at hearing
8-4-16 Nonpayment
8-4-17 Connection to utilities required
§ 8-4-1 PURPOSE.
   The provisions of this chapter and the Charter are intended to be the sole
laws within the town relating to special and local improvement projects under
which improvements are to be constructed or installed by the town, and special
assessments are to be imposed against real properties to pay for all or a
portion of the costs therefor. Special and local improvement projects of every
character for which special assessments may be imposed and accomplished under
the provisions of this chapter and the Charter include, by way of illustration
but not limitation, the construction or installation of the following: storm
sewers and improvements for drainage and flood control; street lighting; curbs;
gutters; sidewalks; bridges; grading; graveling; paving or otherwise surfacing
or improving; and landscaping streets, roadways and alleys. The construction or
installation of more than one improvement may be accomplished as one project
under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 9(1976) § 1-1)
§ 8-4-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AFFECTED PROPERTY. Real property which is proposed to be or is assessed
under a local improvement project.
   AFFECTED PROPERTY OWNER. One whose real property is proposed to be or is
assessed under a local improvement project.
   COSTS OF THE PROJECT. All costs incurred in accomplishing the construction
or installation of improvements, including the acquisition of right-of-way,
along with associated administrative and overhead charges and expenses.
   TOWN MANAGER. The chief executive and administrative officer of the town
and/or duly authorized agents.
(Ord. 9(1976) § 1-2)
§ 8-4-3 INITIATION.
   (A)   Order of Town Council. Local improvement projects may be initiated by
order of the Town Council, subject to protest by the owners of a majority of
all affected property. Implementation of projects generally rests with the Town
Manager and his or her agents. The Town Council shall initiate a local
improvement project by resolution directing the Town Manager and authorized
agents to proceed and stating the Town Council’s intention that the project be
initiated.
   (B)   Initiate by resolution. If a petition is received from more than 50%
of the owners of property in the area of a proposed local improvement district,
the Town Council shall initiate by resolution the project as specified in the
petition.
   (C)   Affected parties notified. The Town Manager may hold such
administrative hearings relating to a proposed improvement project as the Town
Manager deems appropriate. The hearings may be used to inform affected property
owners about the contemplated project, the assessments proposed and obtain
their reactions thereto. The Town Manager shall use whatever procedures he or
she determines to be appropriate to inform affected property owners of the
administrative hearing(s).
(Ord. 9(1976) § 1-3)
§ 8-4-4 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS; TOWN MANAGER DUTIES.
   If the Town Council determines to pursue a local improvement project, or if
a 50% petition has been filed, and the Town Manager has been directed to
proceed with implementation, the Town Manager will be responsible for the
duties set forth in this section.
   (A)   Publication; contents of notice. The Town Manager shall have notices
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. One notice shall
be published not more than 24, nor less than ten days prior to the date of the
hearing before the Town Council. The notice shall include the following:
      (1)   The date, time and place of the hearing;
      (2)   The general nature of the improvements proposed, along with the
estimated costs thereof;
      (3)   The amount of the estimated costs to be paid by the town and the
total amount proposed to be assessed;
      (4)   The general area which is to be assessed and the manner or method
proposed in the levying of the assessments;
      (5)   The assessments which are proposed to be levied against affected
properties and circumstances which might occur which could result in the final
assessment being in an amount greater than that proposed;
      (6)   A statement as to when assessments would be levied and when they
would be due and payable. If it is proposed that the assessments can be paid in
installments, the installment schedule and the maximum interest rate;
      (7)   The place and times where the plans for the project will be
available for review. In addition, there will be given the name of a person and
a telephone extension at the town office where that person can be contacted to
answer inquiries about the project;
      (8)   That protests, objections and remonstrances against the
contemplated improvements must be made as follows:
         (a)   A “protest” is the exercise by an affected property owner of the
property owner’s right under Charter § 10.8. It must be in writing, it must be
clearly denominated as a protest, it must include a description of the affected
property, and it must be signed by the property owner(s) or someone authorized
on the property owner’s behalf. A protest will be received and honored by the
Town Council if it meets these provisions and only if it is lodged with the
Town Manager’s office, Municipal Building, Vail, Colorado, no less than one day
before the date of the hearing before the Council; and
         (b)   An “objection” or “remonstrance” is a complaint or criticism
based upon legal or factual grounds, or both, which concern the project or any
aspect thereof. Objections and remonstrances may be made either in writing or
orally at the hearing before the Town Council.
      (9)   The place and times where the written material, including the draft
ordinance proposed to be adopted, furnished to the Town Council by the Town
Manager prior to the hearing, may be inspected and reviewed; and
      (10)   That members of the general public and affected property owners
will have an opportunity to present their views, objections and remonstrances
about the project, or any part of it, at the hearing.
   (B)   Notification to property owners. A copy of the notice described in
subsection (A) of this section shall be mailed, postage prepaid, as first class
mail, not more than 23, nor less than 14 days prior to the date of the hearing
before the Town Council to the owners of the affected properties. Included with
the notice shall be a form entitled “protest”, that the owner(s) may complete
and return to the Manager to exercise the property owner’s protest of the
proposed project. Steps will be taken to ascertain the current owners and their
addresses and attempts made to furnish them with actual notice via mail.
However, notice shall be sufficient where it has been mailed, postage prepaid,
as first class mail, within the time set forth in this section, to the last
known address of the last known owner of the affected properties per the real
property assessment rolls for general (ad valorem) taxes of Eagle County as of
a date five days before the date of such mailing.
(Ord. 9(1976) § 1-4(a, b))
§ 8-4-5 HEARING.
   (A)   Inform Council. Prior to the hearing, the Town Manager may inform the
Town Council by written memoranda about the project. At or before the hearing,
the Manager will inform the Town Council concerning such compliance with §
8-4-4 of this chapter. Any information in writing furnished to the Town Council
prior to the hearing will be available as set forth in §
8-4-4(A)(9) of this chapter.
   (B)   Presentation by Town Manager and affected persons. At the hearing, the
Town Manager may make an oral presentation to the Town Council about the
project. All affected property owners and members of the general public will be
given an opportunity to present their views, objections and/or remonstrances.
The Town Manager will then be given an opportunity to make further comments.
   (C)   Possible continuation. The hearing may be continued from time to time.
If continued, further or additional notices will not be required.
   (D)   Protests submitted; ruling by Council. Protests lodged in accordance
with §
8-4-4 of this chapter will be submitted by the Town Manager. The Town Council
will rule upon their validity and sufficiency. If the Council determines that
the valid protests exceed 50% of the affected property owners, the Council
shall find that the project will not be completed, except as it may be built
with funds of the town. The specific ruling on the protests as submitted shall
be included in the ordinance under §
8-4-6 of this chapter if the Council authorizes the construction of the
improvements.
(Ord. 9(1976) § 1-5)
§ 8-4-6 ORDER OF IMPROVEMENTS; PREREQUISITES.
   (A)   Adopt ordinance. If the Town Council at the hearing, or at any later
time or times to which the hearing might be continued, determines to proceed
with the project, an ordinance shall be adopted. The ordinance shall be based
on the items considered and shall include the following:
      (1)   An order that the district within which the local improvements
shall be made is formed and the order shall include a description of the
district’s boundaries;
      (2)   A finding relating to notice and public hearing requirements of
this chapter;
      (3)   A finding or ruling on the protests, if any had been lodged;
      (4)   A finding that the local improvement project is in the public
interest and that special benefits are anticipated to result to the affected
properties;
      (5)   An approval of the plans for the project;
      (6)   An order directing construction of the improvements;
      (7)   An approval of the proposed assessments schedule and the manner or
method of levying the assessments in accordance with §
8-4-8 of this chapter; and
      (8)   An approval of the installment schedule for the payments of
assessments when levied and the maximum interest rate, if applicable.
   (B)   Objections and remonstrances. The ordinance may expressly rule upon
objections and remonstrances. If no express ruling is made, adoption of the
ordinance will have the effect of overruling all objections and remonstrances.
   (C)   Defeat of ordinance. By defeat of a proposed ordinance, the Town
Council will determine that the improvement project is not in the public
interest, but it shall not limit proceedings for the same or similar
improvements from being considered again at any time in the future.
(Ord. 9(1976) § 1-6(a))
§ 8-4-7 COSTS WHEN ABOVE ESTIMATE.
   (A)   Ordinance limits costs; exceptions. The ordinance ordering the
improvements shall include a statement that the assessments which can be levied
against the affected properties will be limited to the amount shown on the
schedule approved in the ordinance adopted under §
8-4-6 of this chapter, except under the following circumstances:
      (1)   Actual construction costs exceed estimated construction costs, but
only to the maximum of an additional 15%;
      (2)   Land acquisition costs exceed the estimated costs; and/or
      (3)   Separate and additional elements of cost are incurred in
construction or for other items which are of a nature generally not foreseen
and included in the construction costs at the time of estimate. Such is to be
based upon experience and similar projects in the past.
   (B)   Limit increase. The Council may by ordinance further limit the
increase in assessments over the estimates as it deems appropriate. Further,
the notice required in §
8-4-4 of this chapter must contain the provisos of subsection (A) of this
section in order for the assessments to be higher than the amount shown on the
schedule.
(Ord. 9(1976) § 1-6(b))
§ 8-4-8 IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Let contracts. The Town Manager will be responsible to carry forward
the order contained in the Council’s ordinance. Town forces may be used to
construct the improvements. If not, the Town Manager shall let a contract or
contracts within a reasonable time under all the circumstances. The Manager may
let the contract for the improvements by bid or by negotiation as directed by
the Council. If the bids exceed the estimated amount, the Manager has the
authority to reject them and have the project put out again for bid when the
conditions are deemed more favorable.
   (B)   Consolidation of improvements. The Town Manager has the authority to
combine similar improvements for different areas for contracting purposes to
affect economies.
   (C)   Fairness in apportioning. Economies affected will be equitably
apportioned between the town and the affected properties by the Town Council at
the time of the imposition of assessments.
(Ord. 9(1976) § 1-7)
§ 8-4-9 LIMITATION ON ACTIONS AGAINST PROJECT.
   After the expiration of 30 days from the date of the final action and
approval by the Town Council of the ordinance described in §§
8-4-6 and
8-4-7 of this chapter, all actions or suits attacking its findings,
determinations and contents, and of all proceedings relating thereto, shall be
perpetually barred and shall be conclusive of the facts so stated in the
ordinance in every court or other tribunal. In order for one to have standing
to sue, one must have asserted his or her protests, objections and
remonstrances in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Review shall
be limited to the same and the factual and legal grounds asserted before the
Town Council.
(Ord. 9(1976) § 1-8)
§ 8-4-10 ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Hearing.
      (1)   Manager hearing. The Town Manager may hold such administrative
hearings relating to the imposition of assessments as the Manager deems
appropriate to obtain reactions thereto from affected property owners. The
Manager shall use whatever procedures he or she determines to be appropriate to
inform affected property owners of the administrative hearing(s).
      (2)   Council hearing. Upon ascertaining the costs of the project. and
after holding administrative hearings, if any, the Town Manager shall bring the
matter on the levying of assessments before the Town Council. No such hearing
will be held before the Council until the improvements have been substantially
completed.
   (B)   Levying.
      (1)   Special benefit designated.
         (a)   If the Town Council determines that the improvements confer
special benefits to the real or personal property within the district,
assessments may be made, pursuant to this chapter, and levied on any basis
which the Town Council determines to be equitable under all of the
circumstances. The assessments made shall be sufficient to cover the portion of
the total cost of the improvements to be defrayed by the levying of special
assessments. Special assessments shall not exceed the special benefits as
determined by the Council.
         (b)   For purposes of this chapter, SPECIAL BENEFITS means that the
real property has available improvements which enhance the present and/or
potential use, convenience, value, reduction in maintenance costs, alleviation
of health and sanitation hazards, or enjoyment of the property. Factors which
may be weighed and considered by the Town Council in determining special
benefits include, but are not limited to, the following:
            1.   The effects upon the appearance and environment of and for the
properties abutting upon or in the vicinity of the improvements;
            2.   The availability of the improvements for use by the properties
abutting upon or in the vicinity of the improvements;
            3.   The type of improvements made and the policy followed in
making assessments on similar improvements constructed in the past;
            4.   The nature of the improvements, singularly or in combination,
and their influence throughout the area and as to the individual parcels of
property;
            5.   The ever-increasing responsibility and changing concept of
what is required of the individual property owners at their own costs under the
police power even though the general public also has available to it such
improvements;
            6.   Unique features of particular properties;
            7.   The zoning, the uses and potential uses of the properties in
the vicinity of the improvements;
            8.   Opinions on the effects upon the fair market values from the
improvements upon properties in the vicinity of the improvements; and
            9.   The probable influence from the improvements relating to the
protection or preservation of the values of the properties in the vicinity of
the improvements.
      (2)   Imposition by ordinance. If the Town Council at the hearing, or at
any later time or times to which the hearing might be continued, determines
from the evidence that special benefits have accrued to affected properties,
then the assessments will be levied and imposed by ordinance. The ordinance
will include a finding relating to notice and public hearing requirements of
this chapter and resolve the issues, if any, which have been presented through
appropriate objection. In the event installment payments can be made, the
ordinance shall set forth the schedule and the interest rate.
   (C)   Ordinance levying; conclusiveness. After the expiration of 30 days
from the effective date of the ordinance described in subsection (B)(2) of this
section, all actions or suits attacking in any way the proceedings held, the
determinations and findings made, and the assessments levied therein, shall be
perpetually barred and shall not thereafter be questioned in any court or
before any other tribunal. In order for one to have standing to challenge the
proceedings in any respect, or the ordinance adopted, or any assessment levied,
one must have asserted his or her objections in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter. Review shall be limited to the objections so
asserted.
   (D)   Set aside, new assessment. If a court of competent jurisdiction sets
aside any final assessment, then the Town Council may make a new assessment
generally in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Notices and
procedures followed need not be in strict compliance with this chapter so long
as the affected property owner is afforded due process of law.
   (E)   Lien; exception. All assessments made in pursuance of this chapter
shall be a lien in the several amounts assessed against each tract or parcel of
land from the effective date of the assessing ordinance. A lien shall not,
however, attach to any tract or parcel of land so assessed which is owned by
the state, or any agency, or instrumentality thereof, or any county,
municipality, school district, special or quasi-municipal district, other
political subdivision or private corporation operating a public utility.
   (F)   Subdivision. As to any subdivisions of any real estate assessed in
pursuance of this chapter, the assessments shall in each case be a lien upon
the individual lots of the subdivision in proportion to their respective
shares.
   (G)   Lien; superiority. The liens for assessments granted by subsections
(E) and (F) of this section shall be prior and superior to all other liens,
claims, encumbrances and titles, whether prior in time or not, and shall
constitute such a lien until paid; provided, however, the assessment lien is
subordinate and junior to any lien for general taxes and is subject to
extinguishment by the sale of any property on account of the nonpayment of
general taxes; and provided, further, any such assessment lien on any tract or
parcel of land is prior and superior to any assessment lien thereon
subsequently levied.
   (H)   Time due. Subject to the requirements of subsections (I) and (J) of
this section, all installments both of principal and interest, shall be payable
at such times as may be determined in and by the assessing ordinance referred
to in subsection (B)(2) of this section.
   (I)   Lump payment; when due. All assessments made in pursuance of this
chapter shall be due and payable without demand within 30 days after the
publication of the assessing ordinance, after its final passage.
   (J)   Installment payment.
      (1)   Owner discretion. All assessments as mentioned in subsection (J)(2)
of this section may, at the election of the owner, be paid in installments with
interest as provided in subsection (J)(5) of this section, if so authorized by
the Town Council.
      (2)   Election of method. Whenever the Town Council authorizes the
payment of assessments in installments with interest as provided in subsection
(J)(3) of this section, failure to pay the whole assessment within the period
of 30 days shall be conclusively considered and held as election on the part of
all persons interested, whether under disability or otherwise, to pay in
installments the amount of the assessment then unpaid.
      (3)   Regaining right. At any time prior to the date a delinquent
assessment is certified to the County Treasurer for collection, but not
thereafter, the owner may pay the amount of delinquent installments and accrued
interest as provided under subsection (J)(5) of this section, and shall
thereupon be restored to the right thereafter to pay in installments in the
same manner as if default had not been made.
      (4)   Prepayment. The owner of any piece of real estate may at any time
pay the whole unpaid principal due under the assessing ordinance referred to in
subsection (B)(2) of this section, with the interest accrued to the next
interest payment date, together with penalties, if any.
      (5)   Annual or semi-annual installments. In case of an election to pay
in installments under subsection (J)(2) and (J)(3) of this section, the
assessment shall be payable in annual or semi-annual installments not to exceed
20 years in length, or as determined and directed by the Council, shall be
substantially equal, including principal, with interest in all cases on the
unpaid principal payable annually or semi-annually at a rate equal to or less
than that set in the ordinance ordering the improvements. The Town Council
shall set the installment interest rate in the ordinance ordering the
improvements, but the interest rate shall in no event be less than the highest
interest rate to be borne by the bonds, if any, of the district. Further,
nothing contained in this subsection (J)(5) shall be construed as limiting the
discretion of the Town Council in providing a different number of installments
or periods of payment than is provided in this chapter, or in determining the
time when the first installment of principal or interest or both shall become
due.
   (K)   Interest-free period. Payments under the assessing ordinance referred
to in subsection (B)(2) of this section, may be made to the Director of Finance
and recorded at any time within 30 days of the final publication of the
assessing ordinance, without penalty or the payment of interest. The Town
Manager may publish a notice in at least one newspaper published and of general
circulation in the town at least ten days before the end of the 30-day period,
which notice shall state the place of payment and the time for it to close.
Before any installment payment date a notice may also be published. The failure
to publish such notice or to do any other act or thing required by this chapter
shall not affect the assessment or any installment thereof, or the lien the
town holds therefor, nor extend the time for payment thereof.
(Ord. 9(1976) §§ 1-9(a,b), 1-14 – 1-26)
§ 8-4-11 BONDS.
   (A)   Issuance authority. The Town Council shall have the power by ordinance
without an election to issue bonds for the purpose of paying all or such
portion of the cost of constructing or installing any special or local
improvement projects ordered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
including the costs incidental thereto. The bonds may be of the total principal
amount, date, denomination, form, terms and bear such interest as may be
prescribed by the Town Council and shall be payable in a sufficient period of
years after their date to cover the period of payment of the improvements to be
provided. If the Town Council so determines, the bonds may be redeemable prior
to maturity with or without the payment of a premium. The bonds may be issued
upon estimates approved by the Town Council and may be payable in whole or in
part out of the monies collected on account of the assessments made for the
authorized improvements. All monies collected from the assessments for the
improvements shall be applied to the payment of the bonds so issued, until
payment in full is made of all the bonds, both as to principal and interest.
   (B)   Refunding. All bonds may be refunded as authorized in §
10.7 of the Town Charter.
   (C)   Surplus or deficit fund. Where all outstanding bonds of a special or
local improvement district have been paid and any monies remain to the credit
of the district, they shall be transferred to a special surplus and deficiency
fund, and whenever there is a deficiency in any special or local improvement
district fund to meet the payments of outstanding bonds and interest due
thereon, the deficiency shall be paid out of the surplus and deficiency fund.
Whenever a special or local improvement district has paid and cancelled three-
fourths of its bonds issued, and for any reason the remaining assessments are
not paid in time to take up the remaining bonds of the district and the
interest due thereon and there are not sufficient monies in the special surplus
and deficiency fund, then the town shall pay the bonds when due and the
interest due thereon, and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid assessments
due the district.
   (D)   Town payment. In consideration of general benefits conferred upon the
town at large from the construction and installation of improvements in
improvement districts, the Town Council may levy annual taxes without an
election on all taxable property within the town at a rate to be determined by
the Town Council, for the purpose of advancing monies to maintain current
payments of interest and equal annual payments to the principal amount of bonds
issued for any improvement district created pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. The proceeds of the taxes shall be placed in a special fund and shall
be disbursed only for the purposes specified in this chapter, provided that in
lieu of the tax levies, the Town Council may annually transfer to the special
fund any available monies of the town.
(Ord. 9(1976) § 1-10(a–d))
§ 8-4-12 LIMITATION ON ACTIONS AGAINST BONDS OR ORDINANCE.
   After the expiration of 30 days from the date of the final action and
approval by the Town Council of the ordinance providing for the issuance of the
bonds, all actions or suits attacking its findings, determinations, and content
or questioning the legality of the bonds authorized therein and all proceedings
relating thereto, shall be perpetually barred and the ordinance and bonds shall
be conclusive of the facts so stated in the ordinance and bonds and shall be
conclusively deemed valid and legal in every court or other tribunal and shall
not be open to contest by the town or any person whomsoever, for any reason
whatever.
(Ord. 9(1976) § 1-10(e))
§ 8-4-13 HEARING NOTICE.
   (A)   Contents. Prior to a hearing, the Town Manager shall be responsible
for having a notice published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
town. One notice shall be published not more than 24 nor less than ten days
prior to the date of the hearing before the Town Council. The notice shall
include the following:
      (1)   The date, time and place of the hearing;
      (2)   The general nature of the improvements which have been constructed
and the total project cost;
      (3)   The amounts proposed to be assessed against individual parcels of
real property;
      (4)   That the provisions of subsection (A)(3) of this section, must be
complied with in detail by affected property owners before objections to the
levy of the assessment will be recognized;
      (5)   That affected property owners will have an opportunity to be heard
and present evidence concerning their objections at the public hearing if they
comply with the condition precedent set forth in subsection (A)(4) of this
section. Failure to comply with such condition precedent will be deemed a
waiver of any objections and a consent to the levy of the proposed assessment;
      (6)   Where and when inquiries can be made and questions answered;
      (7)   The place and times where the written material, including the draft
ordinance proposed to be adopted, furnished to the Town Council by the Town
Manager prior to the hearing may be inspected and reviewed; and
      (8)   Affected property owners who do not wish to contest their
assessment but who wish to make any comments favorable or unfavorable, relating
to the project will be given an opportunity to do so.
   (B)   Delivery. A copy of the notice described in subsection (A) of this
section along with a copy of §
8-4-14 of this chapter shall be mailed, postage prepaid, as first class mail,
not more than 23, nor less than 18 days prior to the date of the hearing before
the Town Council to the owners of the affected properties. Steps will be taken
to ascertain the current owners and their addresses and attempts made to
furnish them with actual notice via mail. However, notice shall be sufficient
where it has been mailed, postage prepaid, as first class mail, within the time
hereinabove set forth, to the last known address of the last known owner of the
affected properties per the real property assessment rolls for general (ad
valorem) taxes of Eagle County as of a date five days before the date of such
mailing.
(Ord. 9(1976) § 1-11(a,b))
§ 8-4-14 OBJECTIONS; TIME LIMIT.
   (A)   Objections to the proposed assessment must be lodged in writing by the
affected property owner with the Town Manager’s office, Municipal Building, no
less than five days prior to the date of the hearing before the Town Council.
The objections must be framed so as to identify the specific issue(s) involved,
the grounds therefor, and the witnesses who will present the evidence at the
hearing and the general nature of their testimony. The writing must also
include the name of the owner(s) and a description of the affected property.
   (B)   Prior to the hearing, the Town Manager will forward to the Town
Council the written objections which the Manager has received. The Manager may
at the same time forward his or her comments in writing in respect to the
project and the assessments. He or she may also make comments relating to the
written objections. Such information furnished to the Town Council prior to the
hearing will be available as set forth in §
8-4-13(A)(7) of this chapter.
(Ord. 9(1976) § 1-11(c))
§ 8-4-15 PARTICIPATION AT HEARING.
   (A)   Formal objections heard. At or before the hearing, the Town Manager
will inform the Town Council concerning his or her compliance with the notice
requirements of this chapter. At the hearing, the Manager will have an
opportunity to make a presentation to the Town Council relating to the proposed
assessments. Only those persons who have filed their written objections as
required by §
8-4-14 of this chapter will be given an opportunity to present evidence in
support of their objections and may respond to the presentation or written
comments made by the Town Manager. The Town Manager in turn will be permitted
to present additional evidence in response to the objectors’ evidence.
   (B)   Informal comments pro and con are heard. Affected property owners not
wishing to contest their assessment but wishing to comment, favorably or
unfavorably, on the project will be heard.
(Ord. 9(1976) § 1-11(d))
§ 8-4-16 NONPAYMENT.
   (A)   Procedure. An assessment or installment thereof, of any local
improvement district, shall be considered delinquent if not paid within 30 days
after the date set for payment thereof in the provisions of the assessing
ordinance.
      (1)   A delinquency shall cause the whole amount of unpaid principal and
accrued interest to become due and payable.
      (2)   As soon as any assessment or installment thereof becomes
delinquent, the Director of Finance shall mark it delinquent on the assessment
roll and shall, at least once each calendar year, but not sooner than October
1, certify such assessments, along with interest and penalty, to the Treasurer
of Eagle County, Colorado; and the County Treasurer shall extend the assessment
upon the real property tax rolls of the county and collect it in the same
manner as delinquent general taxes levied upon the property. Upon certification
of the delinquent assessment or payments, the costs of collection shall also
become due and payable.
   (B)   Certification.
      (1)   There shall be no interest charged against an assessment which is
paid in full to the town within 30 days from the effective date of the
assessment ordinance. In the event that the assessment is not paid in full
within the 30-day period, interest shall be charged at the rate set by the Town
Council in the ordinance levying the assessments.
      (2)   Failure to pay an assessment, or an installment payment thereof,
when due, whether principal or interest, shall cause the whole amount of the
unpaid assessment and accrued interest thereon, along with penalty, to become
due and payable immediately and the amount shall continue drawing interest at
the rate established in the ordinance levying the assessments. In the event
that the assessment in default is on the installment payment basis, and the
assessment has not been certified to the County Treasurer for collection, the
Director of Finance may permit the owner of the property assessed to return to
the installment payment basis upon the payment of all installment payments in
default together with all interest and penalty then due.
(Ord. 9(1976) §§ 1-27, 1-28; Ord. 23(1993) § 2)
§ 8-4-17 CONNECTION TO UTILITIES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Connection required when streets improved. Whenever any paving of a
street is authorized or ordered under the provisions of this chapter, the Town
Council may order the owners of the abutting property to connect their premises
with the gas or water mains, or with any other utility in the street in front
of their premises. Upon default of any owner for 20 days after such an order to
make the connections, the Town Manager may contract for and make the
connections at the distance, under the regulations, and in accordance with the
specifications as may be prescribed. The whole cost of each connection shall be
assessed against the property with which the connection is made and the cost
shall be paid upon completion of the work. The cost may be paid in one sum or
it may be paid in installments as provided for in §
8-4-10(J)(1) through (J)(5) of this chapter, except that the cost shall be
payable in annual installments not to exceed five years in length and the
interest rate shall be the rate charged large commercial borrowers by major
United States banking institutions as reported in the Wall Street Journal on
the day of the hearing levying assessments pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Abatement cost becomes lien. The cost shall be assessed, shall become
a lien and shall be continued in the same manner as is provided in this chapter
for the assessment and collection of the cost of other special improvements.
Upon default in the payment of any such assessment, the property shall be sold
in like manner and with like effect.
(Ord. 9(1976) § 1-29; Ord. 5(1988) § 1)
CHAPTER 5: CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES AND FACILITIES
Section
8-5-1 Title
8-5-2 Purpose
8-5-3 Applicability
8-5-4 Definitions
8-5-5 Franchise required
8-5-6 General franchise characteristics
8-5-7 Franchise as a contract
8-5-8 Conflicts
8-5-9 Franchisee subject to police power
8-5-10 Franchise validity
8-5-11 Filing of applications
8-5-12 Content of applications
8-5-13 Consideration of applications
8-5-14 Acceptance
8-5-15 Franchise term
8-5-16 Franchise fee
8-5-17 Insurance, bonds, indemnity
8-5-18 Letter of credit
8-5-19 Liquidated damages
8-5-20 Forfeiture and termination
8-5-21 Insolvency
8-5-22 Removal of cable communications system
8-5-23 Subscriber fees and rates
8-5-24 Reports
8-5-25 Records required
8-5-26 Filings
8-5-27 Consumer protection and service standards
8-5-28 Service to subscribers
8-5-29 Leased access
8-5-30 Public drops
8-5-31 Lockout device
8-5-32 Protection of subscriber privacy
8-5-33 Construction and installation work
8-5-34 Location of structures, lines and equipment
8-5-35 Excavation; cable location
8-5-36 Damage to cable
8-5-37 Replacement of paving
8-5-38 Alteration of streets by town
8-5-39 Trimming trees
8-5-40 Temporary move of cables
8-5-41 Refunds and service terminations
8-5-42 Service area
8-5-43 Continuity of service
8-5-44 Transitional operation
8-5-45 Periodic reevaluation and renegotiations
8-5-46 Theft of services and tampering
8-5-47 Renegotiation
8-5-48 Franchise renewal
8-5-49 Franchise nontransferable
8-5-50 Multiple franchises
8-5-51 Rights reserved to town
8-5-52 Severability
§ 8-5-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the CABLE COMMUNICATIONS ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-2 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this chapter are:
   (A)   Provide for the franchising and regulation of cable television within
the town;
   (B)   Provide for a cable communications system that will meet the current
needs of the town and that can be improved and upgraded to meet future needs;
   (C)   Provide for the payment of fees and other valuable consideration to
the town for the use of the public ways and for the privilege to construct and
operate cable communications systems;
   (D)   Provide for the regulation by the town of certain rates to be charged
to subscribers for certain cable communications services, as permitted by law;
   (E)   Provide for the development of cable communications as a means to
improve communication between and among the members of the public and public
institutions of the town; and
   (F)   Provide remedies and prescribe penalties for violation of this chapter
and any franchise granted hereunder.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-3 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter is applicable to any application for a cable franchise or
franchise renewal filed on or after the effective date hereof and to any such
franchise or renewal granted thereafter.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used from the present tense include the future, words
in the plural number include the singular and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is
permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary
meanings.
   ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel set aside for public use, educational use or
governmental use without a channel use charge.
   ACCESS USER. Any person or entity entitled to make use of an access channel
consistent with the intended purpose of the channel.
   APPLICATION. A proposal seeking authority to construct and operate a cable
communications system within the town pursuant to this chapter. It shall
include the initial proposal plus all related subsequent amendments and
correspondence with the town.
   BASIC CABLE SERVICE. Any service tier which includes the retransmission of
local broadcast television signals, or as the term may be redefined by Title 17
of the United States Code and Federal Communications Commission Regulations.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM. A nonbroadcast facility consisting of
a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, and reception and
control equipment, under common ownership and control, that distributes or is
designed to distribute to public subscribers cable television services,
institutional services, or other communications services; but such terms shall
not include:
      (1)   A facility or combination of facilities that serves only to
retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast signals;
      (2)   A facility or combination of facilities that serves only
subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership,
control or management, unless such facility or facilities use any public right-
of-way;
      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended; except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other
than for the purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541(c)) to the extent such facility is
used and the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or
      (4)   Any facilities of an electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility system.
   CABLE SERVICE. The one-way transmission of video programming and associated
nonvideo signals to subscribers together with subscriber interaction, if any,
which is provided in connection with the video programming.
   CHANNEL. Six megahertz (MHZ) frequency band which is capable of carrying
either one standard video signal, a number of audio, digital or other nonvideo
signals or some combination of such signals and which is at least six MHZ wide.
   CONNECTION. The attachment of the drop to the radio or television set or
other communication device of the subscriber.
   CONVERTER. An electronic tuning device which converts transmitted signals to
a frequency which permits the reception on an ordinary television receiver.
   COUNCIL or TOWN COUNCIL. The governing body of the Town of Vail.
   DROP. The cable that connects a subscriber’s terminal to the nearest feeder
line of the cable communications system.
   EASEMENT. A right to use all public rights-of-way including public utility
easements.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   FEEDER LINE. The coaxial or fiber optic cable running from the trunk line to
line extenders and taps for the purpose of interconnection to individual
subscribers.
   FRANCHISE. The nonexclusive right and authority to construct, maintain and
operate a cable communications system through use of the public streets,
dedications, public utility easements or other public right-of-way or public
places in the town pursuant to a contractual agreement executed by the town and
a franchisee.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. A franchise grant ordinance or a contractual agreement,
containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including
references, specifications, requirements and other related matters.
   FRANCHISE FEE. Any fee or assessment of any kind imposed by a franchising
authority on a grantee as compensation for the grantee’s use of the public
rights-of-way. The term FRANCHISE FEE does not include:
      (1)   Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any
such tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or
their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly
discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);
      (2)   Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by
grantee for public, educational or governmental access facilities;
      (3)   Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of
the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages; or
      (4)   Any fee imposed under U.S.C. Title 17.
   FRANCHISEE or GRANTEE. Refers to an entity authorized to construct, or
operate, or both, a cable communications system within the town pursuant to
this chapter including any lawful successor, transferee or assignee of the
original grantee.
   GROSS REVENUE. The annual gross receipts received by a grantee from all
sources of operations of the cable television system within the town utilizing
the public streets and rights-of-way for which a franchise is required in order
to deliver such cable service, excluding refundable deposits, rebates or
credits, except that any sales, excise or other taxes or charges collected for
direct pass-through to local, state or federal government, other than the
franchise fee, shall not be included.
   INSTALLATION. The act of connecting the system from the feeder cable to the
subscriber’s receiver so that the installation is to the subscriber’s terminal
or receiver.
   INSTITUTIONAL SERVICES. One- and two-way nonentertainment transmission
services for businesses, public agencies and community institutions. Such
services include, but are not limited to, video transmission and voice and data
communications.
   LEASED CHANNEL or LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel or part of a channel,
available for commercial use on a fee basis by persons or entities other than a
franchisee.
   MONITORING. Observing a communications signal carried on a cable
communications system, or the absence of such a signal, by any person without
regard to whether such observation is by visual or electronic means. Monitoring
shall not include system-wide sweeps of the cable communications system for
purposes of verifying the integrity of the system and controlling return path
of the transmissions.
   PAY TELEVISION. The delivery over the system of per channel audio-video
signals to subscribers for a fee or charge in addition to the charge for basic
service.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS FACILITIES or “PEG” ACCESS
FACILITIES. The total of the following:
      (1)   Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational
or government use; and
      (2)   Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
   SERVICE AREA or FRANCHISE AREA. The entire geographical area within the town
as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise
specified in the franchise or permit.
   SERVICE TIER. A specific set of cable subscriber services which are made
available as, and only as, a group for purchase by subscribers at a specific
rate for the group.
   STREET OR PUBLIC WAY. The surface and the space below and above any public
street, road, highway, path, sidewalk, alley, court or easement now or
hereafter held by the town for the purpose of public travel or public utilities
and shall include public easements or rights-of-way.
   SUBSCRIBER. A recipient of cable television service or other services
provided over a cable communications system.
   TOWN. The Town of Vail, Colorado.
   USER. A party utilizing a cable communications systems facility for the
purpose of production or transmission of material or information to
subscribers.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-5 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Obtaining franchise. It shall be unlawful to construct, install,
maintain or operate a cable communications system or part of a cable
communications system within the town without a valid franchise obtained in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Use of streets and public property. It is unlawful for any person,
company or entity to construct, install or maintain within any public street in
the town, or within any other public property of the town, or within any
privately owned area within the town which has not yet become a public street,
but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any proposed
subdivision map approved by the town, any equipment or facilities for
distributing any television signal or radio signal through a cable television
system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street, property or
area has first been obtained from the town, and unless such franchise is then
in full force and effect.
(Ord. 20(1979) § 2; Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-6 GENERAL FRANCHISE CHARACTERISTICS.
   Any franchise issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed to:
   (A)   Authorize use of the public ways for installing cables, wires, lines
and other facilities in order to operate a cable communications system, but
shall neither expressly nor impliedly be deemed to authorized the grantee to
provide service, or install cable, wires, lines or any other equipment or
facilities upon private property without owner consent, or to utilize publicly-
or privately-owned utility poles or conduits without a separate agreement with
the owners thereof;
   (B)   Be nonexclusive, and shall neither expressly nor impliedly be deemed
to preclude the issuance of subsequent franchises to operate one or more cable
communications systems within the town; and
   (C)   Convey no property right to the franchise or right to renewal except
as required by federal and state law.
(Ord. 25(1994); 1997 Code)
§ 8-5-7 FRANCHISE AS A CONTRACT.
   A franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to constitute a contract between the franchisee and the town. The
franchisee shall be deemed to have contractually committed itself to comply
with the terms, conditions and provisions of the franchise documents, and with
all rules, orders, regulations and determinations applicable to the franchise
which are issued, promulgated or made pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-8 CONFLICTS.
   (A)   Between documents. All terms, conditions and provisions of this
chapter and the application for a franchise shall be deemed to be embodied in a
franchise, and conflicts in terms, conditions or provisions between these
documents shall be resolved as follows:
      (1)   The express terms of this chapter shall prevail over conflicting or
inconsistent provisions of the franchise;
      (2)   The express terms of the franchise shall prevail over conflicting
or inconsistent provisions in the application and any request for proposals;
and
      (3)   The express terms of any request for proposals shall prevail over
conflicting or inconsistent provisions in the application for the franchise.
   (B)   Franchise provisions separable; compliance with state statutes. The
provisions of the franchise shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate
its purposes and objectives consistent with this chapter and the public
interest. In the event one or more provisions of the franchise or this chapter
are subsequently found to be unlawful, null and void or unenforceable, the town
shall, at its sole option, have the right to consider said provisions severed
from the franchise so as to continue the franchise’s effectiveness, in
accordance with the terms of this chapter. Any franchise agreement will be
construed under the laws of the state.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-9 FRANCHISEE SUBJECT TO POLICE POWER.
   A franchisee shall, at all times during the life of a franchise, be subject
to all lawful exercise of the police power by the town and through such lawful
regulations as the town shall hereafter enact. The construction, operation and
maintenance of the system shall also be in full compliance with all other
applicable rules and regulations now in effect or hereafter adopted by the
United States, the State of Colorado, or any agency of said governments.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-10 FRANCHISE VALIDITY.
   A grantee shall agree, by the acceptance of a franchise, to accept the
validity of the terms and the conditions of this chapter and the franchise in
their entirety and that the grantee will not, at any time in any claim or
proceeding, challenge any term or provision of this chapter or the franchise as
unreasonable or arbitrary or argue that the town did not have authority to
impose such term or condition.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-11 FILING OF APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for a cable communications franchise will be considered
pursuant to the following procedures.
   (A)   Application accepted. An application may be filed at any time or
pursuant to a request for proposals issued by the town.
   (B)   Notice published. Upon the filing of an application, the town shall
publish notice of the filing in a newspaper of general circulation in the town.
Any person wishing to submit any comment on the application shall, within 15
days of the date of notice of the first application, file such comment with the
Town Manager.
   (C)   Fee; refund. All applications to be acceptable for filing must be
accompanied by a filing fee of $10,060. The town shall apply all filing fees
received against all costs associated with its evaluation of any pending
applications pursuant to this chapter. In the event that total costs are less
than the total filing fees, the town shall refund a portion of the filing fee
on a prorated basis for each applicant within 45 days after franchise grant.
The town shall furnish applicants with documentation of all costs incurred at
that time.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-12 CONTENT OF APPLICATIONS.
   To be acceptable for filing, an application must conform to any applicable
request for proposals and all the information specified therein. Where an
application is not filed pursuant to a request for proposals, the application
shall contain at minimum, the following information:
   (A)   Ownership. Identification of the ownership of the applicant, if not a
natural person, including the names and addresses of all persons with 1% or
more ownership interest and the ultimate controlling natural persons and
identification of all officers and directors and any other primary business
affiliation of each;
   (B)   Business background. An indication whether or not the applicant, or
any entity controlling the applicant, including any officer of the corporation
or a major stockholder thereof, has been adjudged bankrupt, has had a cable
franchise revoked, or been found guilty by any court or administrative agency
in the United States of:
      (1)   A violation of a security or antitrust law; or
      (2)   A felony or any other crime involving moral turpitude. Identify any
such person or entity and fully explain the circumstances.
   (C)   Financial disclosure. A demonstration of the applicant’s technical and
financial ability to construct and operate the proposed cable facility;
   (D)   Facility capabilities. A description of the physical facility
proposed, including channel capacity including one-way and two-way, if any, the
area to be served, a summary of technical characteristics, and head end and
access facilities;
   (E)   Construction plan. A description relating how any construction will be
implemented, identification of areas having aboveground or below ground cable
facilities, the proposed construction schedule and a description where
appropriate, indicating how service will be converted from any existing
facility to a new facility;
   (F)   Services to be offered. A description of the services to be provided
over the system, including identification of television signals, both broadcast
and nonbroadcast, to be carried and all nontelevision services to be provided
initially. Where service will be offered by tiers, identify the signals or
services, or both, to be included on each tier;
   (G)   Rates. The proposed rates to be charged, including rates for each
service tier, as appropriate, and charges for installation, converters and
other services;
   (H)   Compliance with chapter. Information as necessary to demonstrate
compliance with all relevant requirements contained in this chapter;
   (I)   Compatibility with need of community. A demonstration stating how the
proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable related community needs and
interests. In particular, the application should describe how the proposal will
satisfy the needs as analyzed in any recent community needs assessment
commissioned by the town;
   (J)   Compliance with federal and state. A demonstration how the proposal
was designed to be consistent with all federal and state requirements;
   (K)   Projected performances. Pro forma financial projections for each year
of the franchise term. The projections shall include a statement of income,
balance sheet, statement of sources and use of funds, and schedule of capital
additions. All significant assumptions shall be explained in notes or
supporting schedules set accompanying the projections;
   (L)   Disclosure of interests. A complete list of all cable communications
systems in which the applicant or a principal thereof holds an equity interest;
   (M)   Sworn truth in disclosure. An affidavit of the applicant or duly
authorized officer thereof certifying, in a form acceptable to the town, the
truth and accuracy of the information contained in the application;
   (N)   Application for renewal. In the case of an application by an existing
franchisee for a renewed franchise, a demonstration that said franchisee has
substantially complied with the material terms of the existing franchise and
with applicable law; and
   (O)   Representatives identified. Any person who files an application with
the town for a cable communications franchise shall forthwith, at all times,
disclose to the town, in writing, the names, addresses and occupations of all
persons who are authorized to represent or act on behalf of the applicant in
those matters pertaining to the application. The requirement to make such
disclosure shall continue until the town shall have rejected an applicant’s
application or until an applicant withdraws its application.
(Ord. 25(1994); 1997 Code)
§ 8-5-13 CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Criteria examined. The town shall consider each application for a
franchise with the applications found to be acceptable for filing and in
substantial compliance with the requirements of this chapter and any applicable
request for proposals. In evaluating an application, the town will consider,
among other things, the applicant’s past service record in other communities,
the nature of the proposed facilities and services, including rates to be
charged therefor, and whether the proposal is adequate to meet the future
cable-related community needs and interests of the citizens of the town. Where
the application is for a renewed franchise, the town shall consider whether:
      (1)   The cable operator has substantially complied with the material
terms of the existing franchise and with applicable law;
      (2)   The quality of the operator’s service, including signal quality,
response to consumer complaints and billing practices, but without regard to
the mix quality, or level of cable services or other services provided over the
system, has been reasonable in light of community needs;
      (3)   The operator has the financial, legal and technical ability to
provide the services, facilities and equipment as set forth in the operator’s
proposal; and
      (4)   The operator’s proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-
related community needs and interest, taking into account the cost of meeting
such needs and interests.
   (B)   Grant of franchise; ordinance required. Where the town determines that
an applicant’s proposal, including the proposed service area, would serve the
public interest, it may grant a franchise to the applicant. The franchise
agreement will constitute a contract, freely entered into, between the town and
the grantee. Said franchise agreement shall incorporate by reference the
relevant provisions of this chapter. Any such franchise must be approved by
ordinance of the Town Council pursuant to the ordinances of the town and the
Charter of the town.
   (C)   Public hearing for franchise renewal. In the course of considering an
application for renewed franchise, the Council shall hold a public hearing,
consistent with the provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 626 as existing or as may from
time to time be amended.
   (D)   Grant fee. A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall not take
effect until the applicant pays a grant fee to the town. The grant fee shall be
equal to the town’s reasonable direct costs in the franchising process, less
the application filing fee received. The town shall provide the grantee a
statement summarizing such costs prior to the execution of the franchise.
(Ord. 18(1989) § 13; Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-14 ACCEPTANCE.
   A franchise and its terms and conditions shall be accepted by a grantee by
written instrument, in a form acceptable to the Town Attorney, and filed with
the Town Clerk within 30 days after the granting of the franchise by the town.
In its acceptance, the grantee shall declare that it has carefully read the
terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and accepts all of the
terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and agrees to abide by
same. In accepting a franchise, a grantee shall indicate that it has relied
upon its own investigation of all relevant facts, that it was not induced to
accept the franchise and that it accepts all reasonable risks relating to the
interpretation of the franchise.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-15 FRANCHISE TERM.
   The term of a franchise shall be as specified in the franchise agreement,
but it shall not exceed 15 years. If a franchisee seeks authority to operate a
cable system in the town beyond the term of its franchise, it shall file an
application for a renewed franchise not later than 30 months prior to the
expiration of its franchise.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-16 FRANCHISE FEE.
   (A)   Gross revenue percentage due to city. The franchisee in consideration
of the privilege granted under a franchise for the use of the public ways and
the privilege to construct and operate a cable communications system, shall pay
to the town up to 5% of its annual gross revenues or, if more than 5% is
permitted by law, the amount provided in the franchise agreement for the term
of the franchise.
   (B)   Quarterly financial statements required. A franchisee shall file with
the town, 30 days after the last day of each quarter, a financial statement
showing the gross revenues received by the franchisee during the preceding
quarter. A franchisee shall pay the quarterly portion of the franchise fee to
the town on or before the time such financial statement is due to be filed.
With each payment required by this section, the franchisee shall submit a
written statement, signed and certified by the franchisee to be true and
correct, showing for the immediately preceding calendar quarter the amount of
gross revenues, the amount of all revenues derived from the system and an
itemization of all permissible deductions therefrom to arrive at gross
revenues. The franchisee shall also submit to the town on or before the
thirtieth day following the end of each calendar year and following the
expiration or termination of the franchise a written statement, signed and
certified by the franchisee to be true and correct, showing for the immediately
preceding year or partial year, as applicable, the amount of gross revenues,
the amount of all revenues derived from the system and an itemization of all
permissible deductions therefrom to arrive at gross revenues. The town shall
have the right on 30 days’ notice to the franchisee to demand that the annual
statement be certified to be true and correct and in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter by both the franchisee and an independent
certified public accountant in accordance with sound and accepted accounting
practices. The statements referred to in this subsection (B) shall be in such
form and style and contain such details and information as the town shall
reasonably designate. The acceptance by the town of payments or reports thereof
shall be without prejudice and shall not constitute a waiver of the town’s
right to claim a deficiency in the payment of franchise fees or to audit the
franchisee’s books and records, as hereinafter set forth.
   (C)   Authority to audit. Upon five days’ prior written notice to the
franchisee, the town shall have the right to cause a complete audit to be made
of the books and records of the franchisee with respect to the system. If the
results of such audit show that the franchisee’s statement of gross revenues
for any period ending not more than three years prior to the commencement of
the audit has been understated by 3% or more, then the franchisee shall pay the
town the cost of such audit, any deficiency payment shown by such audit to be
due and interest thereon at the agreed rate. A report of the findings of the
town’s accountant shall be binding and conclusive upon the franchisee and the
town.
   (D)   Due date; penalty. In the event that any franchise payment is not
received by the town on or before the applicable date, interest shall be
charged from such due date at an annual interest rate then chargeable for
unpaid federal income taxes (26 U.S.C. § 6621). In addition to the foregoing,
the franchisee shall pay a late charge of 5% of the amount of such payment.
Interest and late charges will not be chargeable to the franchisee for
additional payment required under the yearly adjustment; provided, that such
payment does not exceed 10% of the total monthly payments made during the year.
In the event such payment exceeds 10%, the franchisee shall be liable for
interest and late charges for the entire amount.
   (E)   Procedure upon revocation; termination. In the event a franchise is
revoked or otherwise terminated prior to its expiration date, the franchisee
shall file with the town, within 90 days of the date of revocation or
termination, an audited financial statement showing the gross revenues received
by the franchisee since the end of the previous year and shall make adjustments
at that time for the franchise fees due up to the date of revocation or
termination.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-17 INSURANCE, BONDS, INDEMNITY.
   (A)   Insurance by franchisee. Upon the granting of a franchise and
following simultaneously the filing of the acceptance of the franchise and at
all times during the term of the franchise including the time for removal of
facilities or management as a trustee as provided for herein, the franchisee
shall obtain, pay all premiums for, and deliver to the town written evidence of
payment of premiums for and the originals of the following:
      (1)   Liability insurance. A general comprehensive public liability
policy or policies indemnifying, defending, and saving harmless the town, its
officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees from any and all claims by
any person whatsoever, including the costs, defenses, attorney fees, and
interest arising therefrom on account of injury to or death of a person or
persons occasioned by the operations of the franchisee under the franchise
herein granted, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred, with a minimum
liability of $1,000,000 per personal injury or death of any one person and
$3,000,000 for personal injury or death, of any two or more persons in any one
occurrence. The policy shall be endorsed adding coverage against all claims for
personal injury liability offenses; and
      (2)   Property damage insurance. A property damage insurance policy or
policies indemnifying, defending, and saving harmless the town, its officers,
boards, commissions, agents and employees from and against any and all claims
by any person whatsoever, including the costs, defenses, attorney fees and
interest arising therefrom, for property damage occasioned by the operation of
the franchisee under the franchise herein granted, or alleged to have been so
caused or occurred, with a minimum liability of $500,000 for property damage to
the property or any one person and $1,000,000 for property damage to the
property of two or more persons in any one occurrence.
   (B)   Performance bonds.
      (1)   A performance bond or bonds in favor of the town with good and
sufficient surety approved by the town in the sum set forth in the franchise
agreement conditioned upon the faithful performance and discharge of the
obligations imposed by this chapter and the franchise awarded hereunder from
the date hereof. The amount of the bond may be reduced as any construction that
is required is completed, consistent with the franchise agreement.
      (2)   The bond requirements set forth above shall no longer apply upon
completion of construction and inspection by the town as follows.
         (a)   The franchisee shall give notice to the town at such time as
franchisee has completed the construction.
         (b)   Upon receipt of notice, the town shall have 60 days to receive a
written report from an independent engineer; provided, however, if the town
fails to receive such a written report within the 60 days the completion of
construction shall be deemed to have taken place, unless the failure to receive
such a report is due to unforeseen events, acts of God, or events beyond the
reasonable control of the town.
         (c)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the town may condition
completion of the construction upon receipt of a written report from an
independent engineer. The completion of the system upgrade or system rebuild
shall not be deemed to have taken place until the independent engineer reports
the following:
            1.   All construction or improvements contemplated by the
franchisee have been completed or otherwise satisfactorily resolved;
            2.   Satisfactory test results using the technical standards for
cable systems established by the FCC at up to ten widely separated subscriber
drops selected by the independent engineer; and
            3.   All bonds and insurance policies called for herein shall be in
a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney. The town may at any time, if it deems
itself insecure, require a franchisee to provide additional sureties to any and
all bonds or to replace existing bonds with new bonds for good and sufficient
surety approved by the town.
   (C)   Indemnify town.
      (1)   A franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and
hold harmless the town, its officials, boards, commissions, agents and
employees against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings and
judgments for damage arising out of the operation of the cable communications
system by franchisee under the franchise. These damages shall include, but not
be limited to, penalties arising out of copyright infringements and damages
arising out of any failure by franchisee to secure consent from the owners,
authorized distributors and licensees or programs to be delivered by the
franchisee’s communications system whether or not any act or omission
complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by the franchise.
Indemnified expenses shall include, but not be limited to, all out-of-pocket
expenses, such as costs and attorney fees, and shall also include the
reasonable value of any services rendered by the Town Attorney or his or her
assistants or any employees of the town.
      (2)   No franchisee shall permit any policy or bond to expire and the
franchisee, not less than 30 days prior to its expiration, shall deliver to the
town a substitute, renewal or replacement bond or bonds in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-18 LETTER OF CREDIT.
   (A)   Letter nonrevocable. The town may at its discretion require that a
franchisee obtain a letter of credit. When and if the town should so require,
the franchisee shall deposit with the town a letter of credit from a financial
institution approved by the town in the amount of $50,000. The letter of credit
may not be revoked or terminated during the term of the franchise except with
the written approval of the town. The form and the content of such letter of
credit shall be approved by the Town Attorney. The letter of credit shall be
used to insure the faithful performance by the franchisee of all provisions of
the franchise and of this chapter; compliance with all orders, permits and
directions of any agency, commission, board, department, division or office of
the town having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this license; and
the payment by the franchisee of any claims, liens, and taxes due the town or
other municipalities which arise by reason of the construction, operation or
maintenance of the system.
   (B)   Credit amount limitation. The letter of credit shall be maintained by
the franchisee at $25,000 during the entire term of the franchise as the town
may require, even if funds are drawn against it pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   Content. The letter of credit shall contain the following endorsement:
   It is hereby understood and agreed that this letter of credit may not be
cancelled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety
until thirty (30) days after the receipt by the Town Attorney, by certified
mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew.
   (D)   Authority to draw against letter. At the town’s option, it may draw
against the letter of credit for any unpaid liquidated damages, franchise fees
or other amounts owing to it under the franchise which are 30 days or more past
due. The town shall notify the franchisee in writing at least ten days in
advance of drawing upon the letter of credit.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-19 LIQUIDATED DAMAGES.
   (A)   Procedure. In the event that the town finds the franchisee is in
violation of any material obligation under this chapter or the franchise, the
town shall notify the franchisee in writing of such apparent violation and
require the franchisee to cure the default within a reasonable time. The
franchisee shall respond in writing to the notice of violation within ten
working days from receipt of such notice setting forth the steps taken to
correct or propose to correct the violation. The town may extend the time for
such response upon a showing of just cause by the franchisee. The franchisee
may, within three days of receipt of such notice, notify the town that there is
a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has in fact occurred. Such
notice by the franchisee to the town shall specify with particularity the
matters disputed by the franchisee and shall stay the running of the above
described time. The town shall hear the franchisee’s dispute at a regularly
scheduled meeting within a reasonable period of time. If after hearing the
dispute, the claim is upheld by the town, franchisee shall have five days from
such a determination to remedy the violation or failure. The town may assess
penalties as follows:
      (1)   Up to $100 per day for construction related violations;
      (2)   Up to $50 per day for recurring violations; and
      (3)   Up to $500 for other violations.
   (B)   Penalties cumulative. The penalties set forth herein are in addition
to all other rights of the town whether reserved by this franchise chapter or
authorized by law and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect
to such penalty shall affect any other right the town may have.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-20 FORFEITURE AND TERMINATION.
   (A)   Breach of franchise; criteria. In addition to all other rights and
powers retained by the town under this chapter and any franchise issued
pursuant thereto, the town reserves the right to forfeit and terminate the
franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchisee in the event of
substantial breach of its terms and conditions. A substantial breach by the
franchisee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   An uncured violation of any material provision of this chapter or
franchise issued thereunder, or any material rule, order, regulation or
determination of the town made pursuant thereto;
      (2)   An attempt to evade any material provision of the franchise or
practice of any fraud or deceit upon the cable communications system customers
and subscribers or upon the town;
      (3)   Failure to begin or substantially complete any system construction
or system extension as set forth in the franchise;
      (4)   Failure to provide the mix, quality and level of services promised
in the application or specified in the franchise or a reasonable substitute
therefor;
      (5)   Failure to restore service after ten consecutive days of
interrupted service except when approval of such interruption is obtained from
the town;
      (6)   Material misrepresentation of fact in the application for, or
during negotiation relating to, the franchise; and
      (7)   Failure to provide surety and indemnity as required by the
franchise or this chapter.
   (B)   Exceptions for failed performance. The franchisee shall have no
liability to the town, nor shall the town have the right to terminate or revoke
this franchise or invoke penalties in accordance with §
8-5-19 of this chapter as a result of any failure of the franchisee to perform,
or delay by franchisee in the performance of its obligations hereunder (other
than to pay the franchise fee and other payments required by this agreement) if
such failure or delay is caused by factors beyond the control of the
franchisee, including without limitation, any flood or other act of God, laws,
regulations, rules or orders of any governmental agency, sabotage, strikes,
lockouts or job actions, failure or delay in transportation or the
unavailability of any product or material necessary to the performance hereof;
provided that, franchisee has exercised all due care to prevent the occurrence
of such events which are reasonably foreseeable, including without limitation,
actively pursuing alternative products, materials and means of transportation.
In the event that delay in performance or failure to perform affects only part
of franchisee’s capacity to perform, then the franchisee shall perform to the
extent it is reasonably able to do so. The franchisee agrees that the excuse
for nonperformance under this section shall last only so long as the act which
excuses performance under this section shall continue without interruption. In
correcting any causes of nonperformance and in effecting any partial
performance, the franchisee shall take all necessary corrective actions as
expeditiously as possible.
   (C)   Demand certified. The town shall make a written demand by certified
mail that the franchisee comply with any such provision, rule, order or
determination under or pursuant to the franchise. If a violation of the
franchise continues for a period of 30 days following such written demand
without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being
actively and expeditiously pursued, the town may consider terminating the
franchise; provided, however, a written notice thereof shall be given to the
franchisee at least 15 days in advance and the franchisee must be given an
opportunity to appear before the Council to present its arguments. Should the
town determine, following the public hearing, that the violation by the
franchisee was the fault of the franchisee and within the franchisee’s control,
the town may, by resolution, declare that the franchise be forfeited and
terminated; provided, however, the town may in its discretion, provide an
opportunity for the franchisee to remedy the violation and come into compliance
with the franchise and this chapter so as to avoid the termination.
(Ord. 25(1994); 1997 Code)
§ 8-5-21 INSOLVENCY.
   The franchise granted hereunder may be terminated prior to its expiration if
the Town Council finds that franchisee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling
to pay its debts as they become due, files a petition for relief under any
state or federal bankruptcy, reorganization, insolvency or similar law (or any
such petition is filed against the franchisee and is not dismissed within 60
days), is adjudged as bankrupt, assigns all or a substantial part of its assets
for the benefit of its creditors, all or part of franchisee’s facilities are
sold under an instrument to secure a debt, or a receiver is appointed with
respect to all or a substantial part of the franchisee’s assets or stock.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-22 REMOVAL OF CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM.
   (A)   Franchisee responsible. In the event this franchise agreement expires,
is revoked or otherwise terminated, the franchisee shall remove, at its own
expense, all designated portions of the cable communications system from all
streets and public ways within the town. In removing its plant, structures and
equipment, the franchisee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that
shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways in as good a condition as
that prevailing prior to franchisee’s removal of its equipment and appliances
without affecting the electrical or telephone or other utility lines, wires,
pipes or attachments. The town may inspect and approve the condition of the
public ways, cables, wires, attachments and poles after removal. The liability,
indemnity and insurance as provided herein and in any Vail cable television
franchise agreement shall continue in full force and effect during the period
of removal and until full compliance by the franchisee with the terms and
conditions of this subsection (A) and this chapter.
   (B)   Removal by city; reimbursement. In the event of a failure by
franchisee to complete any work required by this chapter or any Vail cable
television franchise agreement, or any other work required by town law or
ordinance within the time as may be established and to the satisfaction of the
town, the town may cause such work to be done. The franchisee shall reimburse
the town the costs thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of
such costs.
(Ord. 25(1994); 1997 Code)
§ 8-5-23 SUBSCRIBER FEES AND RATES.
   (A)   Fees contained in franchise agreement. The initial fees to be charged
to subscribers for all services including installation fee and other one time
charges shall be specified in any franchise agreement issued pursuant hereto.
   (B)   Compliance with statute. Those fees and charges which are subject to
regulation by the town in accordance with federal law shall not be increased
without prior approval of the town.
   (C)   Proposed rate increase filed with town. In order to obtain town
approval for rate increases, the franchisee shall file a revised schedule of
rates with the town at least 90 days in advance of a proposed rate increase.
Subscribers shall be notified of the proposed increases within ten days of
notice to the town. This filing shall specify the rates or fees to be increased
and associated regulations which may affect charges to the subscribers and the
justifications for said increases and charges. The franchisee shall promptly
submit any additional supporting information requested by the town.
   (D)   Public hearing. Within 30 days of the rate increase filing, the town
shall schedule a public meeting before the Council to hear subscriber and
franchisee comment on the proposed increase. Following the public meeting, the
Council shall determine whether or not to grant the proposed increase or a
portion thereof prior to the expiration of said 90-day period.
   (E)   Rates just and reasonable. Rates shall be just and reasonable,
considering the franchisee’s costs, including a reasonable rate on investment
over the remaining term of the franchise, and shall not give any undue or
unreasonable preference or advantage to any subscriber or class of subscribers.
   (F)   Promotional reduction of rates. Rates and charges may be reduced at
any time without prior town approval; provided, that the reductions do not
result in rates which are unreasonably discriminatory to any subscriber or
class of subscribers. Where temporary reductions are put into effect for
promotional purposes for a specified time period, a return to the permanent
rate shall not be considered a rate increase for the purpose of this chapter.
The town shall be notified of all reductions in rates whether permanent or
temporary.
   (G)   Unregulated charges; changes; notice. Rates and charges not subject to
regulation by the town under federal law or regulation may be changed by the
franchisee following a minimum of 30 days prior notice to the town and a
minimum of 30 days’ prior notice to all subscribers of basic service.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-24 REPORTS.
   (A)   Annual report. No later than 120 days after the end of the each
franchisee’s fiscal year, the franchisee shall file a written report with the
town which shall include:
      (1)   A summary of the previous calendar year’s activities and
development of the system, including but not limited to, services begun or
dropped, number of subscribers, including gains and losses, homes past and
miles of cable distribution plants and service;
      (2)   A financial statement certified by an officer of the franchisee
including a statement of income, a balance sheet, and a statement of sources
and applications of funds. The statement shall include notes that specify all
significant accounting policies and practices upon which it is based,
including, but not limited to, depreciation rates and methodology, overhead and
interest system cost allocation methods, and basis for interest expense. A
summary shall be provided comparing the current year with the three previous
years. The statement shall contain a summary of the payments;
      (3)   An annual summary of complaints received;
      (4)   An annual projection of plans for the future;
      (5)   An annual report of the company;
      (6)   A current annual statement of cost of construction by component
category;
      (7)   An ownership report, indicating all persons, who at any time during
the preceding year directly controlled or benefitted from an interest in the
franchise of 5% or more of the grantee; and
      (8)   A copy of all the franchisee’s rules and regulations applicable to
subscribers and users of the cable communications system.
   (B)   Additional reports. The franchisee shall prepare and furnish to the
town, at the times and in the form prescribed, such additional reports with
respect to its operation as may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to the
performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the town in connection
with this chapter or the franchise agreement.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-25 RECORDS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Mandatory records. The franchisee shall at all times maintain:
      (1)   A record of all complaints received during the term of the
franchise; and
      (2)   A full and complete set of plans, records and as built maps showing
the exact location of all cable television system equipment installed or in use
in the town, exclusive of subscriber service drops.
   (B)   Inspection by town. Upon reasonable notice to the franchisee, the town
shall have the right to inspect all property, maps and records relating to the
cable operations at any time during normal business hours. All records required
by the town for such inspection shall be made available within the town within
a reasonable time after the request.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-26 FILINGS.
   The franchisee shall mail or deliver a copy of all filings it makes with
state and federal agencies to the Town Clerk. Said copy shall be mailed or
delivered on the filing date.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-27 CONSUMER PROTECTION AND SERVICE STANDARDS.
   Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, the franchisee
shall maintain the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply with
the following consumer protection and service standards under normal conditions
of operation:
   (A)   Adequate toll-free telephone lines. Sufficient toll-free telephone
line capacity during normal business hours to assure that a minimum of 95% of
all calls will be answered before the fourth ring and 90% of all callers for
service will not be required to wait more then 30 seconds before being
connected to a service representative;
   (B)   Emergency communication. Emergency telephone line capacity on a 24-
hour basis, including weekends and holidays;
   (C)   Office hours. A local business and service office open during normal
business hours at least eight hours daily, and at least four hours weekly on
evenings or weekends, and adequately staffed to accept subscriber payments and
respond to service requests and complaints;
   (D)   Twenty-four hour repair. An emergency system maintenance and repair
staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunction on a 24
hour per day basis;
   (E)   Provide timely installation. An installation staff, capable of
installing service to any subscriber within seven days after receipt of a
request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated;
   (F)   Range of appointment time. At the subscriber’s request, franchisee
shall schedule, within a specified four-hour time period, all appointments with
subscribers for installation of service;
   (G)   Scheduled or unscheduled interruptions. The franchisee shall render
efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good
cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions, insofar as
possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during a period of
minimum use of the cable system, preferably between 12:00 midnight and 6:00
a.m.;
   (H)   Service time frames. The franchisee shall maintain a repair force of
technicians normally capable of responding to subscriber requests for service
within the following time frames:
      (1)   For a system outage. Within two hours, including weekends, of
receiving subscriber calls or requests for service which by number identifies a
system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels, affecting at least
10% of the subscribers of the system;
      (2)   For an isolated outage. Within 24 hours, including weekends, of
receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or
picture for one or more channels that affects three or more subscribers. On
weekends, an outage affecting fewer than three subscribers shall result in a
service call no later than the following Monday morning; and
      (3)   For inferior signal quality. Within 48 hours, including weekends,
of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or
sound quality.
   (I)   Response time measured. The franchisee shall be deemed to have
responded to a request for service under the provisions of this section when a
technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. In
the case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, the
technician shall leave written notification of arrival. Three successive
subscriber failures to be present at an appointed time shall excuse the grantee
of the duty to respond;
   (J)   Franchisee bears repair costs. The franchisee shall not charge for the
repair or replacement of defective equipment provided by the franchisee to
subscribers;
   (K)   Problem resolving. Unless excused, the franchisee shall determine the
nature of the problem within 48 hours of beginning work and resolve all cable
system related problems within five business days unless technically
infeasible;
   (L)   Subscriber rebate. Upon request, the franchisee shall provide
appropriate rebates to subscribers whose service has been interrupted for four
or more hours;
   (M)   Five-day compliance. Upon five days’ notice, the franchisee shall
establish its compliance with any or all of the standards required above. The
franchisee shall provide sufficient documentation to permit the town to verify
the compliance;
   (N)   Noncompliance to standards a breach. A repeated and verifiable pattern
of noncompliance with the consumer protection standards of subsections (A)
through (M) above, after the franchisee’s receipt of due notice and an
opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise;
   (O)   Complaint resolution. The franchisee shall establish written
procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints
without intervention by the town. The written procedures shall prescribe the
manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing
specifying the subscriber’s grounds for dissatisfaction. The franchisee shall
file a copy of these procedures with the town;
   (P)   Review response to complaints. The town shall have the right to review
the franchisee’s response to subscriber complaints in order to determine the
franchisee’s compliance with the franchise requirements, subject to the
subscriber’s right to privacy;
   (Q)   Continuous service. It shall be the right of all subscribers to
continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to
the franchisee are honored. In the event that the franchisee elects to rebuild,
modify or sell the system, or the town gives notice of intent to terminate or
not to renew the franchise, the franchisee shall act so as to ensure that all
subscribers receive service so long as the franchise remains in force;
   (R)   Continuity of service. In the event of a change of control of the
franchisee, or in the event a new operator acquires the system, the original
franchisee shall cooperate with the town, and/or the new franchisee or operator
in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period,
the franchisee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it
operates the system;
   (S)   Employee identification. All officers, agents or employees of the
franchisee or its contractors or subcontractors who, in the normal course of
work come into contact with members of the public or who require entry onto
subscriber’s premises shall carry a photo-identification card in a form
approved by the town. The franchisee shall account for all identification cards
at all times. Every vehicle of the franchisee or its major subcontractors shall
be clearly identified as working for the franchise;
   (T)   Conduct satisfaction survey. Upon request of the town, but not more
than once annually, the franchisee shall conduct a subscriber satisfaction
survey pertaining to the quality of service, which may be transmitted to
subscribers in the franchisee’s invoice for cable services. The results of such
survey shall be provided to the town on a timely basis. The cost of such survey
shall be borne by the franchisee;
   (U)   Additional standards. Additional service standards and standards
governing consumer protection and response by the franchisee to subscriber
complaints not otherwise provided for in this chapter may be established in the
franchise agreement, and the franchisee shall comply with such standards in the
operations of the cable television system. A verified and continuing pattern of
noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of the franchise; provided, that
the franchisee shall receive due process, including written notification and an
opportunity to cure, prior to any sanction being imposed; and
   (V)   Systems performance review. Each year throughout the term of the
franchise, if requested by the town, the town and the franchisee shall meet
publicly to review system performance and quality of service. The various
reports required pursuant to this chapter, the results of technical performance
tests, the record of subscriber complaints and the franchisee’s response to
complaints, and the information acquired in any subscriber surveys, shall be
utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit
comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing,
and these shall be considered. Within 30 days after conclusion of system
performance review meeting, the town may issue findings with respect to the
cable system’s franchise compliance and quality of service. If the town
determines that the franchisee is not in compliance with the requirements of
this chapter or the franchise, the town may direct the franchisee to correct
the areas of noncompliance within a reasonable period of time. Failure of the
franchisee, after due notice, to correct the areas of noncompliance within the
period specified therefor or to commence compliance thereafter, shall be
considered a material breach of the franchise, and the town may exercise any
remedy within the scope of this chapter and the franchise agreement considered
appropriate.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-28 SERVICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.
   A franchisee shall provide all the following services to subscribers:
   (A)   A basic subscriber television service tier which consists at minimum
on any legally required “must carry” signals an information and weather
channel, and at least one public educational and governmental access channel.
This may be superseded by the forthcoming FCC definition of “basic service
tier”, in conformance with the 1992 Cable Act;
   (B)   The franchisee shall provide leased access channels to the extent
required by federal law; and
   (C)   A franchisee shall provide equipment directly or through grants for
local program production by all cable users for live and video tape
presentation over the cable television system in accordance with the provisions
of the franchise agreement. The franchisee shall have no control over the
content of access programs. Any public access channel shall be made available
to any member of the public on a first come, first served, nondiscriminatory
basis.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-29 LEASED ACCESS.
   The franchisee shall make channels available for leased or commercial use as
specified in the franchise agreement consistent with federal law.
(Ord. 18(1989) § 29)
§ 8-5-30 PUBLIC DROPS.
   The franchisee shall provide without charge within the franchise area one
drop activated for basic subscriber cable television service to each fire
station, public school, police station, public library, Municipal Building and
other such buildings used for public purposes. As provided in the franchise
agreement, the franchisee shall provide live cablecasting capability to
designated public buildings.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-31 LOCKOUT DEVICE.
   The franchisee shall provide, for sale or lease, upon request, a lockout
device for use by the subscriber. Such device shall be capable of restricting
the reception of any channel including both the video and audio portions of the
programming carried on that channel. The lockout device should be made
available to all subscribers requesting it and the charge and availability of
this device shall be made a part of the rate schedule.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-32 PROTECTION OF SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.
   Franchisee shall protect the town’s privacy consistent with the provision of
47 U.S.C. § 631, as amended.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-33 CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION WORK.
   (A)   Town may inspect. The town shall have the right but not the obligation
to inspect all construction and installation work performed by the franchisee
subject to this chapter as it shall find necessary to insure compliance with
the governing ordinances and the franchise.
   (B)   Code compliance. All construction, installation and maintenance must
comply with all town ordinances including all uniform codes adopted by the town
and all state and local regulations and good and accepted industry practices.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-34 LOCATION OF STRUCTURES, LINES AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Utilization of existing facilities where possible. The franchisee
shall utilize existing conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and
shall not construct or install any new, different or additional conduits or
other facilities whether on public property or on privately-owned property
until approval of the property owner or appropriate governmental authority is
obtained. However, the location and installation of any conduit, or other
facility by a franchisee shall not create a vested interest, and such
structures, or facilities shall be removed, replaced or modified by a
franchisee at its own expense whenever the Council or other governmental
authority determines that the public interest so necessitates.
   (B)   Constraints on franchisee installations. All transmission and
distribution structures, lines and equipment installed by the franchisee within
the town shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the proper
use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places and to cause minimum
interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who
adjoin any of the streets, alleys or other public ways or places and where they
will not interfere with any gas, electric, telephone, water or other
preexisting utility facility.
   (C)   Compliance to code. All such fixtures in any street or public way
shall be placed in full accordance with the standards set forth in the
municipal code of the town.
   (D)   New cable to be underground.
      (1)   Cable shall be installed underground at the franchisee’s expense.
Previously installed aerial cable shall be placed underground in concert with
other utilities when both the telephone and electrical utilities convert from
aerial to underground construction. The franchisee shall place cable
underground in newly platted areas in concert with both the telephone and
electric utilities unless this requirement is waived by the town. Equipment
shall not be stored on town rights-of-way.
      (2)   A preconstruction conference with the property owners will be
completed prior to commencing any underground construction, and the town shall
assist and cooperate in such conferences if necessary. All soil, earth, sod or
improvements disturbed by the installation shall be replaced and restored to
their original condition. Patching of highways, roads and driveways will be
completed in accordance with the specifications promulgated by, and subject to,
inspection and approval by town, county or state engineers, as appropriate.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-35 EXCAVATION; CABLE LOCATION.
   A person or entity planning an excavation within the town shall request the
company or companies franchised to provide cable television within the town to
inform it of the location of its cable or other equipment in the vicinity of
the planned excavation, and as promptly as practicable after its receipt of the
request, the company shall give said information to said person or entity. The
company shall furnish said information within 48 hours of the receipt of the
request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and Colorado legal holidays, unless
unusual circumstances preclude it from doing so. The willful or negligent
failure of the company to furnish said information shall relieve the person or
entity which requested it from the obligation to pay for the damage or repair
that it causes or necessitates to the company’s cable or other equipment;
provided, that the person or entity uses reasonable care in making the planned
excavation; and the request for information was in writing.
(Ord. 20(1970) § 1)
§ 8-5-36 DAMAGE TO CABLE.
   (A)   Liability of responsible party. At any time cable and/or other
equipment of a company or companies franchised to provide cable television
within the town is disturbed, damaged or severed, the cost of the repair shall
be paid by the party responsible for said damage. The company may charge the
responsible party for the time and materials expended for repair of said
damage. The company shall repair any damage to its cable or other equipment and
restore service immediately if such is feasible, or otherwise as promptly as is
practicable, ordinarily prior to seeking payment for the damage or repair from
the responsible party.
   (B)   Lengthy repair time. In the event any necessary repair is not
completed within 48 hours after the damage to the cable or other property
occurs, the company which owns the damaged cable or other property shall inform
the town thereof, in writing, if feasible, giving the reasons for the delay and
the estimated time when the repair will be completed.
(Ord. 20(1970) § 1)
§ 8-5-37 REPLACEMENT OF PAVING.
   The franchisee at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the
town shall replace and restore all paving, sidewalks, driveways or surface of
any street or alley or public way disturbed, in as good a condition as before
the work was commenced and shall maintain the restoration in an improved
condition for a period of one year. Failure of the franchisee to replace or
restore such paving, sidewalk, driveway, or street surface within 48 hours
after completion of work shall authorize the town to cause the proper
restoration to be made at the franchisee’s expense.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-38 ALTERATION OF STREETS BY TOWN.
   If the town shall lawfully decide to alter or change the grade of any
street, alley, or other public way, the franchisee, upon reasonable notice by
the town, shall, in a timely manner as requested by the town, remove and
relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits and other facilities at
its own expense. If other utilities are compensated, the franchisee shall be
entitled to the same compensation.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-39 TRIMMING TREES.
   A franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees upon an overhanging of
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the town so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming into contact with wires and cables and other
television conductors and fixtures of the franchisee. The town may require all
trimming to be done under its supervision and direction and at the expense of
the franchisee.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-40 TEMPORARY MOVE OF CABLES.
   (A)   A franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a valid house
moving permit, temporarily raise or lower its wires or cables to permit the
moving of buildings or other large objects.
   (B)   The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires shall be
paid by the person making the request, and the franchisee shall have the
authority to require such payment in advance. The franchisee shall be given not
less than 48 hours’ advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
(Ord. 25(1994); 1997 Code)
§ 8-5-41 REFUNDS AND SERVICE TERMINATIONS.
   A franchisee shall establish and conform to the following policy regarding
refunds to subscribers and users:
   (A)   Equipment deposits refunded with interest. If the franchisee collects
a deposit or advance charge on any service or equipment requested by a
subscriber or user, the franchisee shall provide such service or equipment
within 30 days of the collection of the deposit or charge or the franchisee
shall refund such deposit or charge within five business days thereafter. Any
converter security deposit collected by the franchisee shall be returned to the
subscriber 24 months after the installation of such converter, or upon
termination of service by the subscriber and return of such converter undamaged
with allowance for reasonable wear and tear and payment of any outstanding
balance due and payable, whichever occurs first. If and when the franchisee
collects deposits from its subscribers, it shall pay interest on any deposit
required of the subscriber at the agreed rate in effect from time to time minus
two percentage points. The franchisee may elect to pay such interest in the
form of credits to subscriber accounts. Nothing in this section shall be
construed:
      (1)   To relieve a franchisee of any responsibility it may have under
separately executed contracts or agreements with its subscribers or users;
      (2)   As limiting a franchisee’s liability for damages, if any, which may
be imposed under the franchise for the violation or breach of any provisions
thereof; or
      (3)   To limit the franchisee’s liability for damages, if any, because of
its failure to provide the service for which deposit or charge was made.
   (B)   Disconnections; reconnections. The following requirements shall apply
to subscriber disconnections.
      (1)   There shall be no charge for disconnection of any installation,
service or outlet. All cable communications equipment shall be removed within a
reasonable time from a subscriber’s property upon the subscriber’s request,
such time not to exceed 30 days from the date of request. The franchisee may
charge for adding or deleting channels at the subscriber’s request.
      (2)   If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber’s
fee, or any other properly due fee or charge, the franchisee may disconnect the
subscriber’s service; provided, however, that such disconnection shall not be
effected until 30 days after the due date of the monthly subscriber fee or
charges and shall include a minimum five days’ written notice to the subscriber
of the intent to disconnect. After disconnection, upon payment in full of all
proper fees or charges, including the payment of any reconnection charge, the
franchisee shall promptly reinstate the service.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-42 SERVICE AREA.
   The franchisee shall offer full cable television service to all areas of the
town unless specifically authorized to serve a lesser area. A franchise issued
in accordance with this chapter shall require that all dwelling units within
the franchise territory be offered service on the same terms and conditions;
provided, however, multiple-family dwelling complexes, apartments or
condominiums may be served on a master-bill basis; and further, service to
motels, hotels, hospitals and similar businesses or institutions may be offered
on terms and conditions different from single-residence subscribers. In the
event that subsequent to the issuance of a franchise the town annexes
additional territory, a franchisee shall extend its cable television services
into the annexed area within a reasonable time of a request by the town to do
so. Such reasonable time shall not be less than nine months.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-43 CONTINUITY OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Guaranteed continuous service. Where a franchisee rebuilds, modifies
or sells its system, it shall ensure that all subscribers receive continuous,
uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances.
   (B)   Specific conditions not excepted. As long as it is entitled to
revenues from the operation of the cable system, a franchisee shall maintain
continuity of service during any temporary transition in the franchise,
including, but not limited to, the following circumstances:
      (1)   Revocation of the franchise;
      (2)   Nonrenewal of the franchise; and
      (3)   Transfer of the cable system to the town or another entity.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-44 TRANSITIONAL OPERATION.
   (A)   In the event a franchisee continues to operate the system in a
transitional period, with town acquiescence, following the expansion,
revocation, or other termination of the franchise, it shall be bound by all the
terms, conditions and obligations of the franchise as if it were in full force
and effect.
   (B)   The terminating franchisee shall cooperate with the town and any
subsequent franchisee in maintaining and transferring service responsibility.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-45 PERIODIC REEVALUATION AND RENEGOTIATIONS.
   (A)   Position stated. Since the field of cable communications is rapidly
evolving and many technological, regulatory, financial, marketing, legal,
competitive and other changes are likely to occur during a franchise term, a
degree of flexibility is needed in order to achieve and maintain a modern and
efficient cable communications system that adequately serves the public. To
this end, the town, with cooperative assistance from a franchisee, shall
periodically reevaluate the system operation and negotiate appropriate
franchise changes.
   (B)   Three-year intervals. The town shall reevaluate the franchisee’s cable
operations and service three years following the award date of the franchise
and every three years thereafter for the life of the franchise. The franchisee
shall cooperate with the town in such evaluation and provide information as may
be necessary for the evaluation.
   (C)   Conduct survey; reevaluation; public release.
      (1)   Following the public release of a reevaluation report, the town and
the franchisee shall meet to discuss the reevaluation and possible means of
improving service to the public. At that time, the parties shall negotiate any
changes in the franchise that may be necessary or desirable. Upon request of
the town, the franchisee shall, no earlier than 90 days and no later the 30
days prior to a review and evaluation session, conduct a written survey of
subscribers. Each questionnaire shall be prepared and constructed in good faith
so as to provide measurements of subscribers preferences and satisfaction for:
         (a)   Programming offered by the franchisee at the time the survey is
conducted;
         (b)   Programming generally available to cable subscribers nationally
but not offered by the franchisee at the time the service is conducted; and
         (c)   Maintenance and subscriber complaint practices.
      (2)   As a part of the review and evaluation session, the franchisee
shall report in writing what steps it may be taking to implement the findings
of the survey.
   (D)   Accommodating changes in statutes or circumstances. The town and the
franchisee may meet at other times to discuss and negotiate possible changes to
the franchise pursuant to an agenda agreed to in advance by both parties. Such
special sessions are intended to provide a mechanism for effecting franchise
changes necessitated by major events affecting cable communications, such as
state or federal legislation, new or revised state or federal regulations, or
an extraordinary change in circumstances.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-46 THEFT OF SERVICES AND TAMPERING.
   (A)   Violation. No person, whether or not a subscriber of the cable
television system may intentionally or knowingly damage or cause to be damaged
any wire, cable, conduit, equipment or apparatus of the franchisee or commit
any act with an intent to cause such damage, or to tap, remove or tamper with
or otherwise connect or maintain any wire or device to a wire, cable, conduit,
equipment and apparatus or appurtenances of the franchisee with the intent to
obtain and maintain a signal or impulse from the cable system without
authorization from or compensation to the franchisee, or to obtain and maintain
cable television or other communications service with the intent to cheat or
defraud franchisee of any lawful charge to which it is entitled.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this
section is subject to a fine of not more than $500 for each offense.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-47 RENEGOTIATION.
   If any court of competent jurisdiction, the FCC or any state regulatory body
rule, decision or other action determines, prior to the commencement of system
construction, that any material provision of this chapter or any franchise
granted pursuant thereto, is invalid or unenforceable, then in such event, the
town shall retain the right to renegotiate any franchise entered into prior to
any such rule, decision or other action. For the purpose of this section,
COMMENCEMENT OF SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION shall mean the first day that physical
construction, including, but not limited to, the placing of cable on poles or
underground, actually begins.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-48 FRANCHISE RENEWAL.
   Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law. The town and
the franchisee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any
time during the term of the franchise. Upon mutual execution of a franchise
renewal agreement, the franchisee shall reimburse the town for costs incidental
to the franchise renewal award, not to exceed any maximum specified in the
agreement. Any such reimbursement shall not be charged against any franchise
fee due to the town during the term of the franchise.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-49 FRANCHISE NONTRANSFERABLE.
   (A)   Consent of town required. The franchisee shall not sell, transfer,
lease, assign, sublet or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or
involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise,
the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the
prior consent of the town and then only upon such terms and conditions as may
be prescribed by the town under applicable law, which consent shall not be
unreasonably denied or delayed. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or
otherwise dispose of the franchise without the consent of the town shall be
null and void. The granting of a security interest in any the franchisee
assets, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, shall not be considered a
transfer for the purposes of this section. The transfer of the franchise from
one wholly owned subsidiary of a franchisee’s parent company to another wholly
owned subsidiary shall not require town consent.
   (B)   Change in control defined. The requirements of subsection (A) of this
section apply to any change in control of the franchisee. The word “control” as
used herein is not limited to major stockholders or partnership interests, but
includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. In the event that
the franchisee is a corporation, prior authorization of the town shall be
required where ownership or control of more than 10% of the voting stock of the
franchisee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none
of whom own or control the voting stock of the franchisee as of the effective
date of the franchise, singularly or collectively.
   (C)   Notification of legal changes. The franchisee shall notify the town in
writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial
part of the franchise property of the franchisee or upon the termination of any
lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of said franchise
property. Such notification shall be considered by the town as notice that a
change in control of ownership of the franchise has taken place and the
provisions under this section governing the consent of the town to such change
in control of ownership shall apply.
   (D)   Franchisee provide information to town. For the purpose of determining
whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control,
the town may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee or
controlling party, and the franchisee shall assist the town in such inquiry. In
seeking the town’s consent to any change of ownership or control, the
franchisee shall have the responsibility of ensuring that the transferee
completes an application in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the
town, which application shall include the information required under §
8-5-12 of this chapter. An application shall be submitted to the town not less
then 60 days prior to the date of transfer. The transferee shall be required to
establish that it possesses the qualifications and financial and technical
capability to operate and maintain the system and comply with all franchise
requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise. If the legal,
financial character and technical qualifications of the applicant are
satisfactory, the town shall consent to the transfer of the franchise. The
consent of the town to such transfer shall not be unreasonably denied or
delayed.
   (E)   Authority of pledgor. Any financial institution having a pledge of the
franchisee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/
or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the town that it
or its designee satisfactory to the town shall take control of and operate the
cable television system in the event of a franchisee default of its financial
obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for
such operation within 30 days of assuming such control that will insure
continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the
term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial
institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding
one year unless extended by the town in its discretion and during said period
of time it shall have the right to petition the town to transfer the franchise
to another franchisee.
   (F)   Reimburse processing and review expense. Upon transfer, the franchisee
shall reimburse the town for the town’s reasonable processing and review
expense in connection with a transfer of the franchise or of control of the
franchise, up to a maximum of $2,500, the cost of administrative review,
financial, legal and technical evaluation of the proposed transfer, consultants
(including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts),
notice and publication costs and document preparation expenses. Any such
reimbursement shall not be charged against any franchise fee due to the town
during the term of the franchise.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-50 MULTIPLE FRANCHISES.
   (A)   Authority. The town may grant any number of franchises subject to
applicable state or federal law. The town may limit the number of franchises
granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of
applicable law and specific local considerations; such as:
      (1)   The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple
cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility systems,
such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage;
      (2)   The benefits that may accrue to cable subscribers as a result of
cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service; and
      (3)   The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition,
such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents’ property, and the
disruption arising from numerous excavations of the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Availability of service to all. Each franchisee awarded a franchise to
serve the entire town shall offer service to all residences in the town, in
accordance with construction and service schedules mutually agreed upon between
the town and the franchisee, and consistent with applicable law.
   (C)   Cable-ready residential developments. Developers of new residential
housing with underground utilities shall provide conduit to accommodate cables
for at least two cable systems.
   (D)   Franchisee or developer responsibilities and options. In the event of
multiple franchisees desiring to serve new residential developments in which
the electric power and telephone utilities are underground, the following
procedure shall apply with respect to access to and utilization of underground
easements.
      (1)   The developer shall be responsible for contacting and surveying all
franchised cable operators to ascertain which operators desire to provide cable
television service to that development. The developer may establish a
reasonable deadline to receive cable operator responses. The final development
map shall indicate the cable operators that have agreed to serve the
development.
      (2)   If one or two cable operators wish to provide service, they shall
be accommodated in the joint utilities trench on a nondiscriminatory shared
cost basis. If fewer than two operators indicate interest, the developer shall
provide conduit to accommodate two sets of cable television cables and dedicate
to the town any initially unoccupied conduit. The developer shall be entitled
to recover the costs of such initially unoccupied conduit in the event that the
town subsequently leases or sells occupancy or use rights to any franchisee.
      (3)   The developer shall provide at least ten working days’ notice of
the date that utility trenches will be open to the cable operators that have
agreed to serve the development. When the trenches are open, cable operators
shall have two working days to begin the installation of their cables, and five
working days after beginning installation to complete installation.
      (4)   The final development map shall not be approved until the developer
submits evidence that:
         (a)   It has notified each franchisee that underground utility
trenches are to be open as of an estimated date, and that each franchisee will
be allowed access to such trenches, including trenches from proposed streets to
individual home sites, on specified nondiscriminatory terms and conditions; and
         (b)   It has received a written notification from each franchisee that
the franchisee intends to install its facilities during the open trench period
on the specified terms and conditions, or such other terms and conditions as
are mutually agreeable to the developer and the franchisee, or has received no
reply from a franchisee within ten days after its notification to such
franchisee, in which case the franchisee will be deemed to have waived its
opportunity to install its facilities during the open trench period.
      (5)   Sharing the joint utilities trench shall be subject to compliance
with state regulatory agency and utility standards. If such compliance is not
possible, the developer shall provide a separate trench for the cable
television cables, with the entire cost shared among the participating
operators. With the concurrence of the developer, the affected utilities and
the cable operators, alternative installation procedures, such as the use of
deeper trenches, may be utilized, subject to applicable law.
      (6)   Any cable operator wishing to serve an area where the trenches have
been closed shall be responsible for its own trenching and associated costs.
      (7)   In the event that more than one franchise is awarded, the town
reserves the right to limit the number of drop cables per residence, or to
require that the drop cable(s) be utilized only by the cable operator selected
by the resident to provide service.
      (8)   The town reserves the right to grant an encroachment permit to a
cable franchisee applicant to install conduit and/or cable in anticipation of
the granting of a franchise. Such installations shall be at the applicant’s
risk, with no recourse against the town in the event the pending franchise
application is not granted. The town may require an applicant to provide a
separate trench for its conduit and/or cable, at the applicant’s cost. The
construction of such separate trench, if provided, shall be coordinated with,
and subject to, to the developer’s overall construction schedule.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-51 RIGHTS RESERVED TO TOWN.
   (A)   In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the town by this
chapter, the town reserves to itself every right and power which is required to
be reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under the franchise.
   (B)   (1)   The town shall have the right to waive any provision of the
franchise, except those required by federal or state regulation, if the town
determines:
         (a)   That it is in the public interest to do so; and
         (b)   That the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue
hardship on the franchisee or the subscribers.
      (2)   To be effective, such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in
writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the town. Waiver of any
provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision
subsequent to such instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of
the franchise unless the statement so recites.
   (C)   If any area of franchise regulation by the town is preempted by
federal or state law or regulation, and such preemption is later eliminated or
modified, the town, at its sole option, may assume or reassume regulation to
the extent permitted by law.
(Ord. 25(1994))
§ 8-5-52 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter is for any reasons held to be unconstitutional, void or invalid or for
any reason unenforceable, the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter shall not be affected thereby, it being the intent of the Town Council
in adopting and approving this chapter that no portion hereof or provision or
regulation contained herein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of any
unconstitutionality or invalidity of any other portion, provision or regulation
and all provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.
(Ord. 25(1994))
CHAPTER 6: NEWSRACKS
Section
8-6-1 Definitions
8-6-2 Newsracks regulated
8-6-3 Newsracks allowed only in specified areas
8-6-4 Permit required
8-6-5 Newsrack specifications
8-6-6 Maintenance
8-6-7 Hold harmless
8-6-8 Insurance requirements
8-6-9 Rights granted
8-6-10 Nonemergency newsrack removal
8-6-11 Emergency newsrack removal
8-6-12 Unauthorized newsracks
8-6-13 Noncomplying designs
§ 8-6-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
   LIONSHEAD. Means and includes that area of Lionshead delineated upon a map
entitled “Lionshead Newsrack Boundary” and maintained in the office of the Town
Clerk and generally including the area bounded on the north by the South
Frontage Road west, on the east by the Evergreen Lodge and Vail Valley Medical
Center, on the south by Gore Creek and on the west by Lionshead Place.
   NEWSRACKS. Means and includes any self- service or coin-operated box,
container, rack, structure or other dispenser used or maintained for the
distribution of newspapers, news periodicals or other printed material.
   PUBLIC WAY. Means and includes a public street, easement, right-of-way,
highway, alley, way, place, road or bike path; and any nonexclusive utility
easement.
   PUBLIC WORKS. The Public Works Director of the town or designated
representative.
   TOWN MANAGER. The Town Manager of the town or designated representative.
   VAIL VILLAGE. Means and includes that area of Vail Village as delineated
upon a map entitled “Vail Village Newsrack Boundary” and maintained in the
office of the Town Clerk and generally including the area bounded on the north
by the South Frontage Road east, on the east by Vail Valley Drive, on the south
by the northern boundary of Track E and Parcel C and on the west by Vail Road.
(Ord. 20(1999) § 1)
§ 8-6-2 NEWSRACKS REGULATED.
   It shall be unlawful to place or maintain a newsrack on property owned by
the town or on other publicly owned sidewalks or rights-of-way without
complying with the provisions of this chapter regulating size, color,
maintenance, location and liability for newsracks in Vail Village and
Lionshead.
(Ord. 20(1999) § 1)
§ 8-6-3 NEWSRACKS ALLOWED ONLY IN SPECIFIED AREAS.
   (A)   Newsracks on town-owned property or on publicly owned right-of-way
shall be lawful within Vail Village and Lionshead, as those areas are defined
and amended by ordinance from time to time, at specific locations approved by
Public Works. Such locations must meet the following criteria:
      (1)   Public safety.
         (a)   Twenty-two-foot minimum street width;
         (b)   Six-foot minimum sidewalk width;
         (c)   Does not block ingress/egress of doorway, walkway, stairway and
the like;
         (d)   Minimum distance to fire hydrant seven feet to side or rear, 14
feet to front; and
         (e)   Does not block or impede fire lane.
      (2)   Pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
         (a)   Twenty-two-foot minimum street width;
         (b)   Six-foot minimum sidewalk width;
         (c)   Does not block ingress/egress of doorway, walkway, stairway and
the like; and
         (d)   Does not block or impede parking or loading/delivery space.
      (3)   Maintenance.
         (a)   Twenty-two-foot minimum street width;
         (b)   Six-foot minimum sidewalk width;
         (c)   Does not block access to trash receptacle, dumpster, mailbox,
manhole, water valve and the like;
         (d)   Does not block access to flower bed or other landscape area; and
         (e)   Does not block or impede street sweeping, snow removal or snow
storage/loading operations.
      (4)   Aesthetics.
         (a)   Does not impact established view corridor or acknowledged “post
card” image;
         (b)   Does not visually detract from or block store front or shop
window;
         (c)   Does not visually block flower bed or other landscape area;
         (d)   Does not exceed the designated dimensions of the site; and
         (e)   Is not a site with a grade that exceeds 5% in any direction.
   (B)   The number of newsrack locations in Vail Village and Lionshead is not
limited by any specific number, however, all locations must meet and be
consistent with the criteria established in subsection (A) of this section.
   (C)   Newsracks located within the town outside of Vail Village and
Lionshead may remain in their present locations subject to other relevant
provisions of this chapter and code.
(Ord. 20(1999) § 1)
§ 8-6-4 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to distribute or display for distribution any
newsrack in the Lionshead Newsrack Boundary or the Vail Village Newsrack
Boundary without first securing a permit from the town for each separate
distribution location. Such permit, which will be issued by the Town Manager,
shall be pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and such rules and
regulations as established by the Town Manager. There shall not be any rental
charge or charges for the distribution locations. However, there may be cost
recovery payments required for costs incurred by the town for construction of
newsrack cabinets and/or distribution mechanisms.
(Ord. 20(1999) § 1)
§ 8-6-5 NEWSRACK SPECIFICATIONS.
   As established and described in the town development standards.
(Ord. 20(1999) § 1)
§ 8-6-6 MAINTENANCE.
   Anyone using, operating, placing or maintaining a newsrack on town-owned
property or publicly owned right-of-way shall be responsible for the
maintenance and upkeep of his or her respective racks. Such maintenance shall
include, but not be limited to, painting, disposing of trash and debris in the
vicinity of the newsrack, working operation, and adequate anchorage. Failure to
adequately maintain any newsrack resulting in failure to comply with the
aesthetic intentions and goals of this chapter will subject the affected
newsrack to removal by the town.
(Ord. 20(1999) § 1)
§ 8-6-7 HOLD HARMLESS.
   Anyone owning, maintaining, placing, using or leasing a newsrack on town-
owned property or publicly owned right-of-way shall indemnify, defend and hold
the town, its officers and employees harmless for any loss or damage, including
attorney fees, arising out of use, placement, maintenance or leasing of such
newsrack(s).
(Ord. 20(1999) § 1)
§ 8-6-8 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Anyone owning, placing, leasing, using or maintaining a newsrack on town-
owned property or publicly owned right-of-way shall maintain liability
insurance with a company insuring against all liability that the owner, lessor
or user of the newsrack may incur by virtue of the placement, care, use,
operation and existence of the newsrack. This insurance shall have limits of
$500,000. The insurance shall name the town as an additional insured and shall
not be cancelable without 30 days’ prior written notice to the town. In lieu of
such insurance, a waiver of such insurance may be obtained from the Director of
Public Works upon a showing, acceptable to the Town Attorney, that such person
has sufficient unencumbered assets available for attachment and execution to
satisfy any judgment that would be rendered against it, up to and including
$500,000. Evidence of insurance or evidence of sufficient assets, as the case
may be, shall be provided to the Director of Public Works on an annual basis.
Failure to comply with this provision will subject the newsrack to immediate
removal by the town.
(Ord. 20(1999) § 1)
§ 8-6-9 RIGHTS GRANTED.
   The approval of any location for use as a newsrack shall not be construed as
granting the user any right or interest to or in the property owned by the
town. The rights granted by this chapter are merely a license to use the
property for permitted purposes, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 20(1999) § 1)
§ 8-6-10 NONEMERGENCY NEWSRACK REMOVAL.
   (A)   Notice. If at any time it is determined by the town that a newsrack is
not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, a notice of intent to
remove shall be issued, in writing, and affixed to the affected newsrack. Such
notice will state the violation(s) that constitute the basis of the proposed
removal. The notice shall contain the date, time and place for a hearing to be
held before removal.
   (B)   Hearing. The hearing shall be held not less than ten days after the
date of service of notice. Prior to the hearing, the newsrack owner or user may
file a written response to the notice specifically setting forth the reason or
reasons the newsrack should not be removed. At the hearing, the Director of
Public Works or his or her designee shall determine whether the newsrack
complies with the provisions of this chapter. In the event the Director of
Public Works or his or her designee finds the newsrack is not in compliance
with this chapter, the newsrack shall be removed by the owner or user within
ten days or otherwise brought into compliance. If the newsrack is not removed,
as required, the town may consider the newsrack abandoned, remove the newsrack
and dispose of it as if it were other surplus property of the town.
   (C)   Appeal. Any decision or order may be appealed to the Town Manager. Any
appeal shall be filed within ten days after the decision of the Director of
Public Works or his or her designee and shall specify the basis of the appeal.
The Town Manager shall consider the appeal on the written submissions only.
(Ord. 20(1999) § 1)
§ 8-6-11 EMERGENCY NEWSRACK REMOVAL.
   (A)   Removal. In the event that it is determined by the town that the
location or operation of the newsrack constitutes an immediate physical threat
to public life, safety or health, the newsrack may be removed by the town
immediately without any prior notice or hearing. This provision shall not be
enforced in any way related to the content or expression of the material
distributed by the newsrack.
   (B)   Notice and hearing. In the event of such an emergency removal, the
town shall immediately contact the newsrack’s owner or user, if known, and
inform the representative of the removal and the reason(s) therefor. If
requested by the representative, the town shall hold an immediate hearing
before the Director of Public Works or his or her designee to determine whether
or not the removed newsrack constituted an immediate threat to the public’s
life, safety, and health. In the event the Director of Public Works or his or
her designee determines that the newsrack did not constitute such an immediate
threat, the town shall immediately, at its own expense, replace the newsrack to
its original location. In the event that no immediate hearing is requested by
the newsrack’s owner or user, a hearing as provided in §
8-6-10 of this chapter shall be held.
   (C)   Appeal. Any decision or order may be appealed to the Town Manager. Any
appeal shall be filed in writing within ten days after the decision of the
Director of Public Works or his or her designee and shall specify the basis for
the appeal. The Town Manager shall consider the appeal based on the written
submissions only.
(Ord. 20(1999) § 1)
§ 8-6-12 UNAUTHORIZED NEWSRACKS.
   Any newsrack on town-owned property or publicly owned right-of-way, except
those that comply with the regulations of this chapter, shall be impounded by
the town without prior notice or hearing. The town shall take reasonable
efforts to determine the owner of the newsrack and shall notify the owner of
the impoundment. The owner of any impounded newsrack shall be responsible for
the expense of removal and storage of such newsrack. If the owner(s) fails to
reclaim the impounded newsrack and pay the expenses of removal and storage
within 30 days after notice of impoundment, the newsrack may be deemed
unclaimed property and may be disposed of in the same manner as other unclaimed
or surplus town property.
(Ord. 20(1999) § 1)
§ 8-6-13 NONCOMPLYING DESIGNS.
   Newsracks located in Vail Village and/or Lionshead must comply with the
provisions of this chapter, including design and review guidelines, no later
than newsrack cabinet installation sequence which will begin in the Village in
September 1999, and conclude in August 2000. The cabinet installation sequence
is kept on file in the Department of Public Works. Failure to comply by the
dates indicated on the installation sequence calendar will result in the
immediate removal and disposal of any noncomplying newsrack by the town.
(Ord. 20(1999) § 1)
CHAPTER 7: OUTDOOR DISPLAY OF GOODS
Section
8-7-1 Purpose
8-7-2 Definitions
8-7-3 Outdoor display of goods regulated
8-7-4 Permit required
8-7-5 Administrative action
8-7-6 Criteria for decision
§ 8-7-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for the licensed use of
town owned property by retail establishments for outdoor display of goods.
Businesses that are located in buildings without adequate privately owned
exterior space may obtain a license to use adjacent town owned property for
outdoor display of goods, for the purpose of increasing the vibrancy and
economic vitality of the commercial cores.
(Ord. 32(2007) § 2)
§ 8-7-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Director of the Department of Community Development and/
or his or her designee that administers and enforces the guidelines outlined in
this chapter.
   FRONTAGE, BUSINESS. The horizontal, linear dimension of any side of an above
grade level that faces a major vehicular or pedestrian way and has its own
public entrance for the exclusive use of said business.
   OUTDOOR DISPLAY. A temporary outdoor arrangement of objects, items or
products representative of the merchandise sold or rented by a retail
establishment, and further regulated by §
12-14-21 of this code.
   PUBLIC WAY. Means and includes a public street, easement, right-of-way,
highway, alley, way, place, road or bike path; and any nonexclusive utility
easement.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any licensed business within the Town of Vail with a
physical location that is open to the public for the purpose of selling,
leasing or renting tangible personal property or services at retail.
(Ord. 32(2007) § 2)
§ 8-7-3 OUTDOOR DISPLAY OF GOODS REGULATED.
   It shall be unlawful to place or maintain any outdoor display of goods on
town owned property or on other publicly owned sidewalks or rights-of-way
without complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 32(2007) § 2)
§ 8-7-4 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person or retail establishment to utilize town owned
property or other publicly owned sidewalks or rights-of-way without first
securing an outdoor display on public property permit. Such permit shall be
issued by the Administrator and shall be pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter. Permits may be approved for a time period of up to two years. Permits
shall be automatically renewed for additional two-year terms unless otherwise
terminated. Prior to final approval of a permit, the retail establishment shall
enter into a license agreement with the Town of Vail, to be executed by the
Town Attorney. Permit applications, application requirement, application fees
and license fees are on file with the Department of Community Development.
(Ord. 32(2007) § 2)
§ 8-7-5 ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION.
   The Administrator shall review the application and make a determination of
approval, approval with modifications, or denial within 30 days of submittal of
a complete application. The determination by the Administrator shall become
final at the next Planning and Environmental Commission public hearing
following the Administrator’s decision, unless the decision is called up for
review by the Commission. Determinations shall be based on the criteria in §
8-7-6 of this chapter. All appeals shall follow the procedures outlined in §
12-3-3, “Appeals”, of this code.
(Ord. 32(2007) § 2)
§ 8-7-6 CRITERIA FOR DECISION.
   Outdoor display of goods on town owned property or on publicly owned right-
of-way shall be lawful at specific locations for use by a specific retail
establishment approved by the Administrator. Retail establishments may be
allowed to utilize town owned property for the use of outdoor display should
the following conditions be met.
   (A)   Zone District. The retail establishment shall be located in one of the
following zone districts:
      (1)   Commercial Core 1 (CC1) District;
      (2)   Commercial Core 2 (CC2) District;
      (3)   Lionshead Mixed Use 1 (LMU-1) District;
      (4)   Lionshead Mixed Use 2 (LMU-2) District; and
      (5)   Ski Base/Recreation 2 (SBR2) District.
   (B)   Area. The area of town owned property to be utilized shall be a
maximum of 20 square feet for retail establishments. Businesses displaying
bicycles may be permitted to license additional square footage of town owned
property at the discretion of the Administrator.
   (C)   Location. The property to be licensed shall be a contiguous piece of
property that is directly adjacent to the business frontage.
   (D)   Circulation. The use of town owned property for outdoor display shall
not impede circulation and thus, shall not block or encroach upon the required
ingress/egress of doorways, walkways, stairways and parking or loading/delivery
spaces.
   (E)   Street and sidewalk width. A minimum street width of 22 feet shall be
maintained in order to allow for emergency vehicle access. Sidewalks shall
remain a minimum width of six feet. Connection of exit discharge to the public
way, as required by the adopted Building Code, shall not be blocked.
   (F)   Public safety. The use of town owned property for outdoor display
shall not pose any risks to public safety. The use of town owned property for
outdoor display shall not block or encroach upon any fire lane, fire staging
area and shall maintain a minimum distance to fire hydrants of seven feet to
side or rear, and 14 feet to the front.
   (G)   Maintenance access. The use of town owned property for outdoor display
shall not block or impede street sweeping, snow removal or snow storage/loading
operations. The use of town owned property for outdoor display shall not block
access to trash receptacles, dumpsters, mailboxes, manholes, water valves,
flowerbeds or other landscape areas.
   (H)   Aesthetics. The use of town owned property for outdoor display shall
not negatively impact established view corridor or acknowledged “postcard”
images and shall not visually detract from, or block, storefront or shop
windows.
   (I)   Lack of available space. Retail establishments may only be located on
a site without 20 square feet of privately owned exterior space adjacent to the
business frontage.
   (J)   Outdoor display fixtures. Outdoor display fixtures shall be
freestanding, temporary in nature, and shall be removed from the exterior
location when the business is closed.
   (K)   Code compliance. All aspects of the outdoor display shall remain in
compliance with this code and the Vail Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 32(2007) § 2)
TITLE 9: WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 1: WATER QUALITY
Section
9-1-1 Definitions
9-1-2 Water quality standards
9-1-3 Jurisdiction for water quality
9-1-4 Discharges unlawful
9-1-5 Compliance with permits
9-1-6 Enforcement
9-1-7 Penalty
§ 9-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENJOINED. Shall include temporary, preliminary and permanent injunctive
relief.
   MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLIES. All surface and underground water rights, whether
absolutely or conditionally decreed, of the Town of Vail, which are used or are
capable of being used for any beneficial purpose, including, without
limitation, municipal, commercial, aesthetic, irrigation, fish and game
propagation, recreation, domestic, industrial uses, and augmentation and
exchange, but does not include waters in sewage systems, waters in treatment
works or disposal systems, water in potable water distribution systems, and all
water withdrawn for use until use and treatment have been completed.
   NONPOINT SOURCE. Any source of pollutant other than a point source,
including, without limitation, water use and development practices, activities
which encroach on riparian areas, vegetation disturbance, soil disturbance and
earth movement, impervious cover, and storm water runoff from developed areas.
   PERMIT. A permit lawfully issued pursuant to Pub. Law No. 92-500, the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq.) or pursuant to C.R.S. §§ 25-8-501 et seq.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, municipality,
district, federal or state agency, commission or other state or federal body or
political subdivision thereof.
   POINT SOURCE. Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including,
but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete
fissure, container, rolling stock or concentrated animal feeding operation from
which pollutants are or may be discharged.
   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar
dirt and industrial, construction, municipal and agricultural waste, dirt and
slurry.
   SOURCES. Any area that contributes to the water supply of any stream or
river and includes, without limitation, any drainage basin or underground
aquifer.
   WATERWORKS. All components of the town’s water supply system, whether
operated by the town or the Eagle River Water and Sanitation District,
including, but not limited to, all equipment, dams, canals, ditches, flumes,
pipelines, conduits, reservoirs, drains, wells, pumps and other facilities
associated with the diversion, control, treatment and/or distribution of the
town’s municipal water supplies.
(Ord. 6(2006) § 1)
§ 9-1-2 WATER QUALITY STANDARDS.
   Within the jurisdictional areas set forth in §
9-1-3 of this chapter, the standards for water quality shall be those standards
adopted from time to time by the Water Quality Control Commission pursuant to
C.R.S. §§ 25-8-202(b) and 25-8-404, as applicable to waters located within the
jurisdiction of this chapter. Said standards are incorporated herein by
reference.
(Ord. 6(2006) § 1)
§ 9-1-3 JURISDICTION FOR WATER QUALITY.
   Pursuant to C.R.S. §§ 31-15-707(b), 31-15-708(1) and 31-15-401, and for the
purpose of maintaining and protecting its municipal water supply from injury
and pollution, the town shall exercise regulatory and supervisory jurisdiction
within the Town of Vail and over all streams and sources contributing to
municipal water supplies for a distance of five miles above the points from
which municipal water supplies are diverted.
(Ord. 6(2006) § 1)
§ 9-1-4 DISCHARGES UNLAWFUL.
   Within the jurisdictional areas defined in §
9-1-3 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge from
either a point or a nonpoint source any pollutant or engage in any activity
which will result in the degradation of water quality below the standards set
forth in §
9-1-2 of this chapter, unless the discharge is the subject of an existing and
valid point source discharge permit issued pursuant to C.R.S. §25-8-501.
(Ord. 6(2006) § 1)
§ 9-1-5 COMPLIANCE WITH PERMITS.
   With the exception of a point source discharge permit as noted in §
9-1-4 of this chapter, obtaining and complying with a permit from any other
local, state or federal entity for activities or discharges resulting in a
violation of this chapter shall not constitute a defense to any such violation.
(Ord. 6(2006) § 1)
§ 9-1-6 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce
any provision of this chapter, an authorized representative of the town may go
upon any land at any reasonable time to inspect the same, provided that such
person identify himself or herself and, if such land be unoccupied, that such
person shall make a reasonable effort to locate the person having control of
such land to notify them of such entry.
   (B)   Stop work order. Whenever any work or activity is being done contrary
to the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of this chapter, the town or
its authorized representatives may order the work stopped by notice in writing
served on any person engaged in or causing such activity until authorized by
the town to proceed.
(Ord. 6(2006) § 1)
§ 9-1-7 PENALTY.
   (A)   Offense. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to the penalties provided in §
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   (B)   Actions. Any activity or use which is continued, operated or
maintained contrary to any provision of this chapter is unlawful. The town may
institute injunction, abatement or any other appropriate legal action to
prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such violation, in which event the prevailing
party shall be entitled to recover its costs and attorney fees.
   (C)   Remedies. The remedies herein provided shall be cumulative and not
exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law.
(Ord. 6(2006) § 1)
TITLE 10: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: BUILDING CODES
Section
10-1-1 Codes adopted by reference
10-1-2 Amendments to the International Building Code
10-1-3 Amendments to the International Residential Code
10-1-4 Amendments to the International Fire Code
10-1-5 Amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code
10-1-6 Amendments to the International Plumbing Code
10-1-7 Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code
10-1-8 Amendments to the International Mechanical Code
10-1-9 Amendments to the International Existing Building Code
10-1-10 Amendments to the National Electrical Code
10-1-11 Amendments to the Uniform Code for the abatement of dangerous buildings
10-1-12 Violation and penalty
10-1-13 Appeals
§ 10-1-1 CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The following codes are hereby adopted by reference, as amended:
      (1)   The International Building Code, 2024 edition, including Appendices
B, E, G, J, K and O.
      (2)   The International Residential Code, 2024 edition, Chapters 10,
including Appendices BE, BO and AA.
      (3)   The International Fire Code, 2024 edition, including Appendices A,
B, C, D, E, G, H, I, J and N.
      (4)   The International Energy Conservation Code, 2024 edition, including
Appendices CA and RA.
      (5)   The International Plumbing Code, 2024 edition, including Appendices
C and F.
      (6)   The International Fuel Gas Code, 2024 edition, including Appendix
E.
      (7)   The International Mechanical Code, 2024 edition, including Appendix
C.
      (8)   The International Existing Building Code, 2024 edition, including
Appendix D.
      (9)   The National Electrical Code, 2023 edition.
      (10)   The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997
edition.
   (B)   All International Codes are published by the International Code
Council, 4051 Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478, except the National
Electrical Code is published by the National Fire Protection Association, 1
Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 and the Uniform Code for the Abatement of
Dangerous Buildings is published by the International Conference of Building
Officials, 5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, CA 90601-2298.
   (C)   Copies shall be available for inspection at the office of the Town
Clerk during regular business hours and can be viewed online at www.iccsafe.org
and www.vailgov.com.
(Ord. 8(2022) § 1; Ord. 13(2024) § 1)
§ 10-1-2 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
The following amendments are hereby made to the International Building Code:
   Section 101.1: Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows: "101.1: Title.
These regulations shall be known as the Vail Building Code."
   Section 101.4: Section 101.4 is amended to read as follows: "101.4
Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.7
and referenced elsewhere in this code shall not be considered a part of this
code unless specifically adopted."
   Section 103.1: Section 103.1 is amended to read as follows: "103.1 Creation
of agency. The Town's Building Department is hereby created and the official in
charge shall be known as the building official. The function of this agency
shall be the implementation, administration, and enforcement of this code."
   Section 105.2: Section 105.2 is amended to include the following: "14. Decks
not exceeding 200 sq/ft (18.6 m2) in area, not more than 30 inches (762 mm)
above grade at any point and are not part of a means of egress or accessible
route."
   Section 110.3.10: Section 110.3.10 is amended to read as follows: "110.3.10
Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified in Sections
110.3.1-110.3.9, the building official may make or require other inspections of
any construction work to ascertain compliance with this code and any other Town
code, standard, requirement or regulation."
   Section 202: Section 202 is amended by the addition of the following
definitions:
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure used to shelter or support any material,
equipment, chattel or occupancy other than a habitable building.
      FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. The Fire Code Official or designee.
      FIRE-RESISTANCE-RATED CONSTRUCTION. The use of materials and systems in
the design and construction of a structure to safeguard against the spread of
fire within a structure and the spread of fire to or from structures to the
wildland-urban interface area.
      IGNITION-RESISTANT BUILDING MATERIAL. A type of building material that
resists ignition or sustained flaming combustion sufficiently to reduce losses
from wildland-urban interface conflagrations under worst-case weather and fuel
conditions with wildfire exposure of embers and small flames, as prescribed in
Chapter 7A.
      IGNITION-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION. As described in Section 7A06.
      LOG WALL CONSTRUCTION. A type of construction in which exterior walls are
constructed of solid wood members and where the smallest horizontal dimension
of each solid wood member is at least 6 inches (152 mm).
      NONCOMBUSTIBLE. A material that, in the form in which it is used, is
either:
      1.   Material of which no part will ignite and burn when subjected to
fire (any material conforming to ASTM E136 shall be considered noncombustible);
or
      2.   Material having a structural base of noncombustible material as
defined in Item 1 above, with a surfacing material not over 1/8 inch (3.2 mm)
thick, which has a flame spread index of 50 or less.
      'Noncombustible' does not apply to surface finish materials. Material
required to be noncombustible for reduced clearances to flues, heating
appliances or other sources of high temperature shall refer to material
conforming to Item 1 above. No material shall be classified as noncombustible
that is subject to increase in combustibility or flame spread index, beyond the
limits herein established, through the effects of age, moisture or other
atmospheric condition.
      SAFETY COVER. A structure, fabric or assembly, along with attendant
appurtenances and anchoring mechanisms, that is temporarily placed or installed
over an entire pool, spa or hot tub and secured in place after all bathers are
absent from the water.
      SFM. Refers to the California State Fire Marshal's office.
      UNENCLOSED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. An accessory structure without a complete
exterior wall system enclosing the area under the roof or floor above.
      WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE AREA. That geographical area, as depicted and
defined in the Community Wildfire Protection Plan, where structures and other
human development meets or intermingles with wildland or vegetative fuels."
   Chapter 7A: Chapter 7A is added to read as follows: "CHAPTER 7A FIRE-
RESISTIVE CONSTRUCTION
      Section 7A01 Scope:
      7A01.1 General. This Chapter shall apply to the construction, alteration,
movement, repair, maintenance and use of any building, structure or premises
into or within the wildland-urban interface areas of the Town.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Repair or replacement of less than 25% of a deck surface or structure.
   2.   Repair or replacement of less than 25% of the exterior siding of a
structure.
   3.   Accessory structures not exceeding 120 sq/ft in floor area where
located not less than 30 feet from buildings containing habitable spaces.
   4.   Agricultural buildings located not less than 30 feet from buildings
containing habitable spaces.
      7A01.2 Objective. Because the unrestricted use of property in wildland-
urban interface areas is a potential threat to life and property from fire and
resulting erosion, the objective of this Chapter is to establish minimum
regulations consistent with nationally recognized good practice for the
safeguarding of life and for property protection, and to mitigate the risk to
life and structures from intrusion of fire from wildland fire exposures and
fire exposures from adjacent structures and to mitigate structure fires from
spreading to wildland fuels. This Chapter supplements the Town's codes to
provide for special regulations to mitigate fire and life-safety hazards in the
wildland-urban interface areas.
      7A01.3 Additions or alterations. Additions or alterations shall be
permitted to be made to any building or structure without requiring the
existing building or structure to comply with the requirements of this Chapter;
provided that the addition or alteration conforms to that required for a new
building or structure.
      Section 7A02 Applicability:
      7A02.1 General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement
and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall apply. Where, in any
specific case, different sections of this Chapter specify different materials,
methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall
apply.
      7A02.2 Existing conditions. The legal occupancy or use of any building,
structure or condition existing on the date of adoption of this Chapter shall
be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in
the International Fire Code.
      Section 7A03 Compliance Alternatives:
      7A03.1 Practical difficulties. Where there are practical difficulties
involved in carrying out the provisions of this Chapter, the building official
or fire code official are authorized to grant modifications for individual
cases upon application, in writing, by the owner or owner's authorized agent.
The building official or fire code official shall first find that a special
individual reason makes enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter
impractical, that the modification is in conformance to the intent and purpose
of this Chapter, and that the modification does not lessen any fire protection
requirements or any degree of structural integrity.
      7A03.2 Technical assistance. To determine the acceptability of
technologies, processes, products, facilities, materials and uses attending the
design, operation or use of a building or premises subject to the inspection of
the building official or fire code official, the building official or fire code
official are authorized to require the owner, the owner's authorized agent or
the person in possession or control of the building or premises to provide,
without charge to the Town, a technical opinion and report. The opinion and
report shall be prepared by a qualified engineer, specialist, laboratory or
fire safety specialty organization acceptable to the code official and the
owner or the owner's authorized agent, and shall analyze the fire safety of the
design, operation or use of the building or premises, the facilities and
appurtenances situated thereon and fuel management for purposes of establishing
fire hazard severity to recommend necessary changes.
      7A03.3 Alternative materials or methods. The provisions of this Chapter
are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any
design or method not specifically prescribed by this Chapter, provided that any
such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method
shall be approved where the building official in concurrence with the fire code
official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the
intent of the provisions of this Chapter, and that the material, method or work
offered is, for the purpose intended, not less than the equivalent of that
prescribed in this Chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire
resistance, durability and safety. If an alternative material, design or method
is not approved, the building official shall respond in writing, stating the
reasons why the alternative was not approved.
      Section 7A04 Special Construction Regulations:
      7A04.1 General. Structures shall be constructed in accordance with this
Section, unless previously exempted in Section 7A01.1.
      7A04.2 Fire-resistance-rated construction. Where this Chapter requires 1-
hour fire-resistance-rated construction, the fire-resistance rating of building
elements, components or assemblies shall be determined in accordance with the
test procedures set forth in ASTM E 119 or UL 263. Exceptions:
   1.   The fire-resistance rating of building elements, components or
assemblies based on the prescriptive designs prescribed in Section 721.
   2.   The fire-resistance rating of building elements, components or
assemblies based on the calculation procedures in accordance with Section 722.
      Section 7A05 Ignition-Resistant Material.
      7A05.1 General. Structures hereafter constructed, modified or relocated
into or within wildland-urban interface areas shall meet the construction
requirements in accordance with ignition-resistant construction in accordance
with Section 7A06. Materials required to be ignition-resistant materials shall
comply with the requirements of Section 7A05.2.
      7A05.2 Ignition-resistant building material. Ignition-resistant building
material shall comply with any one or more of the following:
   1.   Material shall be tested on all sides with the extended ASTM E 84 (UL
723) test or ASTM E 2768, except panel products shall be permitted to test only
the front and back faces. Panel products shall be tested with a ripped or cut
longitudinal gap of 1/8 inch (3.2 mm). Materials that, when tested in
accordance with the test procedures set forth in ASTM E 84 or UL 723 for a test
period of 30 minutes, or with ASTM E 2768, comply with the following:
      1.1.   Flame spread. Material shall exhibit a flame spread index not
exceeding 25 and shall not show evidence of progressive combustion following
the extended 30-minute test.
      1.2.   Flame front. Material shall exhibit a flame front that does not
progress more than 10.5 feet (3,200 mm) beyond the centerline of the burner at
any time during the extended 30-minute test.
      1.3.   Weathering. Ignition-resistant building materials shall maintain
their performance in accordance with this section under conditions of use.
Materials shall meet the performance requirements for weathering (including
exposure to temperature, moisture and ultraviolet radiation) contained in the
following standards, as applicable to the materials and the conditions of use:
         1.3.1.   Method A "Test Method for Accelerated Weathering of Fire-
Retardant-Treated Wood for Fire Testing" in ASTM D 2898, for fire- retardant-
treated wood, wood- plastic composite and plastic lumber materials.
         1.3.2.   ASTM D 7032 for wood-plastic composite materials.
         1.3.3.   ASTM D 6662 for plastic lumber materials.
      1.4.   Identification. Materials shall bear identification showing fire
test results.
   Exception: Materials composed of a combustible core and a noncombustible
exterior covering, made from either aluminum at a minimum 0.019-inch (0.48 mm)
thickness or corrosion-resistant steel at a minimum 0.0149-inch (0.38 mm)
thickness shall not be required to be tested with a ripped or cut longitudinal
gap.
   2.   Noncombustible material. Material that complies with the requirements
for noncombustible materials.
   3.   Fire-retardant-treated wood. Fire-retardant-treated wood identified for
exterior use and meeting the requirements of Section 2303.2.
   4.   Materials meeting the following standards of quality.
      4.1.   SFM Standard 12-7A-1, Exterior Wall Siding and Sheathing. A fire
resistance test standard consisting of a 150 kW intensity direct flame exposure
for a 10-minute duration.
      4.2.   SFM Standard 12-7A-3, Horizontal Projection Underside. A fire
resistance test standard consisting of a 300 kW intensity direct flame exposure
for a 10-minute duration.
      4.3.   SFM Standard 12-7A-4, Decking. A 2-part test consisting of a heat
release rate (Part A) deck assembly combustion test with an under deck exposure
of 80 kW intensity direct flame for a 3-minute duration and a (Part B)
sustained deck assembly combustion test consisting of a deck upper surface
burning ember exposure with a 12 mph wind for 40 minutes using a 2.2 lb (1 kg)
burning "Class A" size 12" x 12" x 2.25" (300 mm x 300 mm x 57 mm) roof test
brand.
      4.4.   SFM Standard 12-7A-4A, Decking Alternate Method A. A heat release
deck assembly combustion test with an under-deck exposure of 80 kW intensity
direct flame for a 3-minute duration.
      4.5.   SFM Standard 12-7A-5, Ignition-resistant Material. A generic
building material surface burning flame spread test standard consisting of an
extended 30-minute ASTM E84 or UL 723 test method as is used for fire-
retardant-treated wood.
   5.   Exterior Windows. Dual or triple pane windows that meet the
requirements of the International Energy Conservation Code.
   Section 7A06 Ignition-Resistant Construction:
      7A06.1 General. Ignition-resistant construction shall be in accordance
with Sections 7A06.2 through 7A06.11.
      7A06.2 Roof covering. All roof coverings shall comply with Chapter 15 of
this Code, as amended.
         7A06.2.1 Roof valleys. Where provided, valley flashings shall be not
less than 0.019 inches (0.48 mm) (No. 26 galvanized sheet gage) corrosion-
resistant metal installed over a minimum 36-inch-wide (914 mm) underlayment
consisting of one layer of 72-pound (32.4 kg) mineral- surfaced, non-perforated
cap sheet complying with ASTM D 3909 running the full length of the valley.
      7A06.3 Protection of Eaves. Eaves and soffits shall be protected on the
exposed underside by ignition-resistant building materials or by materials
approved for not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction, 2-inch
(51 mm) nominal dimension lumber, or 1-inch (25 mm) nominal fire- retardant-
treated lumber or ¾ inch (19.1 mm) nominal fire-retardant- treated plywood,
identified for exterior use and meeting the requirements of Section 2303.2.
Fascias are required and shall be protected on the backside by ignition-
resistant building materials or by materials approved for not less than 1-hour
fire-resistance-rated construction or 2-inch (51 mm) nominal dimension lumber.
      7A06.4 Gutters and downspouts. Gutters and downspouts shall be
constructed of noncombustible material.
      7A06.5 Exterior walls. Exterior walls of buildings or structures shall be
constructed with one of the following methods and all such material shall
extend from the top of the foundation to the underside of the roof sheathing:
   1.   Materials approved for not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated
construction on the exterior side.
   2.   Approved noncombustible materials.
   3.   Heavy timber or log wall construction.
   4.   Ignition-resistant building materials complying with Section 7A05.2 on
the exterior side.
   All exterior walls shall have a minimum of 6 vertical inches of
noncombustible material, measured from the ground (at grade) or the nearest
horizontal surface.
   Exception: Combustible siding materials not complying with Section 7A05.2
may be used but shall not cover more than 33% of a given wall and shall not be
within 5 feet of finished grade. Combustible siding with a profile that may
allow ember intrusion such as wood shake or wood shingle is prohibited.
      7A06.6 Underfloor enclosure. Buildings or structures shall have
underfloor areas enclosed to the ground with exterior walls in accordance with
Section 7A06.5.
   Exception: Complete enclosure shall not be required where the underside of
exposed floors and exposed structural columns, beams and supporting walls are
protected as required for exterior 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction or
heavy timber construction or fire-retardant-treated wood, if labeled for
exterior use and meeting the requirements of Section 2303.2.
      7A06.7 Appendages and projections. Unenclosed accessory structures
attached to buildings with habitable spaces and projections, such as decks,
shall be not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction, heavy timber
construction or constructed of one of the following:
   1.   Approved noncombustible materials.
   2.   Fire-retardant-treated wood identified for exterior use and meeting the
requirements of Section 2303.2.
   3.   Ignition-resistant building materials in accordance with Section
7A05.2.
   4.   Decks or porches (or portions of the decks or porches) 4 feet or less
above the ground shall have the underdeck area enclosed to reduce the
accumulation of debris using one of the following methods:
      a.   Install noncombustible, corrosion-resistant mesh material with
openings not to exceed 1/8 inch around the outer edge of the deck from the
walking surface to the ground to prevent ember intrusion. Material (e.g.,
lattice) installed over the mesh, shall be noncombustible; or
      b.   Fully enclose with a noncombustible wall covering/cladding.
   7A06.8 Exterior doors. Exterior doors shall be constructed of approved
noncombustible materials, standard solid core wood not less than 1.75 inches
thick (44 mm) or have a fire protection rating of not less than 20 minutes.
Tempered glass doors are permissible. Exception: Vehicle access doors.
   7A06.9 Vents. Attic ventilation openings, foundation or underfloor vents, or
other ventilation openings in vertical exterior walls and vents through roofs
shall not exceed 144 square inches (0.0929 m2) each. Such vents shall be
covered with noncombustible corrosion-resistant materials with openings not to
exceed ¼ inch (6.4 mm) or perforated noncombustible materials with perforations
not to exceed ¼ inch (6.4 mm) or shall be designed and approved to prevent
flame or ember penetration into the structure.
      7A06.9.1 Vent locations. Attic ventilation openings shall not be located
in the inner 2/3 of soffits, eave overhangs, or other overhang areas. Gable end
and dormer vents shall be located not less than 10 feet (3,048 mm) from lot
lines. Underfloor ventilation openings shall be located as close to grade as
practical.
      7A06.10 Detached accessory structures. Detached accessory structures
located less than 30 feet (15,240 mm) from a building containing habitable
space shall have exterior walls constructed with materials approved for not
less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction, heavy timber, log wall
construction, or constructed with approved noncombustible materials or ignition
resistant building materials in accordance with Section 7A05.2. The fire-
retardant-treated wood shall be labeled for exterior use and meet the
requirements of Section 2303.2.
      7A06.10.1 Underfloor areas. Where the detached structure is located and
constructed so that the structure or any portion thereof projects over a
descending slope surface greater than 10%, the area below the structure shall
have underfloor areas enclosed to within 6 inches (152 mm) of the ground, with
exterior wall construction in accordance with Section 7A06.5 or underfloor
protection in accordance with Section 7A06.6. Exception: The enclosure shall
not be required where the underside of exposed floors and exposed structural
columns, beams and supporting walls are protected as required for exterior 1-
hour fire-resistance-rated construction or heavy- timber construction or fire-
retardant-treated wood on the exterior side. The fire-retardant-treated wood
shall be labeled for exterior use and meet the requirements of Section 2303.2.
      7A06.11 Spark arrestors. Chimneys serving fireplaces, barbecues,
incinerators or decorative heating appliances in which solid or liquid fuel is
used, shall be provided with a spark arrester. Spark arresters shall be
constructed of woven or welded wire screening of 12 USA standard gage wire
(0.1046 inch) (2.66 mm) having openings not exceeding ½ inch (12.7 mm)."
   Section 1505.1: Section 1505.1 is amended to read as follows: "1505.1
General. All roof coverings shall be Class A. Wood shakes and shingles are not
permitted unless exempted for replacement or repair as defined in Section
1501.1.1. Where the roof profile allows space between the roof covering and the
roof decking at the eave ends, the spaces shall be constructed to prevent
intrusion of flames and embers or have one layer of 72-pound (32.4 kg) mineral-
surfaced non-perforated cap sheet complying with ASTM D3909 installed over the
combustible decking. Exception: Skylights and sloped glazing that comply with
Chapter 24 or Section 2610."
      Section 1505.1.1: Section 1505.1.1 is added to read as follows:
"Replacement or Repair. Each structure with a nonconforming roof covering or
roof assembly shall be allowed 1 replacement or repair of 25% or less of the
roof area. Replacement or repair in excess of 25% or a second replacement or
repair of the roof covering or roof assembly shall trigger replacement of the
nonconforming covering or assembly in its entirety. For purposes of this
section, a 2-family dwelling shall be considered 2 separate structures.
Emergency repairs of less than 10 sq/ft shall not be subject to the 25%) rule."
      Table 1505.1 is deleted.
      Sections 1505.3, 1505.4, 1505.5, 1505.6 and 1505.7 are deleted.
      Section 1507.1.2: Section 1507.1.2 is amended to read as follows:
"1507.1.2 Ice barriers. Ice barriers shall be installed for shingle types,
metal roof panels and mineral-surfaced roll roofing. The ice barrier shall
consist of not less than 2 layers of underlayment cemented together, or a self-
adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet shall be used in place of normal
underlayment. The ice barrier shall completely cover all roof surfaces.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that do not contain conditioned floor
area."
      Sections 1507.8 and 1579.9 are deleted.
      Section 1511.7.6: Section 1511.7.6 is added to read as follows: "1511.7.6
Snow retention devices. New roof assemblies shall be designed to prevent
accumulations of snow from shedding onto exterior balconies, decks, stairways,
sidewalks, streets, alleys, pedestrian and vehicle exits from buildings, areas
directly above or in front of utility meters and/or adjacent properties. The
design of snow retention devices shall be provided by a registered design
professional or as determined by the building official. Exception: Roof areas
with a horizontal projection of less than 48 inches that will not receive snow
shedding from a higher roof. The horizontal projection shall be measured
perpendicular to the exterior wall line from the edge of the roof or eave to
the intersecting wall surface."
      Section 1603.2: Section 1603.2 is added to read as follows: "1603.2
Boulder and rock walls. Boulder or rock walls with a height of greater than 48
inches shall be designed by a registered design professional and shall comply
with Section 1603.1."
      Section 1604.1.1: Section 1604.1.1 is added to read as follows: "1604.1.1
Hazard areas. All new construction and additions to existing structures located
in mapped debris flow, rock fall, avalanche and flood hazard areas shall comply
with Title 12, Chapter 21 of the Vail Town Code."
      Section 1608. Design snow loads shall be determined in accordance with
Chapter 7 of ASCE7, and design roof loads shall be not less than that
determined by Section 1608.2.
      Section 1608.2: Section 1608.2 is amended to read as follows: "1608.2
Ground and roof snow loads. The ground snow loads to be used in determining the
design snow loads shall be 142 pounds per sq/ft. Designs for roof snow loads
shall be as follows:
   1.   Roof pitches of less than 4:12 shall be designed to carry a 100 pound
per square foot snow load.
   2.   Roof pitches of 4:12 and greater shall be designed to carry an 80 pound
per square foot snow load.
   There is no allowance for pitch reduction nor is there a requirement to
increase surcharge loading due to snow drifting or type of roof covering. Snow
loads for decks and exterior balconies shall be as required for roofs."
      Section 1612.3: Section 1612.3 is amended to read as follows: "1612.3
Establishment of flood hazard areas. The Town has adopted a flood hazard map
including areas of special flood hazard as identified by FEMA in the report
entitled 'The Flood Insurance Study for The Town of Vail' dated December 2007,
as amended, with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) and related supporting data. The flood hazard
map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference."
      Section 2111.1: Section 2111.1 is amended to read as follows: "2111.1
General. The construction of masonry fireplaces, consisting of concrete or
masonry, shall be in accordance with this section and Title 5, Chapter 3 of the
Vail Town Code."
      Section 2902.2: Section 2902.2 is amended to read as follows: "2902.2
Separate facilities. Separate facilities are not required in structures or
tenant spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and
customers, of 30 or fewer."
      Section 2902.2: Exception 4 is deleted.
      Section 3107.1: Section 3107.1 is amended to read as follows: "3107.1
General. Signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with
this code and Title 11 of the Vail Town Code."
      Section 3109: Section 3109 is amended to read as follows: "Section 3109
Swimming Pool Enclosures and Safety Devices.
      3109.1 General. The design and construction of swimming pools, spas and
hot tubs shall comply with the requirements of Sections 3109.2 through 3109.5,
other applicable sections of this code, and the Colorado Department of Public
Health and Environment (CDPHE) Water Quality Control Division standard 5 CCR
1003-5. Where spas or hot tubs are equipped with a lockable safety cover
complying with ASTM F1346 and swimming pools are equipped with a powered safety
cover that complies with ASTM F1346, the areas where those spas, hot tubs or
pools are located shall be exempt from Sections 3109.2-3109.6.
      3109.2 Public and semi-public swimming pools. Public and semi-public
swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than 60 inches
(1,524 mm) in height and shall with Sections 3109.4 through 3109.6.
      3109.4 Private swimming pools. Private swimming pools shall be completely
enclosed by a barrier not less than 48 inches (1,524 mm) in height and shall
comply with Sections 3109.4-3109.6.
      3109.4 Barriers. The vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of
the barrier shall be not greater than 2 inches (51 mm) measured on the side of
the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool
structure is above grade, the barrier is authorized to be at ground level or
mounted on top of the pool structure, and the vertical clearance between the
top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be not greater
than 4 inches (102 mm).
      3109.4.1 Openings. Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a
4- inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.
      3109.4.2 Solid barrier surfaces. Solid barriers which do not have
openings shall not contain indentations or protrusions, except for normal
construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
      3109.4.3 Closely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed
of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the
horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1,143 mm), the horizontal members
shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between
vertical members shall be not greater than 1.75 inches (44 mm) in width. Where
there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the
cutouts shall be not greater than 1.75 inches (44 mm) in width.
      3109.4.4 Widely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed
of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the
horizontal members is 45 inches (1,143 mm) or more, spacing between vertical
members shall be not greater than 4 inches (102 mm). Where there are decorative
cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall be not
greater than 1.75 inches (44 mm) in width.
      3109.4.5 Chain link dimensions. Mesh size for chain link fences shall be
not greater than a 2.25-inch square (57 mm square) unless the fence is provided
with slats fastened at the top or the bottom that reduce the openings to not
more than 1.75 inches (44 mm).
      3109.4.6 Diagonal members. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal
members, the opening formed by the diagonal members shall be not greater than
1.75 inches (44 mm).
      3109.4.7 Clear zone. Where any equipment, including pool equipment, are
on the same lot as a pool or spa and such equipment is located outside of the
barrier protecting the pool or spa, such equipment shall be located not less
than 36 inches (914 mm) from the outside of the barrier.
      3109.4.8 Doors and gates. Access doors or gates shall be equipped to
accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access doors or gates shall open
outward away from the pool and shall be self-closing and have a self- latching
device. If the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less
than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the bottom of the door or gate, the release
mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the door or gate 3 inches (76
mm) or more, below the top of the door or gate, and the door or gate and
barrier shall be without openings greater than ½ inch (12.7 mm) within 18
inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism.
      3109.4.9 Structure wall as a barrier. Where a wall of a structure serves
as part of the barrier, one of the following shall apply:
      1.   Doors, gates and operable windows with direct access to the pool
through that wall shall be equipped with an alarm that produces an audible
warning when the door or its screen, if present, are opened. The alarm shall be
listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2017. In dwellings not required to be
accessible units, Type A units or Type B units, the alarm deactivation switch
shall be located not higher than 54 inches (1,372 mm) and not less than 48
inches (1,219 mm) above the finished floor. In dwellings required to be
Accessible units, Type A units or Type B units, the deactivation switch shall
be located not higher than 54 inches (1,372 mm) and not less than 48 inches
(1,219 mm) above the finished floor.
      2.   A safety cover that is listed and labeled in accordance with ASTM
F1346 is installed for the pools and spas.
      3.   An approved means of protection, such as self-closing doors with
self- latching devices, that provides a degree of protection that is not less
than the protection afforded by Item 1 or 2.
      3109.4.10 Pool structure as barrier. Where an above-ground pool structure
is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool
structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then the ladder or
steps either shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent
access, or the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier that meets the
requirements of Sections 3109.4.1-3109.4.8. Where the ladder or steps are
secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of
a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.
      3109.5 Indoor swimming pools. Walls surrounding indoor swimming pools
shall not be required to comply with Section 3109.4.9.
      3109.6 Prohibited locations. Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit
permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being used to climb the
barriers.
      3109.7 Entrapment avoidance. Suction outlets shall be designed and
installed in accordance with ANSI/APSP-7."
(Ord. 8(2022) § 1; Ord. 13(2024) § 1)
§ 10-1-3 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   The following amendments are hereby made to the International Residential
Code:
      Section 101.1: Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows: "101.1 Title.
These regulations shall be known as the Vail Residential Code."
      Section R105.2: Section R105.2, Item 10 in the building portion, is
amended to read as follows: "10. Decks not exceeding 200 sq/ft (18.6 m2) in
area, not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at any point, and not
serving the exit door required by Section R311.4."
      Section R109.1.5: Section R109.1.5 is amended to read as follows:
"R109.1.5 Other inspections. In addition to inspections in Sections R109.1.1-
R109.1.4, the building official is authorized to make or require other
inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with this code and
any other Town code, standard, requirement or regulation."
      Table R301.2: Table R301.2 is amended to read as follows:
 
   CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
 
       WIND DESIGN                               SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM    ICE
GROUND                          Wind-  SEISMIC                             BARRIER            AIR      MEAN
SNOW   Speed  Topo-     Special borne  DESIGN                Frost Termite UNDE R-   FLOOD    FREEZING ANNUAL
LOAD   (mph)d graphical wind    debris CATEGORYf Weatheringa line  c       LAMENT    HAZARDSg INDEXi   TEMPj
              effectsk  regionl zonem                        deptb         REQUIREDh

140    115    NO        NO      NO     B         SEVER E     48"   None to YES, 100% -        2500     37.4%
                                                                   Slight
 
   MANUAL J DESIGN CRITERIAn
 
                                 Indoor     Indoor      Outdoor
          Altitude    Coincident winter     winter      winter      Heating
Elevation correction  wet bulb   design     design dry- design dry- temperature
          factore                relative   bulb        bulb        difference
                                 humidity   temperature temperature
8150'     .745        54º       30%        70º        -5º        75º
                      Indoor                Indoor      Outdoor
                      summer     Summer     summer      summer      Cooling
Latitude  Daily Range design     design     design dry- design dry- temperature
                      relative   gains      bulb        bulb        difference
                      humidity              temperature temperature
39.64ºN  H           50%        -33 to -53 75º        82º        7º
 
      Section R301.2.3: Section R301.2.3 is amended to read as follows:
      "R301.2.3 Ground and roof snow loads. The ground snow loads to be used in
determining design snow loads shall be 142 pounds per sq/ft. Designs for roof
snow loads shall be as follows:
         1.   Roof pitches of less than 4:12 shall be designed to carry 100
pounds per sq/ft.
         2.   Roof pitches of 4:12 and greater shall be designed to carry 80
pounds per sq/ft.
         All buildings and structures shall be designed in accordance with
accepted engineering practice. Snow loads for decks and exterior balconies
shall be as required for roofs."
      Section R309.1: Section R309.1 is amended to read as follows: "Exception:
An automatic sprinkler system is required when a Level 3 alteration, as
classified by the Vail Existing Building Code, occurs to a townhouse unit that
is 3,600 sq/ft or greater, including attached garages or when additional sq/ft
is added to a townhouse that would increase the total floor area of an
individual townhouse unit to 3,600 sq/ft or greater. Existing townhouses that
are 3,600 sq/ft or more may add up to 100 sq/ft of floor area without
triggering the sprinkler retrofit requirement. This exemption may only be taken
once and does not include a detached garage."
      Section R309.1.1: Section R309.1.1 is amended to read as follows:
"R309.1.1 Design and installation. Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems
for townhouses shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 13D,
NFPA 13R or NFPA 13 standards and Vail Fire and Emergency Services fire
sprinkler installation standards."
      Section R309.2: R309.2 is amended to read as follows: "Exception: An
automatic sprinkler system is required when a Level 3 alteration, as classified
by the Vail Existing Building Code, occurs to a 1- or 2-family dwelling that is
3,600 sq/ft or greater, including attached garages or when additional sq/ft is
added to a 1- or 2-family dwelling that would increase the total floor area of
an individual 1- or 2-family dwelling unit to 3,600 sq/ft or greater. Existing
1- or 2-family dwellings of 3,600 sq/ft or greater may add up to 100 sq/ft of
floor area without triggering the sprinkler retrofit requirement. This
exemption may only be taken once. This does not include a detached garage. For
purposes of this Section, a 2-family dwelling shall be considered 2 separate
structures."
         Section R309.2.1: Section R309.2.1 is amended to read as follows:
"R309.2.1 Design and installation. Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems
shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 13D, NFPA 13R and NFPA
13 standards and Vail Fire and Emergency Services fire sprinkler installation
standards."
      Section R311.2: Section R311.2 is amended to read as follows: "R311.2.1
Where required. Carbon monoxide alarms shall be provided in accordance with
NFPA 72, NFPA 720, C.R.S. § 38-45-101 and Vail Fire and Emergency Services
alarm installation standards."
      Section R311.2.1: Section R311.2.1 is amended to read as follows:
"R311.2.1 New construction. For new construction, carbon monoxide alarms shall
be provided in accordance with NFPA 72, NFPA 720, C.R.S. § 38-45-101 and Vail
Fire and Emergency Services alarm installation standards."
      Section R311.3: Section R311.3 is amended with the addition of the
following text: "In addition to the above locations, carbon monoxide alarms
shall be provided in accordance with NFPA 72, NFPA 720, C.R.S. § 38-45- 101 and
Vail Fire and Emergency Services alarm installation standards."
      Section R311.7: Section R311.7 is amended to read as follows: "R311.7
Carbon monoxide detection systems. Carbon monoxide detection systems shall be
permitted to be used in lieu of carbon monoxide alarms and shall comply with
NFPA 72, NFPA 720, C.R.S. § 38-45-101 and Vail Fire and Emergency Services
alarm installation standards."
      Section R311.7.2: Section R311.7.2 is amended to read as follows:
"R311.7.2 Location. Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in accordance
with Section R315.3."
      Section R318.7.12: Section R318.7.12 is amended to read as follows:
"Exception: Alternating tread devices are allowed to be used as an element of a
means of egress for lofts, mezzanines and similar areas of 200 gross sq/ft
(18.6 m2) or less where an emergency escape and rescue opening is provided for
the area served and such devices do not provide exclusive access to a kitchen
or bathroom."
      Section R318.13: Section R318.13 is amended to read as follows:
"Exception: Ships ladders are allowed to be used as an element of a means of
egress for lofts, mezzanines and similar areas of 200 gross sq/ft (18.6m2) or
less where an emergency escape and rescue opening is provided for the area
served and such devices do not provide exclusive access to a kitchen or
bathroom."
      Section R328.1: Section R328.1 is amended to read as follows: "R328.1
General. The design and construction of pools and spas shall comply with
Section 3109 of the Vail Building Code."
      Section R331.2: Section R331.2 is amended to read as follows: "R331.2
Installation. The installation of stationary engine generators shall be in an
approved location and in accordance with the listing, the manufacturer's
installation instructions and NFPA 70."
      Section R507.2.4.1: Section R507.2.4.1 is amended by the addition of the
following exception: "Exception: An approved flashing detail in accordance with
Section R507.2.4.1 that prevents moisture and water accumulation on member
surfaces and joints may be utilized in-lieu of preservative-treated materials."
      Section R902.1: Section R902.1 is amended to read as follows: "R902.1
Roofing assemblies. All roof assemblies and roof coverings shall be Class A.
Wood shakes and shingles are prohibited unless exempted for replacement or
repair as defined below. Where the roof profile allows space between the roof
covering and the roof decking at the eave ends, the spaces shall be constructed
to prevent intrusion of flames and embers or have one layer of 72-pound (32.4
kg) mineral-surfaced non-perforated cap sheet complying with ASTM D3909
installed over the combustible decking."
      Section R902.1.1: Section R902.1 is added to read as follows: "R902.1
Replacement or Repair. Each structure with a nonconforming roof covering or
roof assembly shall be allowed 1 replacement or repair of 25% or less of the
roof area. Replacement or repair in excess of 25% or a second replacement or
repair of the roof covering, or roof assembly shall trigger replacement of the
nonconforming covering or assembly in its entirety. Emergency repairs of less
than 10 sq/ft shall not be subject to the 25% rule. For purposes of this
section, a 2-family dwelling shall be considered 2 separate structures.
Exception: Metal and concrete roofing systems."
      Section R902.2 is deleted.
      Section R903.5: Section R903.5 is added to read as follows: "R903.5 Snow
retention devices. New roof assemblies shall be designed to prevent
accumulations of snow from shedding onto areas directly above or in front of
utility meters and adjacent properties. The design of snow retention devices
shall be provided by a registered design professional or as determined by the
building official. Exception: Roof areas with a horizontal projection of less
than 48 inches that will not receive snow shedding from a higher roof. The
horizontal projection shall be measured perpendicular to the exterior wall line
from the edge of the roof or eave to the intersecting wall surface."
      Section R905.1.2: Section R905.1.2 is amended to read as follows:
"R905.1.2 Ice barriers. Ice barriers shall be installed for all shingle types,
metal roof panels and mineral-surfaced roll roofing. The ice barrier shall
consist of not less than 2 layers of underlayment cemented together, or a self-
adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet shall be used in place of normal
underlayment. The ice barrier shall completely cover all roof surfaces.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that do not contain conditioned floor
area."
      Sections R905.7 and R905.8 are deleted.
      Section R1001.1: Section R1001.1 is amended to read as follows: "R1001.1
General. Masonry fireplaces shall be constructed in accordance with this
Section, the applicable provisions of Chapters 3 and 4 of this code, and with
Title 5, Chapter 3 of the Vail Town Code."
      Chapters 11-43 are deleted and replaced with the corresponding provisions
of International Codes and National Electric Code.
(Ord. 8(2022) § 1; Ord. 13(2024) § 1)
§ 10-1-4 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   The following amendments are hereby made to the International Fire Code:
      Section 101.1: Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows: "101.1 Title.
These regulations shall be known as the 'Vail Fire Code'."
      Section 202: The following definitions are amended to read as follows:
      FALSE ALARM. See Title 4 of the Vail Town Code.
      FIREWORKS. Any combustible or explosive composition, article, device,
substance or combination of substances, prepared for the primary purpose of
producing a visual or auditory sensation by combustion, explosion, deflagration
or detonation, including without limitation the following articles and devices
commonly known and used as fireworks: sparklers, cold sparks, toy cannons or
toy canes in which explosives are used to propel the same, firecrackers,
torpedoes, skyrockets, rockets, Roman candles, daygo bombs, torches, bottle
rockets, or other devices of like construction and any devices containing any
explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or device containing any
explosive substances; and any composition or device for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect for entertainment purposes by
combustion, deflagration or detonation that meets the definition of 1.3G
fireworks or 1.4G fireworks.
      PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACE. A portable, outdoor, solid-fuel burning
fireplace that may be constructed of steel, concrete, clay or other non-
combustible material and equipped with a screen or other approved spark
arrestor, of open design or equipped with a small hearth opening and a short
chimney or chimney opening in the top.
      Section 307.1.1: Section 307.1.1 is amended to read as follows: "307.1.1
Prohibited open burning. The following burning activities are prohibited:
      1.   Open burning.
      2.   Bonfires.
      3.   Recreational fires.
      4.   The burning of any materials when a National Weather Service Red
Flag Warning is activated.
      5.   The burning of any materials when Stage 2 or 3 fire restrictions are
in place.
      6.   The use of portable outdoor fireplaces when Stage 2 or 3 fire
restrictions are in place.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Burning conducted for training purposes by Vail Fire and Emergency
Services.
      2.   If the burning is a smokeless flare or safety flare used to indicate
danger to the public.
      3.   Open burning conducted pursuant to a permit issued by the fire code
official upon written application, if the fire code official determines that
such burning will be performed without hazard to the public health, safety or
welfare.
      4.   Prescribed burning for the purpose of reducing the impact of
wildland fire when authorized by the fire code official.
      5.   The use of propane or natural gas appliances equipped with automatic
shut-off controls."
      Section 307.3: Section 307.3 is amended to read as follows: "307.3
Extinguishment authority. Where any open burning, permitted or otherwise
(including the use of a portable outdoor fireplace), creates or adds to a
hazardous situation or creates a nuisance or health risk due to smoke or other
products of combustion, the fire shall be ordered to be extinguished by Vail
Fire and Emergency Services or Vail Police Department."
      Sections 307.4.1 and 307.4.2 are deleted.
      Section 308.1.7: Section 308.1.7 is amended to read as follows: "308.1.7
Sky lanterns. The use of sky lanterns is prohibited."
      Section 308.1.11: Section 308.1.11 is amended to read as follows:
"308.1.11 Open-flame cooking devices. Charcoal burners and other open- flame
cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within 10
feet (3048 mm) of combustible construction.
      Exceptions:
      1.   1- and 2-family dwellings.
      2.   Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an automatic
sprinkler system."
      3.   LP-gas cooking devices having LP-gas container with a water capacity
not greater than 20 pounds [nominal 17-pound (0.454 kg) LP gas capacity.
      4.   Natural gas cooking devices having a 60-minute automatic shut-off
timer.
      5.   Where approved by the fire code official."
      Section 503.6: Section 503.6 is amended to read as follows: "503.6
Security gates. The installation of security gates across a fire apparatus
access road or driveway shall be approved by the fire code official. Where
security gates are installed, they shall have an approved means of emergency
operation. The security gates and the emergency operation shall be maintained
operational at all times. Electric gate operators, where provided, shall be
listed in accordance with UL 325. Gates intended for automatic operation shall
be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM
F2200."
      Section 603.4: Section 603.4 is amended to read as follows: "603.4
Working space and clearances. Working space around electrical equipment shall
be provided in accordance with Section 110.26 of NFPA 70 for electrical
equipment rated 1,000 volts or less, and Section 110.32 of NFPA 70 for
electrical equipment rated over 1,000 volts. The minimum required working space
shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in width, 36 inches (914 mm) in depth
and 78 inches (1981 mm) in height in front of electrical service equipment.
Where the electrical service equipment is wider than 30 inches (762 mm), the
minimum working space shall be not less than the width of the equipment.
Storage of materials shall not be located within the designated working space.
The fire code official is authorized to require electric meters, rapid shut-
down switches, and other main electrical disconnects to be located on the
structure's non-shed or gable end side to protect from snow and ice shedding.
When ice or snow buildup is likely to occur above the electric meter, rapid
shut-down, and other main electrical disconnects, other approved protection
shall be required. The fire code official is authorized to require a
maintenance plan for vegetation, snow, and ice removal due to the safety of the
equipment and firefighter access challenges."
      Section 605.8: Section 605.8 is amended to read as follows: "605.8 Gas
meters. Above-ground gas meters, regulators and piping subject to damage shall
be protected by a barrier complying with Section 312 or otherwise protected in
an approved manner. Gas meters shall be located on the structure's non-shed or
gable end side to protect from snow and ice shedding. When ice or snow buildup
is likely to occur above the gas meter, other approved protection shall be
required. Snow and ice build-up around gas and other utility meters shall be
kept clear and maintained at all times. The fire code official is authorized to
require a maintenance plan for vegetation, snow, and ice removal due to the
safety of the equipment and firefighter access challenges."
      Section 903.3.1.1: Section 903.3.1.1 is amended to read as follows:
"903.2.1.1 NFPA 13 sprinkler systems. Where the provisions of this code require
that a building or portion thereof be equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with this section, sprinklers shall be installed
throughout in accordance with NFPA 13 and Vail Fire and Emergency Services fire
sprinkler installation standards except as provided in Sections 903.3.1.1.1-
903.3.1.1.3."
      Section 903.3.1.2: Section 903.3.1.2 is amended to read as follows:
"903.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems in Group R
occupancies shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with
NFPA 13R and Vail Fire and Emergency Services fire sprinkler installation
standards where the Group R occupancy meets all of the following conditions:
      1.   4 stories or less above grade plane.
      2.   For other than Group R-2 occupancies, the floor level of the highest
story is 30 feet (9,144 mm) or less above the lowest level of fire department
vehicle access. For Group R-2 occupancies, the roof assembly is less than 45
feet (13,716 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. The
height of the roof assembly shall be determined by measuring the distance from
the lowest required fire vehicle access road surface adjacent to the building
to the eave of the highest pitched roof, the intersection of the highest roof
to the exterior wall, or the top of the highest parapet, whichever yields the
greatest distance.
      3.   The floor level of the lowest story is 30 feet (9,144 mm) or less
below the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
      The number of stories of Group R occupancies constructed in accordance
with Sections 510.2 and 510.4 of the International Building Code shall be
measured from grade plane."
      Section 903.3.1.3: Section 903.3.1.3 is amended to read as follows:
"903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems that are
installed in 1- and 2-family dwellings and townhouses shall be installed in
accordance with NFPA 13D and Vail Fire and Emergency Services installation
standards."
      Section 903.4: Section 903.4 is amended to read as follows: "903.4
Sprinkler system supervision and alarms. Automatic sprinkler systems
supervision and alarms shall comply with Section 903.4.1."
         Section 903.4.1: Section 903.4.1 is amended by the deletion of all
exceptions.
      Section 907.2: Section 907.2 is amended to read as follows: "907.2 Where
required - new buildings and structures. An approved fire alarm system
installed in accordance with the provisions of this code, NFPA 72 and Vail Fire
and Emergency Services installation standards shall be provided in new
buildings, structures, 1- and 2-family dwellings and townhouses in accordance
with Sections 907.2.1-907.2.23 and provide occupant notification in accordance
with Section 907.5, unless other requirements are provided by another section
of this code. Not fewer than 1 manual fire alarm box shall be provided in an
approved location to initiate a fire alarm signal for fire alarm systems
employing automatic fire detectors or waterflow detection devices. Where other
sections of this code allow elimination of fire alarm boxes due to sprinklers,
a single fire alarm box shall be installed.
   Exceptions:
   1.   The manual fire alarm box is not required for fire alarm systems
dedicated to elevator recall control and supervisory service.
   2.   The manual fire alarm box is not required for Group R-2 occupancies
unless required by the fire code official to provide a means for fire watch
personnel to initiate an alarm during a sprinkler system impairment event.
Where provided, the manual fire alarm box shall not be located in an area that
is open to the public.
   3.   The manual fire alarm box is not required for fire alarm systems
dedicated to 1- and 2-family dwellings and townhouses."
      Section 907.2.11.2: Section 907.2.11.2 is amended to read as follows:
"907.2.11.2 Groups R-2, R-3, R-4, I-2. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms
shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4, I-2, and all
residential properties that are available for rent or lease, regardless of
occupant load, at all of the following locations:
   1.   On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the
immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
   2.   In each room used for sleeping purposes.
   3.   In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements but not
including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units
with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels,
a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower
level provided that the lower level is less than 1 full story below the upper
level."
      Section 1004.1: Section 1004.1 is amended to read as follows: "1004.1
Design occupant load. In determining means of egress requirements, the number
of occupants for whom means of egress facilities are provided shall be
determined in accordance with this section.
   Exceptions: Short-term rentals. Any property operating as a short-term
rental pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 4 of the Vail Town Code shall have means
of egress facilities requirements designated based on 2 occupants per room plus
an additional 2 occupants per residence. There shall be an additional exception
available for short-term rentals with multiple means of egress per room,
subject to the fire code official or designee's specific approval."
      Section 1207.11.3: Section 1207.11.3 is amended to read as follows:
"1207.11.3 Location. ESS shall be installed only in the following locations:
   1.   Detached garages and detached accessory structures.
   2.   Attached garages separated from the dwelling unit living space and
sleeping units in accordance with Section 406.3.2 of the International Building
Code.
   3.   Outdoors or on the exterior side of exterior walls located a minimum of
3 feet (914 mm) from doors and windows directly entering the dwelling unit,
except where smaller separation distances are permitted by the UL 9540 listing
and manufacturer's installation instructions.
   ESS shall not be installed in sleeping rooms, means of egress, or in closets
or spaces opening directly into sleeping rooms. (Material based on NFPA 855
2023 Ed.)"
(Ord. 8(2022) § 1; Ord. 13(2024) § 1)
§ 10-1-5 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
   The following amendments are hereby made to the International Energy
Conservation Code:
      Section C101.1: Section C101.1 is amended to read as follows: "C101.1
Title. These regulations shall be known as the Vail Commercial Energy Code."
      Section C202: Section C202 is amended by the addition of the following
definitions:
      ALL-ELECTRIC BUILDING. A building and building site that contains no
combustion equipment, or plumbing for combustion equipment, and that uses heat
pump technology as the primary supply for heating, cooling, and service water
heating loads.
      COMBUSTION EQUIPMENT. Any equipment or appliances used for space heating,
cooling, water heating (including pools and spas), cooking, clothes drying or
lighting that uses natural gas, propane, other fuel gas, or fuel oil.
      EV-CAPABLE PARKING SPACE. A parking space for an electric vehicle (EV)
with the electrical panel capacity and conduit installed to support future
implementation of EV charging with a 208/240-volt (or greater), 40-ampere (or
greater) circuit, and a dedicated, labeled space in the electrical panel.
      EV-INSTALLED PARKING SPACE. A parking space for an EV that has the EV
supply equipment (EVSE) fully installed from the electrical panel to the
parking space, including charging equipment.
      MIXED-FUEL BUILDING. A building and building site that contains
combustion equipment, or plumbing for combustion equipment.
      Section C405.14: Section C405.14 is added as follows: "C405.13 EV
charging. EV charging capabilities and required parking spaces shall be
determined according to Table C405.13. Exception: A request for a reduction in
the number of required EV installed parking spaces can be made if DC fast
charging stations are installed to fulfill the requirements of this subsection.
An EV parking study shall be submitted to support the request and based on the
findings of the analysis or study, the building official is authorized to
approve a reduction in the number of required EV- installed parking spaces."
      Section C410.1: Section C401.1 is added to read as follows: "C410.1 EV
charging. EV charging capabilities and required parking spaces shall be
determined according to Table C405.13.
   Exception: A request for a reduction in the number of required EV installed
parking spaces can be made if DC fast charging stations are installed to
fulfill the requirements of this subsection. An EV parking study shall be
submitted to support the request and based on the findings of the analysis or
study, the building official is authorized to approve a reduction in the number
of required EV-installed parking spaces."
      Table C410.1: Table C410.1 is added as follows:
   "TABLE C410.1 EV PARKING SPACESa
 
Property Type                           Space Requirements
All commercial properties (incl. multi- 5% EV-installed parking spaces + 50%
family developments)                    EV-capable parking spaces
a.   These provisions are for new construction only."
      Section R101.1: Section R101.1 is amended to read as follows: "R101.1
Title. These regulations shall be known as the Vail Residential Energy Code."
      Section R202: Section R202 is amended by the addition of the following
definitions:
      ALL-ELECTRIC BUILDING. A building and building site that contains no
combustion equipment, or plumbing for combustion equipment, and that uses heat
pump technology as the primary supply for heating, cooling, and service water
heating loads.
      COMBUSTION EQUIPMENT. Any equipment or appliances used for space heating,
cooling, water heating (including pools and spas), cooking, clothes drying or
lighting that uses natural gas, propane, other fuel gas, or fuel oil.
      EV-CAPABLE PARKING SPACE. An EV parking space with the electrical panel
capacity and conduit installed to support future implementation of EV charging
with a 208/240-volt (or greater), 40-ampere (or greater) circuit, and a
dedicated, labeled space in the electrical panel.
      MIXED-FUEL BUILDING. A building and building site that contains
combustion equipment or plumbing for combustion equipment.
      SOLAR-READY ZONE. A section of the roof or building overhang designated
and reserved for the future installation of a solar photovoltaic or solar
thermal system.
      Table R402.1.3: Table R402.1.3 is amended by deleting footnote g.
      Section R403.7: Section R403.7 is amended to read as follows: "R403.7
Equipment sizing and efficiency rating. Heating and cooling equipment shall be
sized in accordance with ACCA Manual S based on building loads calculated in
accordance with ACCA Manual J or other heating and cooling calculation
methodologies. All new heating and cooling equipment shall have an efficiency
rating of 92% AFUE or better. Exception: The replacement, alteration or repair
of an existing system."
      Section R403.14: Section R403.14 is added to read as follows: "R403.14
Gas fireplaces. Gas fueled fireplaces, fire pits and other outdoor fireplaces
and appliances require automatic shut-off controls with a maximum 60- minute
timer."
      Section R403.15: Section R403.15 is added as follows: "R403.15 Solar-
ready zone. New 1- and 2-family dwellings and townhouses with not less than 600
sq/ft (55.74 m2) of roof area oriented between 110 degrees and 270 degrees of
true north, shall comply with Sections R403.14.1-R403.7.
   Exceptions:
   1.   A new residential building with a permanently installed on-site
renewable energy system.
   2.   A building where all areas of the roof that would otherwise meet the
requirements of Section R403.14 are in full or partial shade for more than 70%
of daylight hours annually.
      R403.15.1. Construction documents shall indicate the solar-ready zone.
      R403.15.2 Solar-ready zone. The solar-ready zone shall be not less than
300 sq/ft (27.87 m2) exclusive of mandatory access or setback areas as required
by the Vail Fire Code. New townhouses of 3 stories or less in height above
grade plane and with a total floor area less than or equal to 2,000 sq/ft
(185.8 m2) per dwelling shall have a solar-ready zone area of not less than 150
sq/ft (13.94 m2). The solar-ready zone shall be composed of areas not less than
5 feet (1,524 mm) in width and not less than 80 sq/ft (7.44 m2) exclusive of
access or set-back areas as required by the Vail Fire Code.
      R403.15.3 Obstructions. Solar-ready zones shall be free from
obstructions, including without limitation vents, chimneys, and other roof-
mounted equipment.
      R403.15.4 Capped roof penetration sleeve. A capped roof penetration
sleeve shall be provided adjacent to all solar-ready zones located on roofs.
The capped roof penetration sleeve shall be sized to accommodate the future
photovoltaic system conduit and shall have an inside diameter of not less than
1.5 inches (38 mm).
      R403.15.5 Roof load documentation. The structural design loads for roof
dead load and roof live load shall be clearly indicated on the construction
documents.
      R403.15.6 Interconnection pathway. Construction documents shall indicate
pathways for routing of conduit or plumbing from the solar-ready zone to the
electrical service panel or service hot water system.
      R403.15.7 Electrical service reserved space. The main electrical service
panel shall have a reserved space to allow installation of a dual pole circuit
breaker for future solar electric installation and shall be labeled 'For Future
Solar Electric'. The reserved space shall be positioned at the opposite (load)
end from the input feeder location or main circuit location.
      R403.15.8 Certificate. A permanent certificate, indicating the solar-
ready zone and other requirements of this Section, shall be posted near the
electrical distribution panel, water heater or other conspicuous location by
the builder or registered design professional."
      Section R404.5: Section R404.5 is added as follows: "R404.5 EV charging.
EV charging capabilities and required parking spaces shall be determined
according to Table R404.5."
      Table R404.5: Table R404.5 is added as follows:
   "TABLE R404.5 EV PARKING SPACESa
 
Property Type                         Space Requirements
1- and 2-family dwellings, townhouses 1 EV-capable space per dwelling
a.   These provisions are for new construction only."
      Section R404.6: Section R404.6 is added as follows:
   "R404.6 Electric readiness. Systems using gas or propane to serve individual
dwelling units shall comply with R404.6.1 and R404.6.2.
      R404.6.1 Receptacle required. A dedicated electrical receptacle connected
to the electric panel with an appropriately sized branch circuit shall be
provided within 36 inches (914 mm) of each gas or propane water heater, clothes
dryer, and conventional cooking appliance.
      R404.6.2 Receptacle identification. The branch circuits within the
electric panel serving the future electric appliances shall be appropriately
labeled for their intended use."
(Ord. 8(2022) § 1; Ord. 13(2024) § 1)
§ 10-1-6 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE.
   The Town hereby adopts, by reference, all amendments to the International
Plumbing Code adopted by the State of Colorado and referred to as the Colorado
Plumbing Code, in addition to the following amendments:
      Section 101.1: Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows: "101.1 Title.
These regulations shall be known as the Vail Plumbing Code."
      Section 103.1: Section 103.1 is amended to read as follows: "103.1
Creation of agency. The Town's Building Department is hereby created and the
official in charge shall be known as the building official. The function of
this agency shall be the implementation, administration, and enforcement of
this code."
      Section 115.4: Section 115.4 is deleted.
      Section 305.4.1: Section 305.4.1 is amended to read as follows: "305.4.1
Sewer depth. Per Eagle River Water and Sanitation District (ERWSD) standards,
building sewers shall be installed not less than 54 inches (1,372 mm) below
grade."
      Section 903.1: Section 903.1 is amended to read as follows: "903.1 Roof
extension unprotected. Open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be
terminated not less than 16 inches (406 mm) above the roof."
      Section 903.2: Section 903.2 is amended to read as follows: "903.2 Frost
closure. Vent extensions through a roof or wall shall be not less than 3 inches
(76 mm) in diameter. Any increase in size of the vent shall be made not less
than 1 foot (305 mm) inside the thermal envelope of the building."
(Ord. 8(2022) § 1; Ord. 13(2024) § 1)
§ 10-1-7 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.
   The Town hereby adopts, by reference, all amendments to the International
Fuel Gas Code adopted by the State of Colorado and referred to as the Colorado
Fuel Gas Code, in addition to the following amendments:
      Section 101.1: Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows: "101.1 Title.
These regulations shall be known as the Vail Fuel Gas Code."
      Section 103.1: Section 103.1 is amended to read as follows: "103.1
Creation of agency. The Town's Building Department is hereby created and the
official in charge shall be known as the building official. The function of
this agency shall be the implementation, administration, and enforcement of
this code."
      Section 115.4: Section 115.4 is deleted.
      Table 503.8: Table 503.8 is amended as follows:
 
A Clearance above finished grade level, veranda, porch, deck, or 36 inches
  balcony
(All other values within the table are unchanged.)
(Ord. 8(2022) § 1; Ord. 13(2024) § 1)
§ 10-1-8 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
   The following amendments are hereby made to the International Mechanical
Code:
      Section 101.1: Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows: "101.1 Title.
These regulations shall be known as the Vail Mechanical Code."
      Section 103.1: Section 103.1 is amended to read as follows: "103.1
Creation of agency. The Town's Building Department is hereby created and the
official in charge shall be known as the building official. The function of
this agency shall be the implementation, administration, and enforcement of
this code."
      Section 115.4: Section 115.4 is deleted.
      Section 401.4: Section 401.4 is amended by the addition of the following
text: "5. The bottom of intake openings shall be located not less than 36
inches (914 mm) above finished grade."
      Section 701.3: Section 701.3 is added to read as follows: "701.3
Combustion air ducts. Combustion air ducts shall terminate to the outside a
minimum of 36 inches (914 mm) above finished grade."
      Section 804.3.4: Section 804.3.4 is amended by the addition of the
following: "6. The bottom of the vent termination shall be located not less
than 36 inches (914 mm) above finished grade."
(Ord. 8(2022) § 1; Ord. 13(2024) § 1)
§ 10-1-9 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
   The following amendments are hereby made to the International Existing
Building Code:
      Section 101.1: Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows: "101.1 Title:
These regulations shall be known as the Vail Existing Building Code."
      Section 103.1: Section 103.1 is amended to read as follows: "103.1
Creation of agency. The Town's Building Department is hereby created and the
official in charge shall be known as the building official. The function of
this agency shall be the implementation, administration, and enforcement of
this code."
      Section 101.4.2: Section 101.4.2 is amended to read as follows: "101.4.2
Buildings previously occupied. The legal occupancy of any building existing on
the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without
change, except as is specifically covered in this code, the Vail Fire Code, or
as deemed necessary by the code official for safety."
(Ord. 8(2022) § 1; Ord. 13(2024) § 1)
§ 10-1-10 AMENDMENTS TO THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE, NFPA 70.
   The Town hereby adopts, by reference, all amendments to the National
Electrical Code adopted by the State of Colorado and referred to as the
Colorado Electrical Code.
(Ord. 8(2022) § 1; Ord. 13(2024) § 1)
§ 10-1-11 AMENDMENTS TO THE UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS
BUILDINGS.
   The following amendments are hereby made to the Uniform Code for the
Abatement of Dangerous Buildings:
      Section 301: Section 301 is amended to read as follows, including the
addition of the following definitions: "Section 301 General. For the purpose of
this code, certain terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall be
construed as specified in this section or as specified in the Vail Building
Code.
      BUILDING CODE is the International Building Code, as adopted and amended
by the Vail Building Code.
      DANGEROUS BUILDING is any building or structure deemed to be dangerous
under Section 302 of this code."
(Ord. 8(2022) § 1; Ord. 13(2024 § 1)
§ 10-1-12 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any code
adopted in this Chapter.
   (B)   Violations of this Chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided
in § 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition, the Town may maintain an action for damages,
declaratory relief, specific performance, injunction, or any other appropriate
relief for a violation of any provision of this Chapter.
(Ord. 8(2022) § 1; Ord. 13(2024) § 1) Penalty, see §
1-4-1
§ 10-1-13 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeal of Building Official or Fire Code Official actions:
      (1)   Authority: The Building and Fire Code Appeals Board (the "Board")
shall have the authority to hear and decide appeals from any order or decision
of the Building Official or Fire Code Official under this Chapter. An appeal
shall be based on a claim that the intent of this code or the rules legally
adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this
Chapter do not fully apply, or an equivalent or better form of construction is
proposed. The Board shall not have the authority to waive any specific
requirement of this Chapter.
      (2)   Initiation: An appeal may be initiated by any resident, property
owner, or contractor adversely affected by any order or decision of the
Building Official or Fire Code Official under this Chapter. Failure to file a
timely appeal shall constitute a waiver of any rights under this Chapter to
appeal any order, decision, determination or interpretation by the Building
Official or Fire Code Official.
      (3)   Procedure:
         (a)   A written notice of appeal shall be filed with the Community
Development Department within fourteen (14) days of the decision or order being
appealed. Upon the filing of the appeal, the Building Official shall gather and
forward all records concerning the subject matter of the appeal to the Board.
         (b)   The appeal shall be considered by the Board at its next
regularly scheduled meeting.
         (c)   The Board may affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the
Building Official or Fire Code Official, or schedule a hearing. Failure of the
Board to act within thirty (30) days of receipt of the appeal information shall
be deemed concurrence with the action of the Building Official or Fire Code
Official.
         (d)   If a hearing is deemed necessary, it shall be held within thirty
(30) days of the first consideration by the Board. Written notice shall be sent
to the appellant a minimum of seven (7) days prior to the scheduled hearing.
The Board may grant one continuance of the hearing of up to thirty (30) days.
         (e)   On all appeals, the Board shall, make findings of fact based on
the evidence presented and issue a written order.
   (B)   Appeal of Board actions:
      (1)   Authority: The Town Council shall have the authority to hear and
decide appeals from any order of the Board.
      (2)   Initiation: An appeal may be initiated by any resident, property
owner, or contractor adversely affected by any order of the Board. Failure to
file a timely appeal shall constitute a waiver of any rights to appeal any
order of the Board.
      (3)   Decision: The Town Council may affirm, reverse, or modify the order
of the Board. The Town Council shall make findings of fact based on the
evidence presented.
      (4)   Final Decision: The decision of the Town Council shall be final,
subject only to judicial review by a court of competent jurisdiction under
C.R.C.P. 106(a)(4).
(Ord. 3 (2023) § 2; Ord. 13(2024) § 1)
CHAPTER 2: SPECIAL HISTORIC AND ARCHITECTURAL STRUCTURES
Section
10-2-1 Designation; criteria
10-2-2 Application requirements
10-2-3 Hearing date
10-2-4 Planning And Environmental Commission determination
10-2-5 Designation not to imply safety
§ 10-2-1 DESIGNATION; CRITERIA.
   For the purposes of the currently adopted edition of the Building Code that
describes historical buildings, if a building or structure within the town
shall be designated as having special historical or architectural significance
and such building or structure meets the following criteria:
   (A)   It has been in existence for at least 50 years; and
   (B)   It has importance in the history, architecture, archeology or culture
of the town as determined by the Planning and Environmental Commission.
(Ord. 11(1983) § 2; Ord. 25(1991) § 5; 1997 Code; Ord. 14(2015) § 1)
§ 10-2-2 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Anyone wishing to have a building or structure designated as architecturally
or historically significant shall file an application with the Planning and
Environmental Commission, which application shall be made upon a form provided
by the Administrator which shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name and address of the owner or applicant;
   (B)   A legal description, street address or other identifying data
concerning this site;
   (C)   A picture of the building or structure;
   (D)   A statement giving the age of the proposed building or structure;
   (E)   A brief description as to why the applicant considers the building or
structure to have historical or architectural significance; and
   (F)   Such additional material as the Administrator may request or the
applicant may submit pertinent to the application and to the findings
prerequisite to the issuance of a designation.
(Ord. 11(1983) § 2)
§ 10-2-3 HEARING DATE.
   Upon receipt of an application for the designation of a building or
structure as having historical or architectural significance, the Planning and
Environmental Commission shall set a date for hearing to determine whether such
building or structure shall be designated as historically or architecturally
significant.
(Ord. 11(1983) § 3)
§ 10-2-4 PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION DETERMINATION.
   The criteria the Planning and Environmental Commission shall use to
determine whether to designate a building or structure as architecturally or
historically significant shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   The association of such building or structure which events have made
it a significant contribution to the history of the town or the surrounding
area, the State of Colorado, or the United States;
   (B)   The connection of such property with persons significant in such
history;
   (C)   Distinctive characteristics of a type, period, method of construction;
   (D)   The geographic importance of the property; and
   (E)   The possibility of important discovery related to prehistory or
history.
(Ord. 11(1983) § 4)
§ 10-2-5 DESIGNATION NOT TO IMPLY SAFETY.
   Neither the designation of any building or structure as having historic or
architectural significance pursuant to this chapter nor the authorization by
the Building Official for repairs, alterations and additions without
conformance to the Building Code pursuant to the currently adopted edition
thereof, shall not imply that said building is in a safe condition, or without
hazard.
(Ord. 11(1983) § 5; 1997 Code; Ord. 14(2015) § 1)
CHAPTER 3: IN-BUILDING PUBLIC SAFETY RADIO SYSTEM COVERAGE
Section
10-3-1 Purpose
10-3-2 Radio coverage
10-3-3 Application of provisions
10-3-4 Enhanced amplification system
10-3-5 Testing
10-3-6 Qualifications of testing personnel
10-3-7 Property owner maintenance responsibility
10-3-8 Exemptions
10-3-9 Failure to comply
10-3-10 Appeals
§ 10-3-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards within certain
buildings in the Town of Vail to ensure a reasonable degree of reliable
emergency service communications from within certain buildings and structures
in the town, between public safety providers, and to and from the Town of Vail
emergency communication center.
(Ord. 1(2007) § 1)
§ 10-3-2 RADIO COVERAGE.
   Except as otherwise provided, no person shall erect, construct or modify any
building or structure or any part thereof, or cause the same to be done, which
fails to support adequate radio coverage for public safety agencies, including,
but not limited to, police, fire, emergency medical services and public works
departments. For purposes of this chapter, adequate radio coverage shall
include those specifications set forth in the Town of Vail in-building public
safety radio system coverage specifications, which may be amended by resolution
of the Town Council and which shall be kept in the office of the Town Clerk. A
certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any building or structure
which fails to comply with this requirement.
(Ord. 1(2007) § 1)
§ 10-3-3 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, definitions of basement, building,
structure, occupant load and related elements shall be as defined in the
International Building Code. To the extent that the provisions of this chapter
apply to structures and buildings already in existence at the time of the
adoption of this chapter, the owner of said structure or building shall have 18
months, from the time the owner is notified in writing by the Town of Vail of
the need to comply, to file a plan of compliance. Thereafter, the owner shall
have an additional 18 months to bring the building or structure into compliance
herewith.
   (A)   Buildings and structures greater than 25,000 gross square feet or
modifications to existing buildings or structures which cause the buildings to
be greater than 25,000 gross square feet.
   (B)   Existing buildings and structures of less than 25,000 gross square
feet that have occupancy loads of over 100 persons, regardless of the
occupancy.
   (C)   All basements where the occupancy load is greater than 50 persons,
regardless of the occupancy.
   (D)   All sublevel parking areas where radio communications do not meet the
minimum requirements as set forth by this chapter.
(Ord. 1(2007) § 1)
§ 10-3-4 ENHANCED AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM.
   Where buildings and structures are required to provide in-building
amplification systems to achieve adequate signal strength, such buildings and
structures may use any or all of the following: radiating cable systems,
internal multiple antenna systems with a frequency range as specified, with
amplification systems as needed, or any other system approved by the Town of
Vail.
(Ord. 1(2007) § 1)
§ 10-3-5 TESTING.
   In-building amplification systems as required by this chapter shall undergo
initial testing, annual testing and periodic five-year testing in accordance
with the Town of Vail in-building public safety radio system coverage
specifications, which are incorporated into this chapter by reference and which
shall remain on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
(Ord. 1(2007) § 1)
§ 10-3-6 QUALIFICATIONS OF TESTING PERSONNEL.
   All tests shall be conducted, documented and signed by a person in
possession of a current Federal Communications Commission (“FCC”) general
radiotelephone operator license. All test records shall be retained at the
inspected premises by the building owner and a copy submitted to Vail Fire and
Emergency Services (Fire Department) within 30 days of when the test has been
conducted. In the event the test shall fail to comply with the minimum
requirements, appropriate repairs shall be made and additional tests conducted
until tests meet the minimum requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1(2007) § 1)
§ 10-3-7 PROPERTY OWNER MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   Upon verification of the initial testing:
   (A)   The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the system;
   (B)   A copy of the maintenance contract, excluding costs, shall be provided
to the Town of Vail Fire Department with the name of contractor, who will
supply a 24 hour, seven day per week emergency response within four hours after
notification by the Town of Vail or the property owner;
   (C)   The maintenance contract shall also contain information as to contact
personnel with phone numbers. Property owners shall also submit information to
the Vail public safety communications center with phone numbers for the
property owner and manager; and
   (D)   The property owner shall also be responsible for making any repairs,
replacement or upgrades to the systems as directed by the Town of Vail, should
the system fail or no longer work in the future.
(Ord. 1(2007) § 1)
§ 10-3-8 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Single-family/duplex residences and attached garages constructed under
the International Residential Code are exempt from the requirements in this
chapter.
   (B)   Single-family/duplex residences and attached garages constructed under
the International Building Code, under 25,000 gross square feet, are exempt
from the requirements in this chapter.
   (C)   Buildings that meet the minimum inbound and outbound signal strength
specifications as delineated in the Town of Vail in-building public safety
radio system coverage specifications.
(Ord. 1(2007) § 1)
§ 10-3-9 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be grounds for
the Town of Vail to refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy or to revoke any
previously issued certificate of occupancy for the building or structure.
Building owners who fail to comply may be subject to additional enforcement
actions as provided for in this code or Colorado law, which may include a
summons and complaint and/or injunctive relief.
(Ord. 1(2007) § 1)
§ 10-3-10 APPEALS.
   A written appeal may be made to the Building Code Board of Appeals regarding
the revocation of the certificate of occupancy, or a failure to issue a
certificate of occupancy, within 30 days of the revocation or from the date of
the town’s decision to not issue said certificate. Appeals shall be made to the
Town of Vail Building Code Board of Appeals to provide for reasonable
interpretations of the provisions of this chapter. The Board of Appeals shall
render timely decisions and findings in writing to the Town of Vail Fire Chief,
with a duplicate copy to the appellant.
(Ord. 1(2007) § 1)
CHAPTER 4: CULTIVATION OF MARIJUANA ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
Section
10-4-1 Purpose
10-4-2 Definitions
10-4-3 Plant limit
10-4-4 Limitation on impacts
10-4-5 Safety regulations
10-4-6 Violation; penalty
§ 10-4-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the cultivation of marijuana on
residential property in the town, regardless of whether the marijuana is for
medical or recreational use.
(Ord. 4(2018) § 1)
§ 10-4-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
   MARIJUANA. All parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis whether growing or
not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the
plant, its seeds or its resin, including marijuana concentrate, but excluding
industrial hemp, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to
prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink or other product.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. A single-family dwelling, multi-family dwelling, two-
family dwelling or other dwelling unit, as those terms are defined in Title 12
of this code, including any associated accessory structures and front, rear or
side yards. (Ord. 4(2018) § 1)
§ 10-4-3 PLANT LIMIT.
   Regardless of whether the marijuana is for medical or recreational use, it
is unlawful for a person to knowingly cultivate more than six marijuana plants
on residential property or to knowingly allow more than six marijuana plants to
be cultivated on residential property.
(Ord. 4(2018) § 1)
§ 10-4-4 LIMITATION ON IMPACTS.
   The cultivation of marijuana on residential property shall not be
perceptible from outside the residential property, including without
limitation:
   (A)   Common visual observation, including any form of signage;
   (B)   Odor;
   (C)   Light pollution or glare; or
   (D)   Undue vehicle or foot traffic, including excess parking.
(Ord. 4(2018) § 1)
§ 10-4-5 SAFETY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The cultivation of marijuana on residential property shall meet the
requirements of all applicable Building and Life/Safety Codes.
   (B)   The cultivation of marijuana on residential property shall comply with
all applicable water and sewer regulations.
   (C)   The use of flammable gas as a solvent in the extraction of
tetrahydrocannabinol or any other cannabinoid is prohibited on any residential
property.
   (D)   The cultivation of marijuana on residential property is and shall be
deemed consent by the person cultivating the marijuana, upon reasonable notice,
for the town to inspect the premises to determine compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 4(2018) § 1)
§ 10-4-6 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   It is unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter. Violations of this
chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 4(2018) § 1)
TITLE 11: SIGN REGULATIONS
Editor’s note:
   All photographic representations of signs contained in this title are on
file on the office of the Town Clerk.
CHAPTER 1: DESCRIPTION, PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
Section
11-1-1 Description
11-1-2 Purpose
11-1-3 Applicability
11-1-4 Severability
§ 11-1-1 DESCRIPTION.
   This title may be cited as the SIGN REGULATIONS for the town, and shall be
incorporated as Title 11 of this code.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-1-2 PURPOSE.
   (A)   General purpose. This title is enacted for the purpose of promoting
the health, safety, and general welfare of the Town of Vail and to promote the
coordinated and harmonious design and placement of signs in the town in a
manner that will conserve and enhance its natural environment and its
established character as a resort and residential community of the highest
quality.
   (B)   Specific purpose. This title is intended to achieve the following
specific purposes:
      (1)   To describe and enable the fair and consistent enforcement of signs
in the Town of Vail;
      (2)   To encourage the establishment of well designed, creative signs
that enhance the unique character of Vail’s village atmosphere;
      (3)   To preserve a successful and high quality business environment that
is aided by signs that identify, direct and inform the public;
      (4)   To aid in providing for the growth of an orderly, safe, beautiful,
and viable community; and
      (5)   To preserve freedom of expression in the Town of Vail.
   (C)   This title is not intended to restrict noncommercial speech on the
basis of its content, viewpoint or message.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-1-3 APPLICABILITY.
   Except as provided elsewhere in this title, the design, placement and use of
any signs shall be in compliance with all of the regulations specified in this
title. All signs in the Town of Vail are subject to the design guidelines and
standards (Chapter 5 of this title) and design review.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-1-4 SEVERABILITY.
   The severability of any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase, as
set forth in §
1-2-4 of this town code.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
CHAPTER 2: DEFINITIONS
Section
11-2-1 Definitions enumerated
§ 11-2-1 DEFINITIONS ENUMERATED.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign, and its supporting structure, that has ceased to be
used for the display of sign copy.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Director of the Department of Community Development or
his or her designee.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Any person who will suffer an adverse effect to an
interest protected or furthered by this title. The alleged adverse interest may
be shared in common with other members of the community at large, but shall
exceed in degree the general interest in community good shared by all persons.
   ANIMATED SIGN. Any sign or part of a sign that changes physical position by
any movement or rotation or that gives the visual impression of such movement
or rotation.
   AWNING or CANOPY. A permanently roofed shelter covering a sidewalk, building
entrance, window or other outdoor space. This shelter may be wholly or
partially supported by a building, columns, poles or braces extending from the
ground.
   BUILDING FRONTAGE. The horizontal, linear dimension of any side of a
building that has a usable public entrance that parallels a major vehicular or
pedestrian way or other major circulation area.
   BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign permitted based on building frontage,
regardless of the number of tenants residing therein.
   BUSINESS FRONTAGE. The horizontal, linear dimension of any side of an above
grade level that faces a major vehicular or pedestrian way and has its own
public entrance for the exclusive use of said business.
   BUSINESS SIGN. A sign placed on a business frontage, typically as a wall or
projecting sign.
   BUSINESS, VACATED. A commercial entity that has been closed and vacated for
more than 90 days without intent to reopen.
   CHANGEABLE COPY. A manually operated sign that displays content that can be
easily changed or altered.
   CLEARANCE. The vertical distance from existing grade to the lowest hanging
point of any projecting/hanging sign or flag.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A temporary sign located on a parcel of property, on
which construction activities of any type are being actively performed.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign located within five feet of an entrance or exit to
a lot, for any building on the lot, or for parking for the lot.
   DISPLAY BOX. A freestanding or wall sign that is enclosed in glass or a
similar clear material on at least one side.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER. A sign that contains changing messages or images
composed of electronically illuminated segments and/or a series of grid lights,
including, but not limited to, cathode ray, LED, plasma, LCD, fiber optic or
other electronic media or technology.
   ELECTRONIC SIGN. A sign utilizing video screens, variable message, digital
display and similar features. Illumination sources may include, but are not
limited to, LCD, LED, incandescent, and other similar light sources. Messages
may roll, scroll, dissolve and alternate periodically.
   ERECT. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, mount, suspend or affix a
sign; this also includes the painting of wall signs, murals or supergraphics.
   FINISHED GRADE. The existing level of a property after any development or
construction activity and prior to the erection of a sign.
   FIRST FLOOR OR STREET LEVEL. For the purposes of calculating allowable sign
area, first floor or street level shall be any floor, or portion of any floor,
of a structure located at or nearest to (either above or below) the level of
the adjacent vehicular or pedestrian way, as determined by the Administrator.
More than one floor, or portion of floors, may be defined as first floor or
street level within a single structure.
   FLAG. Any fabric or similar lightweight material typically attached to a
staff or pole, which is intended to be permanently affixed to the ground or
attached to a building.
   FLASHING SIGN. Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign that exhibits
changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A single or multi-faced sign that is detached from a
building and is affixed to a supporting structure or imbedded in and extending
from the ground.
   GOVERNMENT SIGN. Any sign erected or installed by a federal, state, county
or local government agency.
   HEIGHT. For the purposes of this title, the height above existing grade to
the highest part of a sign and its structures, unless otherwise noted or
described.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign emitting or reflecting a steady suffused or glowing
light.
   ILLUMINATION, DIRECT. Lighting by means of an unshielded light source
whereby the light source is directly visible to the viewer.
   ILLUMINATION, HALO. An internal light source, that is not visible to the
viewer, for a sign making use of opaque surfaces such that light only shines
through the back and sides of the sign.
   ILLUMINATION, INDIRECT. A light source separated from the sign that
illuminates the sign’s surface by means of spotlights or similar fixtures with
reflective housings that control and direct light onto the sign area; the
indirect light source is not visible to the viewer.
   ILLUMINATION, INTERNAL. A light source that is not directly visible to the
viewer and is within a sign that makes use of a translucent screening;
prohibited in the Town of Vail, excluding for government signs.
   MASONRY INSCRIPTION. Any text or numeral etched into masonry.
   MURAL. A work of art or a painting that is applied to, and made an integral
part of, an exterior wall.
   NEIGHBORHOOD SIGN. A sign located within common or jointly owned spaces in a
residential district.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign that was approved by the Town of Vail, and
erected and maintained prior to the enactment of this title and any amendments
thereto, but that fails to conform to all applicable regulations and
restrictions of this title.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign located on a premise not owned or rented by the
owner of the sign.
   OPEN HOUSE. The period of time during which a specific property is actively
listed for sale, as evidenced by such parcel’s listing in a multiple listing
service or other real estate listing service, and is open for viewing by
potential buyers or renters.
   OPEN HOUSE SIGN. A temporary sign used in association with a property
conducting an open house.
   PORTABLE SIGN. A sign that is not permanently attached to the ground, a
building or a structure. This does not include a vehicle mounted sign as
defined herein.
   PRIVATE WARNING SIGN. A sign designed to warn others of specific dangers or
regulations on the property on which the sign is erected.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign that is attached to a building, extending
horizontally beyond the surface of the building to which it is attached.
   PUBLIC ENTRANCE. An entrance to a building or business that is customarily
used or intended for use by the general public. Fire exits, employee entrances,
loading dock entrances not generally used by the public, French doors that open
onto a patio but are not used as a primary entrance and other similar entrances
shall not be considered PUBLIC ENTRANCES. A double door shall be counted as one
PUBLIC ENTRANCE.
   QUANTITY. The number of signs allowed a business or building.
   REFLECTIVE SURFACE. Any material or device that has the effect of
intensifying reflected light, including but not limited to, Scotchlite®, Day-
Glo®, glass and luminous paint.
   RESIDENTIAL SIGN. A small sign permitted for every residence in the Town of
Vail.
   SIGN. Any object, device, display, structure or fixture situated in the
public view and involving graphics, colors, symbols, written copy or
illumination and which is used to communicate, advertise, draw attention to or
identify an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event or location by any means including words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination or projected images.
   SIGN DISTRICT. Any one of three areas designated by the Town of Vail in this
title, each of which is subject to different standards.
   SIGN MAINTENANCE. The replacing, repairing or repainting of a sign and/or
its structure due to ordinary wear and tear, weathering or accident.
   SIGNPOSTS AND POLES. Any vertical upright(s) that supports a freestanding
sign, that is not attached to or braced by any other structure.
   SIGN PROGRAM. A master plan designed to show the number and relationship of
signs for any building or cluster of buildings that houses multiple tenants and
is therefore allowed multiple signs.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. The supports, uprights, braces, hanging devices and
framework of a sign.
   SITE. As defined in §
12-2-2 of the Vail town code.
   SKI BASE AREA. For the purpose of regulating ski base signs, any area within
Vail’s Ski Base Sign District.
   SKI BASE SIGN. A sign for use within the Town of Vail’s Ski Base Sign
District.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign that is intended for a definite and limited period of
display that is not permanently affixed to a structure or sign structure.
   THEATER. An establishment for the rehearsal and presentation of performing
arts and/or the showing of movies or motion pictures.
   VEHICLE SIGN. A sign that is painted, attached to, or placed on a vehicle or
the bed of a trailer, when the vehicle or trailer is parked on a public right-
of-way or public property, or on private property so as to be visible from a
public right-of-way, for the primary purpose of advertising products or
directing people to a business or activity on the same or nearby premises,
excluding a vehicle sign when the vehicle is primarily used for business
purposes other than advertising.
   WALL SIGN. A sign that is attached to, painted onto or erected upon the wall
of a building or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane
parallel to the face of the wall.
   WINDOW SIGN. A sign installed upon or within three feet of a window that is
visible from the nearest pedestrian or vehicular way. This term does not
include merchandise displays.
   ZONE. A zoning district as described in Title 12, “Zoning Regulations”, of
this code (e.g., ABD or CC3). A ZONE is not the equivalent of a sign
“district”, as described in this title.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
CHAPTER 3: ADMINISTRATION
Section
11-3-1 Administration of sign regulations
11-3-2 Liability
§ 11-3-1 ADMINISTRATION OF SIGN REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Administrator.
      (1)   Generally. The Administrator of this title as defined in section
12-3-1, “Administrator; Appointment”, of this code.
      (2)   Responsibilities. The Administrator, and his or her designees,
shall be responsible for such duties as prescribed in this title and shall be
responsible for enforcement of the sign regulations. The Administrator shall
have the right to enter on any site for the purpose of investigation or
inspection related to any provision of this title, provided that the right of
entry shall be exercised only at reasonable hours and that in no case shall any
structure be entered in the absence of the owner or tenant without the written
order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (3)   Enforcement. The Administrator may serve notice indicating the
nature of any violation, or requiring the removal of any sign or structure in
violation of this title, on the owner or his or her authorized agent, or a
tenant, or on any other person who commits or participates in any violation of
this title. The Administrator may call upon the Town Attorney to institute
necessary legal proceedings and the Chief of Police and his or her authorized
agents to assist in the enforcement of this title.
   (B)   Design Review Board. The Design Review Board, as established by Title
3, Chapter 4 of this code, shall be responsible for the duties prescribed in
this title, which entail the review of sign applications.
   (C)   Amendments. The regulations prescribed in this title may be amended or
repealed according to §
12-3-7, “Amendment” of this code.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-3-2 LIABILITY.
   The provisions of this title shall not limit the liability of any person who
erects or owns any sign from personal injury or property damage resulting from
the placing of a sign, or resulting from the negligence or willful acts of such
person or his or her agents, employees or workers, in the construction,
maintenance, repair or removal of any sign erected in accordance with a permit
issued under the provisions of this title. The provisions of this title shall
not impose upon the Town of Vail, its officers, employees or the Design Review
Board, any responsibility or liability by reason of the approval of any sign.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
CHAPTER 4: SIGN APPLICATION PROCEDURES
Section
11-4-1 Submittal requirements
11-4-2 Sign application review; criteria for decision
§ 11-4-1 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any sign erected within the Town of Vail shall be regulated by this
title and is subject to design review by the staff and/or Design Review Board
of the Town of Vail.
   (B)   The following application requirements must be met for any sign that
is to be erected within the Town of Vail.
      (1)   Sign application. A sign application for the erection of an
individual sign consists of an application for design review which must be
obtained from the Town of Vail’s Community Development Department, properly
completed per the instructions, and returned with the appropriate materials to
the staff in order to begin the two-phase review process listed in §
11-4-2 of this chapter.
      (2)   Application fee. A reasonable application filing fee shall be set
by the Vail Town Council to include the cost of the Town of Vail administration
time and other expenses involved in the review of the application. The fee
shall be paid at the time that the application is submitted and shall not be
refundable.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-4-2 SIGN APPLICATION REVIEW; CRITERIA FOR DECISION.
   Each sign application is subject to the following two levels of review:
staff review and Design Review Board (DRB) review.
   (A)   Staff review. The Community Development Department of the Town of Vail
shall accept for review the properly completed sign application.
      (1)   If the staff determines that the sign application unquestionably
meets the standards of this title, including the design guidelines and
standards as they are stated in Chapter 5 of this title and the technical
requirements as they are stated in Chapters 6 and 7 of this title, staff shall
then approve the application. All applications approved by the staff shall be
listed on the next publicly posted agenda of the Design Review Board.
      (2)   If the staff determines that the sign application meets the
standards of this title, but does not unquestionably meet the design guidelines
and standards as they are stated in Chapter 5 of this title and the technical
requirements as they are stated in Chapters 6 and 7 of this title, staff will
schedule the application for review by the Design Review Board at their next
hearing, held the first and third Wednesdays of each month.
      (3)   If the staff determines that the sign application does not meet the
standards outlined in this title, including the design guidelines and standards
as they are stated in Chapter 5 of this title and the technical requirements as
they are stated in Chapters 6 and 7 of this title, staff shall deny the
application. Upon denial of the application based on lack of compliance with
any part of this title, the applicant will be notified of the denial in writing
and may submit a new application to the staff, file an appeal of the staff
decision to the Design Review Board, or file an application for a variance in
accordance with Chapter 10, “Variances And Appeals”, of this title.
   (B)   Design Review Board review. The Design Review Board will review all
sign applications scheduled on their agenda by staff, in the required presence
of the applicant or such applicant’s representative, to ascertain the
proposal’s conformance with the design guidelines and standards as listed in
Chapter 5 of this title and the technical requirements as listed in Chapters 6
and 7 of this title.
      (1)   Upon determination of compliance with the design guidelines and
standards listed in Chapter 5 of this title and the technical requirements as
listed in Chapters 6 and 7 of this title, the Design Review Board will approve,
or approve with conditions, the applicant’s sign proposal. The applicant will
be notified in writing of the approval and any conditions placed on the
approval, and may then erect the sign according to the approved application.
      (2)   Upon Design Review Board denial of the application based on the
design guidelines and standards listed in Chapter 5 of this title and/or the
technical requirements listed in Chapters 6 and 7 of this title, the applicant
will be notified in writing of the reasons for denial and may submit a new
application to staff according to the recommendations from the Design Review
Board. The applicant may file an appeal to the Town Council if he or she
chooses not to submit a new application to staff (see Chapter 10, “Variances
And Appeals”, of this title).
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
CHAPTER 5: DESIGN GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS; SIGN MEASUREMENT
Section
11-5-1 Purpose
11-5-2 Design guidelines
11-5-3 Design standards
11-5-4 Sign measurement
§ 11-5-1 PURPOSE.
   The design guidelines and standards exist to provide direction for signs
within the Town of Vail that enhance local streetscapes and provide aesthetic
consistency with both the built and natural environment. The guidelines and
standards are intended to encourage expression and creativity. The design
guidelines make use of the word “should”, to allow for subjectivity and
creativity, whereas the design standards make use of the word “shall”,
signifying strict interpretation and enforcement. The sign measurement section
exists to ensure that measurement of sign area is properly calculated in order
to facilitate signage that upholds the purpose of this title.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-5-2 DESIGN GUIDELINES.
   Any sign erected within the Town of Vail should:
   (A)   Be consistent with the scale and architecture already present in the
town. Sign location, configuration, mounting structure, framing design, and
size should be aesthetically harmonious with the mountain setting and the
alpine village atmosphere of the town;
   (B)   Be compatible with the placement of surrounding signs. Similar signs
should not be placed within close proximity of each other, but should instead
incorporate variety and visual interest within the “view corridor” that they
are placed. Signs shall not create visual clutter. The staff shall review all
proposed signs in the context of adjacent signage to verify that the sign is
appropriately placed;
   (C)   Be composed of predominately natural materials.
      (1)   Be composed of predominately natural materials which may include,
but are not limited to, painted, stained, solid, or carved wood; brick; stone;
wrought iron or metals such as copper or brass that have been treated to
prevent reflective glare; nonreflective glass and stained glass; other
naturally textured building materials.
      (2)   Plastic and other synthetic materials that are not naturally
textured, such as sign foam, vinyl or Plexiglas®, are discouraged.
   (D)   Use natural colors.
      (1)   Earth tones. Full spectrum of soil, clay, and metallic colors;
      (2)   Neutrals. Off whites to deep brown and black; and
      (3)   Bright colors. Bright colors should be used only as accents.
   (E)   Use creative graphics and lettering. The creative use of depth,
relief, shading, three- dimensional projections and other pleasing textural
qualities is generally encouraged. Three-dimensional projections shall not be
calculated as part of total sign area, but shall be subject to design review;
   (F)   Be surrounded by landscaping. Landscaping, when appropriate, should be
designed in harmony with surrounding natural landforms and native plants
(xeriscaping); and
   (G)   Use inconspicuous lighting. Lighting should be integrated into the
overall design of the sign, both in color and placement, and should be of no
greater illumination than is necessary to make the sign visible at night.
Recessed and indirect light sources are encouraged.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-5-3 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Any sign erected within the Town of Vail shall conform to the following
standards.
   (A)   Compatibility. Signs shall be visually compatible with the size of
surrounding structures and other signage and shall not visually dominate the
structure or business to which they belong. The staff shall review all proposed
signs in the context of adjacent signage to verify that the sign is
appropriately sized.
   (B)   Colors. Fluorescent, Day-Glo® and neon colors are prohibited, unless
the owner of the sign has a copyright to such color.
   (C)   Reflective surfaces. Sign surfaces that reflect light are prohibited
and shall instead be comprised of matte or flat finishes.
   (D)   Lighting fixtures. Lighting shall be white in color. Lights shall not
shine or reflect onto adjacent properties. Internal illumination and
fluorescent/neon light sources are prohibited. All lighting shall be subject to
design review.
   (E)   Sign maintenance. All signs, including their support structures and
related fixtures, shall be kept in good repair; this includes replacement of
lighting, repainting when appropriate and other actions that contribute to
attractive signage. The display surfaces and hardware of all signs shall be
properly painted, finished or posted at all times. The glass surfaces on which
window signs are affixed shall be well maintained.
   (F)   Electrical wiring. Electrical wiring shall be concealed. In addition,
all signs that contain electrical wiring shall be subject to the provisions of
the adopted Electrical Code of the town and the electrical components shall
bear the label of an approved testing agency.
   (G)   Wind pressure and dead load requirements. Any “sign”, as defined
throughout this title, shall be designed to withstand wind pressures and shall
support dead loads as required by the most recent building code (IBC) at the
time of construction, as adopted by the Town of Vail and determined by the
Chief Building Official.
   (H)   Placement on public property. Signs shall be constructed on private
property outside of the town right-of-way and shall not project onto the town
right- of-way except when permitted under a licensing agreement or a revocable
right-of-way permit issued from the Town of Vail.
   (I)   Sign inspection. Each sign for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the staff.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-5-4 SIGN MEASUREMENT.
   (A)   Single faced signs. Single faced signs (i.e., awning signs, wall
signs) shall be measured by up to two imaginary polygons enclosing all letters,
graphics and sign base material, including framing, not integrated into the
architecture of the building.
   (B)   Multifaced signs. When two sign faces are placed back to back and are
at no point more than one foot from one another, the sign area shall be the
area of the larger face. Sign area of all other multifaced signs shall be
calculated as the total area of all sign faces.
   (C)   Window signs. Window signs shall be measured by the exact square
footage of opaque or translucent materials affixed within three feet of the
window.
   (D)   Display boxes. Display boxes shall be measured by the area of the
outside dimensions of the box, including framing.
   (E)   Brackets and fixtures. Brackets, fixtures and other means of securing
a sign shall not count towards square footage of signage.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
CHAPTER 6: BUSINESS AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGNS
Section
11-6-1 Sign districts
11-6-2 Business signs
11-6-3 Building identification signs
§ 11-6-1 SIGN DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Sign District 1 (SD 1). All of Vail except for property zoned ABD, CC3
and PA-2;
   (B)   Sign District 2 (SD 2). All property zoned ABD, CC3, and PA-2 (West
Vail and Cascade Crossing); and
   (C)   Ski Base Overlay Sign District (SBO). Properties that are a part of
the Ski Base Sign Area as defined by the Ski Base Overlay map.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-6-2 BUSINESS SIGNS.
   (A)   Business signs.
      (1)   Business signs in Sign District 1 (SD 1).
         (a)   Number. Each business shall be allowed one business sign per
public entrance.
         (b)   Area. The allowable area of each business sign shall be up to
six square feet. At the discretion of the Design Review Board.
         (c)   Height. Projecting and awning signs shall have a minimum
clearance of eight feet above pedestrian ways and a minimum clearance of 15
feet above vehicular ways. No part of any business sign shall extend more than
25 feet above existing grade.
         (d)   Location. Business signs shall be located on the business
frontage.
         (e)   Type of sign. Business signs shall not be freestanding.
         (f)   Businesses not on the first floor or street level. Businesses
not located on the first floor or street level shall be allowed only one
projecting sign with a maximum area of six square feet; location shall be
subject to design review.
      (2)   Business signs in Sign District 2 (SD 2).
         (a)   Number. Each business shall be allowed one business sign per
business frontage with a maximum of three per business.
         (b)   Area. The combined area of allowed business signs is based on
the combined business frontages, and is as follows:
 
Combined Business Frontages Total Sign Area
0 feet — < 13 feet        10 square feet
13 feet — < 25 feet       14 square feet
25 feet — < 50 feet       20 square feet
50 feet — < 75 feet       30 square feet
75 feet — < 100 feet      40 square feet
100 feet plus               50 square feet
 
         (c)   Height. Projecting and awning signs shall have a minimum
clearance of eight feet above pedestrianways and a minimum clearance of 15 feet
above vehicularways. No part of any business sign shall extend more than 25
feet above existing grade.
         (d)   Location. Business signs shall be located on the business
frontage.
         (e)   Type of sign. Business signs shall not be freestanding.
         (f)   Businesses not on the first floor. Businesses not located on the
first floor shall be allowed only one projecting sign with a maximum area of
six square feet; location shall be subject to design review.
   (B)   Display boxes (SD 1 and SD 2).
      (1)   Number. Each business shall be allowed one display box, per
subsection (B)(6) of this section.
      (2)   Area. Display boxes shall not exceed six square feet.
      (3)   Height. The height of the highest part of the display box shall not
extend more than six feet above existing grade.
      (4)   Location. Display boxes shall be located on the business frontage.
      (5)   Type of sign. Display boxes shall not be freestanding signs.
   (C)   Window signs (SD 1 and SD 2).
      (1)   Number. The number of window signs is not regulated as long as area
requirements are met.
      (2)   Area. The area of all window signs shall not exceed 15% of the area
of the window in which they are placed, with a maximum size per window sign of
six square feet. Mullions that are more than 12 inches wide shall be considered
window separators, thereby signifying a separate “window area”.
      (3)   Height. The top of any window sign shall not extend more than 25
feet above existing grade.
      (4)   Special provisions. Any signs placed inside of a business, within
three feet of a window and visible from the outside shall be counted toward
total window sign area.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-6-3 BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.
   (A)   Description. All building signs shall comply with the regulations
listed herein and shall also be subject to review by the Design Review Board,
which reviews signage based on the criteria in Chapter 5 of this title.
   (B)   Measurement. The total area allowed for building identification
signage in both Sign District 1 and Sign District 2 includes the total number
of its building signs, each measured differently, according to the type of
building identification sign, and varies according to building frontage (see
following tables).
      (1)   Sign District 1 (SD 1); allowable building identification sign
area.
         (a)   The linear frontage of a building shall be measured in the same
manner as that of a business, except that frontages shall not be delineated by
inner divisions between tenant spaces.
         (b)   Building identification signs, unlike business signs, shall be
allowed on building frontages without entrances, as long as that frontage
parallels a major pedestrian or vehicular way.
 
Building Frontage     Allowed Total Sign Area
10 feet — < 50 feet 20 square feet
50 feet — < 75 feet 30 square feet
75 feet — < 100 feet40 square feet
100 feet — < 150 fee50 square feet
150 feet — < 200 fee50 square feet
200 feet plus         60 square feet
 
      (2)   Sign District 2 (SD 2); allowable building identification sign
area.
         (a)   The linear frontage of a building shall be measured in the same
manner as that of a business, except that frontages shall not be delineated by
inner divisions between tenant spaces.
         (b)   Building identification signs, unlike business signs, shall be
allowed on building frontages without entrances, as long as that frontage
parallels a major pedestrian or vehicular way.
Building Frontage Allowed Total Sign Area
Building Frontage     Allowed Total Sign Area
10 feet — < 50 feet 20 square feet
50 feet — < 75 feet 30 square feet
75 feet — < 100 feet40 square feet
100 feet — < 150 fee50 square feet
150 feet — < 200 fee50 square feet
200 feet — < 250 fee60 square feet
250 feet - < 300 feet 60 square feet
300 feet — < 400 fee70 square feet
400 feet plus         80 square feet
 
      (3)   Sign Districts 1 And 2; types of building identification signs.
         (a)   Freestanding signs.
            1.   Number. One freestanding sign per building frontage on a major
pedestrian or vehicular way, with a maximum of two freestanding signs per
building.
            2.   Area. Freestanding building identification signs shall be
subject to the total sign area requirements of the building frontage tables
listed previously and shall be measured according to the total sign area.
            3.   Height. No part of a freestanding building identification sign
shall be higher than eight feet above existing grade.
            4.   Special provisions. Freestanding signs shall be placed on two
separate building facades facing pedestrian and vehicular ways and shall be
subject to design review. A joint directory sign, though a type of freestanding
sign, shall not count toward the total quantity of freestanding signs allowed.
         (b)   Wall mounted signs.
            1.   Number. One sign per building frontage on a major pedestrian
or vehicular way. A maximum of two wall mounted building identification signs
shall be allowed if a building has two frontages as defined in these
regulations.
            2.   Area. Wall mounted building identification signs shall be
subject to the total sign area requirements of the building frontage tables
listed previously, and shall be measured according to the size of the text
only.
            3.   Height. No part of a wall mounted building identification sign
shall be higher than 25 feet above existing grade.
            4.   Special provisions. If using two signs, signs shall be placed
on two separate frontages, subject to design review.
         (c)   Joint directory signs.
            1.   Number. One joint directory sign per building unless the
building has more than one building frontage (see Chapter 2, “Definitions”, of
this title) with a combined linear frontage that exceeds 150 feet, in which
case that building shall be entitled to two joint directory signs. No building
identification sign, other than a joint directory sign, shall be allowed for
the side of a building that houses a joint directory sign.
            2.   Area. Each joint directory sign may contain signage of up to
one square foot per business tenant in a building, and up to three square feet
for the name of the building, placed atop the joint directory sign.
            3.   Height. No part of a joint directory sign shall be higher than
eight feet above existing grade.
            4.   Special provisions. A joint directory sign, though a type of
freestanding sign, shall not count toward the total quantity of freestanding
signs allowed. However, the area of the joint directory sign shall be included
in the total building identification area allowed according to building
frontage. All joint directory signs shall be kept current according to business
turnover.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
CHAPTER 7: OTHER SIGNS
Section
11-7-1 Flags
11-7-2 Residential signs
11-7-3 Neighborhood signs
11-7-4 Construction signs
11-7-5 Theater signs
11-7-6 Open house signs
11-7-7 Balloons
11-7-8 Public parking and loading signs for private property
11-7-9 Ski base area signs
11-7-10 Restaurant signs
11-7-11 Additional temporary signage
§ 11-7-1 FLAGS.
   (A)   Quantity. A maximum of two flags per property.
   (B)   Size. Flags are not to exceed 24 square feet in area.
   (C)   Height.
      (1)   Clearance. Flags shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet when
projecting over public walkways and a minimum clearance of 15 feet when
projecting over vehicular streets.
      (2)   No flagpole shall be higher than 25 feet within the Town of Vail.
   (D)   Commercial flags. Flags used for the advertisement of any business,
product or service are subject to DRB review.
   (E)   Noncommercial flags. Flags not used for the advertisement of any
business, product or service are exempt from DRB review, unlimited in number,
but must conform to all dimensional standards. Flagpoles and other mounting
structures require a building permit.
   (F)   Special events. Flags used for the purpose of promoting community
activities or the sponsors thereof shall be exempt from the application
procedure described in this title and shall instead be subject to the
requirements associated with acquiring a special events permit from the Town of
Vail.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-7-2 RESIDENTIAL SIGNS.
   (A)   Size. Size shall not exceed one-half square foot per dwelling unit.
   (B)   Height. No part of the sign shall extend above eight feet above
existing grade.
   (C)   Number. One sign per dwelling unit.
   (D)   Location. Subject to design review.
   (E)   Design. Wall mounted, freestanding or projecting/hanging, subject to
design review.
   (F)   Lighting. Indirect.
   (G)   Landscaping. Subject to design review.
   (H)   Special provisions. Structures having three or more living units may
have one exterior residential sign directory, provided that the individual
signs of the directory are of a standard design and size.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-7-3 NEIGHBORHOOD SIGNS.
   (A)   Description. In all residential zone districts, any property or
portion of a property under common ownership or management shall be allowed
additional signage within the area under common ownership or management. The
common space must be common to more than four units to qualify for a
neighborhood sign.
   (B)   Number. One sign per curb cut accessing the common space.
   (C)   Area. Combined area of all neighborhood signs shall not exceed 20
square feet.
   (D)   Height. No part of a neighborhood sign shall extend more than eight
feet above finished grade.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-7-4 CONSTRUCTION SIGNS.
   (A)   Area. The area of any construction sign shall not exceed eight square
feet.
   (B)   Height. The top of a construction sign shall be no higher than eight
feet above grade.
   (C)   Number. One sign per construction site.
   (D)   Location. Construction signs shall be mounted parallel and flush to
the building wall or construction fence adjacent to the street or major
pedestrianway to which the construction site abuts.
   (E)   Lighting. Not permitted.
   (F)   Type of sign. Construction signs shall not be freestanding signs.
   (G)   Display duration. Construction signs may be displayed upon issuance of
the associated building permit(s) and shall be removed prior to the issuance of
a certificate of occupancy.
   (H)   Construction signs. Construction signs must comply with the current
Building Code adopted by the Town of Vail and any other relevant state or
federal law.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-7-5 THEATER SIGNS.
   (A)   Theaters and movie/media rental business will be allowed three theater
signs in the front window at any one time. The allowable area of each theater
sign may be up to eight square feet, subject to design review approval.
   (B)   Theater signs may be electronic signs. When used as a theater sign,
the illumination levels of an electronic sign must be adjusted to the ambient
light conditions and be no brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate
visibility. When used as a theater sign, electronic signs shall not emit light
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-7-6 OPEN HOUSE SIGNS.
   (A)   Number. For each real property that is actively listed for sale, as
evidenced by such parcel’s listing in a multiple listing service or other real
estate listing service, one temporary sign is allowed.
   (B)   Location. An open house sign is allowed at a street corner on the
street from which the main entrance to the property is accessed. It must be
placed in a manner to not obstruct the flow of traffic or impede in the safe
usage of the right-of-way.
   (C)   Area. The area of any open house sign shall not exceed three square
feet.
   (D)   Height. The height of any open house sign shall not exceed four feet
as measured from the top of the sign to the grade at the base of the sign.
   (E)   Display duration. This sign is only allowed during the period of time
when the property is open for viewing to the public without an appointment (aka
an “open house”). Open house signs may only be displayed between 8:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. on a daily basis.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-7-7 BALLOONS.
   All balloons, regardless of their size, shall be subject to a special events
permit.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-7-8 PUBLIC PARKING AND LOADING SIGNS FOR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Description. A public parking and loading sign is permitted for
private properties which provide “public unstructured parking” or “public
parking structures” as defined by §
12-2-2, “Definitions Of Words And Terms”, of this code, with a minimum of 25
parking spaces and/or loading bays for use by the public. These public parking
spaces must be above and beyond the requirements of Title 12, Chapter 10, “Off-
Street Parking And Loading”, of this code.
   (B)   Number. One sign per public vehicular entrance, unless the
Administrator determines fewer or additional signs are necessary to promote the
safe and expedient flow of traffic.
   (C)   Area. The allowable area of any single public parking and loading sign
shall not exceed ten square feet, unless the Administrator determines a smaller
or larger area is necessary to promote the safe and expedient flow of traffic.
   (D)   Height. Projecting and awning signs shall have a minimum clearance of
eight feet above pedestrianways and a minimum clearance of 15 feet above
vehicularways. No part of any public parking or loading signs shall extend more
than 25 feet above grade.
   (E)   Location. Subject to design review. Signs may be permitted in the
town’s right-of-way, subject to §
11-5-3(H), “Placement On Public Property”, of this title.
   (F)   Type. Awning, freestanding, projecting or wall mounted.
   (G)   Lighting. Subject to design review.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-7-9 SKI BASE AREA SIGNS.
   (A)   Description. These regulations apply to all signs erected within the
ski base areas. There shall be a sign program addressing the needs of both the
winter and summer seasons.
   (B)   Generally. It is not the intent of these regulations to provide a
competitive advantage to on mountain commercial uses.
      (1)   Number. Subject to design review.
      (2)   Area. Subject to design review.
      (3)   Height. Awning, projecting, wall, and electronic signs shall have a
minimum clearance of eight feet above pedestrianways and a minimum clearance of
15 feet above vehicularways. No part of a ski base sign shall extend more than
25 feet above grade.
      (4)   Location. Subject to design review. Signs may be permitted in the
public right-of-way subject to §
11-5-3(H), “Placement On Public Property”, of this title.
      (5)   Type. Awning, freestanding, portable, projecting, wall, and
electronic signs. A-frame and sandwich board style signs are prohibited.
      (6)   Lighting. Subject to design review.
      (7)   Special provisions. A sign program is required in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 8 of this title.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-7-10 RESTAURANT SIGNS.
   (A)   Description. Additional signage allowed for all eating and drinking
establishments within the Town of Vail, subject to the following standards.
   (B)   Display boxes.
      (1)   Number. Each business shall be allowed up to two display boxes per
business frontage, per subsection (C)(5) of this section.
      (2)   Area. Businesses shall be allowed up to six square feet of display
box area per business frontage. No single display box shall exceed six square
feet, and no business frontage shall display more than six square feet of
display box area.
      (3)   Height. The height of the highest part of the display box shall not
extend more than six feet above existing grade.
      (4)   Location. Display boxes shall be displayed on the business
frontage.
   (C)   Specials boards.
      (1)   Number. Businesses shall be allowed one specials board per business
frontage.
      (2)   Area. Specials boards shall not exceed three square feet.
      (3)   Height. The height of the highest part of the specials board shall
not extend more than six feet above existing grade.
      (4)   Location. Specials boards shall be attached to menu boxes, except
where the Administrator determines there is a practical difficulty by making
the following findings, in which case the specials board may be attached to a
wall or deck railing on the business frontage:
         (a)   That there exists no ability to attach the specials board to the
menu box in the existing or proposed location of the menu box; and
         (b)   That there exists no ability to relocate the existing or
proposed menu box to a location that meets the requirements of this title, and
allows for attachment of the specials board to the menu box.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-7-11 ADDITIONAL TEMPORARY SIGNAGE.
   (A)   Description. Each property within the Town of Vail shall be allowed,
without a permit, one additional temporary sign, subject to the following
standards.
   (B)   Size. No temporary sign shall not be greater than three square feet in
area.
   (C)   Height. No part of a freestanding sign shall extend above four feet
above the finished grade.
   (D)   Design. Temporary signage falling under this provision shall be
freestanding or window signs.
   (E)   Timeframe. No sign falling under this provision shall be displayed for
more than 14 days per year. Additional temporary signage may only be displayed
between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on a daily basis.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
CHAPTER 8: SIGN PROGRAMS
Section
11-8-1 Sign program description
11-8-2 Criteria
11-8-3 Sign program review
§ 11-8-1 SIGN PROGRAM DESCRIPTION.
   The purpose of the sign program is to encourage a comprehensive approach to
the design, size, number, shape, color and placement of all signs pertaining to
a particular development or building containing a business or group of
businesses. A sign program shall convey an organized, innovative and unique
approach to multiple signs.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-8-2 CRITERIA.
   Sign programs shall be required for all new or demolished/rebuilt multi-
family residential projects and for new or demolished/rebuilt commercial
projects. Sign programs may be required for other significant new developments
(e.g., subdivisions, ski base facilities) or for redevelopment projects at the
discretion of the staff. Existing multi-tenant commercial buildings shall be
required to submit a sign program when applying for new signage. Sign programs
shall be subject to the provisions, standards, and guidelines listed in this
title.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-8-3 SIGN PROGRAM REVIEW.
   All sign programs shall be subject to the design review process detailed in
Chapter 4, “Sign Application Procedures”, of this title.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
CHAPTER 9: EXEMPT, PROHIBITED AND NONCONFORMING SIGNS
Section
11-9-1 Exempt signs
11-9-2 Prohibited signs
11-9-3 Nonconforming signs
§ 11-9-1 EXEMPT SIGNS.
   The following signs are exempt from design review, but remain subject to the
applicable requirements of this code, including, but not limited to, the design
standards and guidelines listed in Chapter 5 of this title and the maintenance
requirements listed in §
11-11-3 of this title:
   (A)   Memorial signs, dedication plaques or tablets;
   (B)   Government signs and signs erected by government employees in the
course of their work, including directional signs, to control traffic or for
other regulatory purposes;
   (C)   A mural that has received approval by the Art in Public Places Board;
   (D)   Temporary decorations or displays, when they are commonly associated
with any national, local or religious holiday;
   (E)   Temporary or permanent signs erected by public utility companies or
construction companies to warn of dangerous or hazardous conditions;
   (F)   Signage and decorations subject to a special event permit through the
Town of Vail; and
   (G)   Private warning signs.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-9-2 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   Unless otherwise allowed by this title, the following signs are prohibited
within the Town of Vail:
   (A)   Animated signs that incorporate the use of movement (aside from
natural wind induced movement) through revolving, rotating or otherwise moving
parts;
   (B)   Signs with the illusion of movement;
   (C)   Signs (or the illumination thereof) that flash, pulse, move, rotate,
scintillate, blink, flicker or vary in intensity and/or color;
   (D)   Signs that incorporate projected images, emit any sound, or involve
the use of live animals;
   (E)   Any sign for a business or service having been vacated for 90 or more
days. This provision does not apply to permanent signs accessory to seasonal
businesses, provided there is clear intent to continue operation of the
business;
   (F)   Any sign or structure that is unsafe or constitutes a hazard to safety
for any reason;
   (G)   Any gas filled, illuminated or fiber optic sign that is less than four
feet from a window;
   (H)   Any sign or structure that obstructs ingress to or egress from a
required exitway, that obstructs the view of vehicular traffic entering or
exiting a public roadway, or that creates an unsafe distraction for motor
vehicle operators;
   (I)   Any sign that could be confused with an official government sign (such
as a traffic sign) but is not;
   (J)   Any off-premises sign that is not otherwise regulated by this title;
   (K)   All billboards;
   (L)   Pennants, banners and bunting that are not associated with a special
event permit;
   (M)   Any dry erase or chalk board not approved by the provisions of this
title as a specials board; and
   (N)   Vehicular signs as defined by this title.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-9-3 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Definition. Any sign erected prior to the enactment of this title and
in accord with the Town of Vail approval process, that does not conform to the
provisions set forth herein (as determined by the administrative procedure
listed below), or is located in newly annexed territory, shall be designated as
nonconforming.
   (B)   Continuation of a nonconforming sign. Any sign which has been
determined to be nonconforming may continue in use and operation as a
nonconforming sign pending the following provisions.
      (1)   Any nonconforming sign that is not maintained, at the discretion of
the Administrator and according to §
11-2-1 of this title, shall be removed by the Administrator (§
11-11-3 of this title) and shall be replaced as a conforming sign, in
accordance with the regulations in this title.
      (2)   All nonconforming signs shall be brought into conformance with the
regulations in this title at the time that the represented business changes
ownership, provided that the business changes its name and/or offered services,
thereby requiring a new sign, or at the time that the represented business
changes its name and/or services offered, thereby requiring a new sign.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
CHAPTER 10: VARIANCES AND APPEALS
Section
11-10-1 Variances
11-10-2 Appeal of a variance
§ 11-10-1 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Purpose. A variance from the sign regulations constitutes relief from
the strict interpretation of the standards and may be granted by the Planning
and Environmental Commission (PEC) in cases where there exists a physical
limitation that prevents the existence, placement, or operation of a sign in
compliance with the standards of this title.
   (B)   Application procedure. An application for a variance from the sign
regulations may be obtained from the Community Development Department. The
variance application must include a sign permit application, the applicant’s
reasons for requesting a variance, and a nonrefundable fee determined by the
Town Council as set forth by town ordinances. The staff shall set a date for a
hearing before the Planning and Environmental Commission once the complete
application has been received.
   (C)   Criteria for approval.
      (1)   Special circumstances or conditions must exist that apply to the
land, buildings, topography, vegetation, sign structures, or other matters on
adjacent lots or within the adjacent right- of-way, that would substantially
restrict the effectiveness of the sign in question. However, such circumstances
must be unique to the subject site.
      (2)   The applicant shall not have created the circumstances that have
necessitated the variance request.
      (3)   The applicant must demonstrate that the granting of the variance
will be in general harmony with the purposes of this title.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-10-2 APPEAL OF A VARIANCE.
   An appeal to the Town Council of a Planning and Environmental Commission
(PEC) decision on a sign variance application may be made in accordance with
the appeal process (§
12-3-3 of this code).
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
CHAPTER 11: VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
11-11-1 Violations
11-11-2 Procedure and enforcement
11-11-3 Sign maintenance and repair enforcement
§ 11-11-1 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   General violations. Any sign that is deemed by the Administrator to be
erected, structurally altered, extended, moved or otherwise utilized in
violation of any provisions of this title, is in violation of this title and
shall be subject to the procedure for removal as listed below. Any sign not
maintained or kept in good repair, as determined by the Administrator, is in
violation of this chapter and shall also be subject to the procedure listed in
§
11-11-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Sign violations on public property.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any sign in, on, over, or
above any land or right-of- way or on any property belonging to the Town of
Vail without the express permission of the town. The Administrator may
summarily abate a violation of this nature by removing and confiscating any
unauthorized sign without prior notice and may recover the costs incurred in
removing any unauthorized signs from any person who commits, takes part in, or
who assists in any such violation. However, this shall not be deemed to apply
to official government notices and notices posted by governmental officers in
the performance of their duties, government signs to control traffic or for
other regulatory purposes, or to identify streets or warn of danger.
      (2)   Any person who commits, takes part in, or who assists in any such
violation, shall be guilty of a violation of this code and be subject to the
provisions of the penalty and costs subsections (§
11-11-2) of this chapter.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-11-2 PROCEDURE AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Notice of violation. The Administrator shall give written notice of
the violation to the owner, general agent, lessee or tenant of the building or
premises at which such violation has been committed or to any employee,
contractor or any other person who commits, takes part in or assists in any
such violation.
   (B)   Penalty. The business, building or premises at which such violation
has been committed and which has been given written notice of the violation, or
any person who commits, takes part in or who assists in any such violation,
shall be subject to penalty as provided in §
1-4-1, “General Penalty”, of this code for each calendar day after written
notice is received that such violation continues. This shall not preclude the
imposition of any other civil or administrative action or sanction. The
correction of a violation of any provision of this title may not restrain
imposition of these penalties.
   (C)   Failure to comply and town abatement. If the person in receipt of said
written notice fails to abate said violation so as to comply with the
provisions of this title within the time frame specified in the notice, the
Administrator shall cause a sign in violation of the provisions of this title
to be altered or removed at the expense of the owner or person entitled to
possession of the property or sign, and shall, upon the determination of the
expenses, certify them to the Director of Finance of the Town of Vail.
   (D)   Costs. The amount certified by the Director of Finance to the County
Treasurer for collection shall include the actual cost of repair or removal of
the sign and the cost of collection plus 15% of the sum of said costs,
representing penalty.
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
§ 11-11-3 SIGN MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   All signs in the town shall be properly maintained (as defined in §
11-2-1 of this title) at all times to the satisfaction of the Administrator or
they will be repaired or removed (as defined in §
11-2-1 of this title) by the Administrator.
   (B)   The Administrator shall have the authority to order through written
notice the repair or removal of a sign and accompanying landscaping when the
said sign:
      (1)   Has been found to constitute a violation of this title;
      (2)   Is a hazard to the safety, health or public welfare by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment; or
      (3)   Has been damaged beyond 50% of its total area and deemed poorly
maintained by the Administrator. The procedure for removal of a sign in
violation is detailed in §
11-11-2(C) of this chapter. The Administrator’s decision shall be subject to
review by the Planning and Environmental Commission in accordance with the
provisions of the zoning ordinance (§
12-3-3(B) of this code) and may be appealed by any “aggrieved or adversely
affected person” (as defined in §
12-3-3(B)(2) of this code).
(Ord. 11(2021) § 1)
TITLE 12: ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: TITLE, PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
Section
12-1-1 Title
12-1-2 Purpose
12-1-3 Applicability
§ 12-1-1 TITLE.
   This title may be cited as the ZONING REGULATIONS for the town, and shall
form and be incorporated as Title 12 of this code, otherwise referred to as
“Vail town code”.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 1.000; Ord. 29(2005) § 16)
§ 12-1-2 PURPOSE.
   (A)   General. These regulations are enacted for the purpose of promoting
the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the town, and to promote the
coordinated and harmonious development of the town in a manner that will
conserve and enhance its natural environment and its established character as a
resort and residential community of high quality.
   (B)   Specific. These regulations are intended to achieve the following more
specific purposes:
      (1)   To provide for adequate light, air, sanitation, drainage and public
facilities;
      (2)   To secure safety from fire, panic, flood, avalanche, accumulation
of snow and other dangerous conditions;
      (3)   To promote safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic
circulation and to lessen congestion in the streets;
      (4)   To promote adequate and appropriately located off-street parking
and loading facilities;
      (5)   To conserve and maintain established community qualities and
economic values;
      (6)   To encourage a harmonious, convenient, workable relationship among
land uses, consistent with municipal development objectives;
      (7)   To prevent excessive population densities and overcrowding of the
land with structures;
      (8)   To safeguard and enhance the appearance of the town;
      (9)   To conserve and protect wildlife, streams, woods, hillsides and
other desirable natural features;
      (10)   To assure adequate open space, recreation opportunities and other
amenities and facilities conducive to desired living quarters; and
      (11)   To otherwise provide for the growth of an orderly and viable
community.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 1.100)
§ 12-1-3 APPLICABILITY.
   The regulations prescribed by this title applicable to various districts and
uses shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or
kind of land, structure or use. Except as provided elsewhere in this title, the
use of any land, the size or shape or placement of lots, the construction or
location of structures, the provision of yards and other open spaces, and the
provision of off-street parking and loading space shall be in compliance with
all of the regulations specified in this title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 1.300)
CHAPTER 2: DEFINITIONS
Section
12-2-1 Word construction
12-2-2 Definitions
§ 12-2-1 WORD CONSTRUCTION.
   Words used in the present tense include the future, and vice versa; words
used in the singular include the plural, and vice versa; the word “shall” is
mandatory, the word “may” is permissive; and whenever reference is made to any
portion of this title, the reference applies to all amendments and additions
now or hereafter made.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 1.500; Ord. 29(2005) § 17)
§ 12-2-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
   ACCOMMODATION UNIT. Any room or group of rooms without “kitchen facilities”,
as defined herein, which are designed for temporary occupancy by visitors,
guests, individuals or families on a short term rental basis, and accessible
from common corridors, walks or balconies without passing through another
accommodation unit, limited service lodge unit, fractional fee club unit or
dwelling unit. An ACCOMMODATION UNIT is not intended for permanent residency
and shall not be subdivided into an individual condominium unit, pursuant to
Title 13, “Subdivision Regulations”, of this code.
   ACCOMMODATION UNIT, ATTACHED. A room, without kitchen facilities, connected
to a dwelling unit within a multiple-family building designed for or adapted to
occupancy by guests which is accessible from a common corridor, walk or balcony
without passing through another accommodation unit, attached accommodation
unit, or dwelling unit.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Director of Community Development or his or her designee.
   AFFECTED PROPERTY. Property within a Special Development District that, by
virtue of its proximity or relationship to a proposed amendment request to an
approved development plan, may be affected by redesign, density increase,
change in uses, or other modifications changing the impacts, or character of
the approved Special Development District.
   AGENT or AUTHORIZED REPRE- SENTATIVE. Any individual or association
authorized or empowered in writing by the property owner to act on his or her
stead. If any of the property to be included in the Special Development
District is a condominiumized development, the pertinent condominium
association may be considered the AGENT OR AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE for the
individual unit owners if authorized in conformity with all pertinent
requirements of the condominium association’s declarations and all other
requirements of the condominium declarations are met.
   AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any device which upon insertion of a coin, slug, token,
plate or disc, or payment of consideration may be used by the public for use as
a game, entertainment, amusement, a test of skill, either mental or physical,
whether or not registering a score, which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, pool tables, snooker tables, foosball tables, pinball machines,
electronic games, fixed stand coin operated kiddie rides and mechanical bulls,
but shall not include radios, devices that provide music only, or television
carrying commercial broadcasts.
   ANNEXED AREAS. Parcels of land that have been introduced to the boundaries
of the Town of Vail.
   ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTIONS. Building projections including, but not limited
to, towers, stairs, spires, cupolas, chimneys, flagpoles and similar
architectural features.
   ART IN PUBLIC PLACES BOARD (AIPPB). The Art in Public Places Board
established pursuant to Title 3, Chapter 3 of this code.
   ATTIC. The space between the ceiling beams of the top story and the roof
rafters.
   AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATIONS. A facility with retail sale of motor fuel,
vehicle servicing and repair and optional accessory convenience store.
   AVALANCHE AREA, BLUE HAZARD. An area impacted by a snow producing a total
static and dynamic pressure less than 600 pounds per square foot on a flat
surface normal to the flow and/or a return interval in excess of 25 years.
   AVALANCHE AREA, RED HAZARD. Any area impacted by a snow avalanche producing
a total static and dynamic pressure in excess of 600 pounds per square foot on
a flat surface normal to the flow and/or a return interval of less than 25
years.
   AVALANCHE AREA, ZONE OF INFLUENCE. Any area in a potential avalanche hazard
zone where detailed information is not currently available but which may be
impacted by said hazard. These zones of influence shall be designated on the
appropriate maps of the Administrator of the town.
   BAKERIES AND CONFECTIONERIES. Commercial retail or wholesale properties
whose main products are baked goods and desserts, either produced on the
premises or off site.
   BARBERSHOP. A commercial establishment whose primary business is the cutting
and/or styling of human hair.
   BASEMENT. For the purposes of calculating gross residential floor area
(GRFA) on the lowest level of a structure, the total percentage of exterior
wall surfaces unexposed and below existing or finished grade, whichever is more
restrictive, shall be the percentage of the horizontal area of the lowest level
deducted from the GRFA calculation. The percentage deduction calculations shall
be rounded to nearest whole percent. The lowest level’s exterior wall surface
area shall be measured from the finished floor elevation of that level to the
underside of the structural floor members of the floor/ceiling assembly above.
For the purposes of these calculations, retaining walls and site walls shall
not be considered part of the lowest level’s exterior walls.
   BASEMENT OR GARDEN LEVEL. For the purposes of implementing horizontal
zoning, BASEMENT OR GARDEN LEVEL shall be any floor, or portion of any floor,
of a structure located below the first floor or street level of that structure,
as determined by the Administrator. More than one floor, or portions of a floor
or floors, may be defined as BASEMENT OR GARDEN LEVEL WITHIN A SINGLE
STRUCTURE. For the purposes of determining floor level, the following factors
may be considered: site topography, location of building entrances and facades
relative to the adjacent vehicular or pedestrian ways, interior building
layout, proximity to adjacent vehicular or pedestrian ways and relationships to
other floors in the structure.
   BATHROOM. A room containing a working shower or bathtub, sink and toilet.
   BAY WINDOWS. A window or series of windows that projects from the main wall
of a building and forming a bay or alcove in a room within.
   BED AND BREAKFAST. A business which accommodates guests in a dwelling unit
in which the bed and breakfast proprietor lives on the premises and is in
residence during the bed and breakfast use.
   BOWLING ALLEY. A recreation and entertainment facility where the sport of
bowling takes place. A BOWLING ALLEY may also include accessory entertainment
facilities and uses such as eating and drinking facilities, retail shops,
nightclubs, arcade facilities, billiards, ping pong, darts, meeting rooms and
similar uses.
   BREWPUB. An eating place which includes the brewing of beer as an accessory
use. The brewing operation processes water, malt, hops and yeast into beer or
ale by mashing, cooking and fermenting. The area used for brewing, including
bottling and kegging, shall not exceed 50% of the total floor area of the
commercial space. The brewery shall not produce more than 7,500 barrels of beer
or ale per year. A barrel is equivalent to 31 gallons.
   BUILDABLE AREA. Any site, lot, parcel or any portion thereof which does not
contain designated floodplain, red hazard avalanche area or areas in excess of
40% slope.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, or any
other enclosed structure, for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or
property.
   CHILD DAYCARE CENTER. A residence or facility that provides regular care and
supervision, for an entire day or a portion of a day, for seven or more
children who are not related to the owner, operator or manager thereof, whether
such facility is operated with or without compensation for such care. A daycare
center shall comply with all applicable standards for childcare centers of the
Colorado Department of Social Services.
   CLUBS, HEALTH. A facility where members or nonmembers use equipment or space
for the purpose of physical exercise.
   COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT. Any development that includes uses such as business
offices, professional offices, accommodation units, general retail, grocery,
liquor and convenience, recreational amenity, real estate offices, conference
facilities, health clubs, eating and drinking establishments, service oriented
businesses or similar uses.
   COMMERCIAL LINKAGE. An obligation that requires developers to provide
housing for a certain number of new employees that are generated by a new
commercial development, focusing solely on a development’s impact as related to
employee generation and not taking into account secondary impacts.
   COMMERCIAL SKI STORAGE/SKI CLUB.
      (1)   Storage for equipment (skis, snowboards, boots and poles) and/or
clothing used in skiing related sports, which is available to the public or
members, operated by a business, club or government organization, and where a
fee is charged for hourly, daily, monthly, seasonal or annual usage. This use
may have, but does not require, the following components:
         (a)   Personal lockers;
         (b)   Boot dryers;
         (c)   Ski storage racks;
         (d)   Ski tuning;
         (e)   Food and beverage service;
         (f)   Areas for congregation and/or socializing;
         (g)   Restrooms and/or shower facilities;
         (h)   Nonwinter activities;
         (i)   Concierge ski services;
         (j)   Retail sales; and
         (k)   Business center.
      (2)   Ski storage that is part of a lodge, or dwelling unit, in which a
fee is not charged and is located within the lodge or dwelling unit, is not
considered COMMERCIAL SKI STORAGE/SKI CLUB.
      (3)   The following activities, when accessory to a retail operation,
shall not be considered COMMERCIAL SKI STORAGE/SKI CLUB:
         (a)   The outdoor display of skis or skiing related equipment that is
available for sale, available for rent, rented or recently serviced. Outdoor
display is subject to requirements of §
12-14-21, “Outdoor Display Of Goods”, of this title; and
         (b)   The storage, on levels other than the basement or garden level,
of skis or skiing related equipment that is available for sale, available for
rent, rented or recently serviced.
   CONFERENCE FACILITY. A facility used for conferences, conventions, seminars,
banquets and entertainment functions, along with accessory functions such as
lobbies, preconvene areas and exhibition space.
   CONVENTION FACILITY. A building or portion thereof designed to accommodate
300 or more persons in assembly, but not including a dining room or meeting
room in a lodge, if the dining room or meeting room is designed to accommodate
less than 300 persons.
   CREEK or STREAM. A body of flowing water indicated as a perennial stream on
the most recent USGS topographic map of the area.
   DECK, ROOFED OR COVERED. A deck that is protected from the elements via a
roof or other similar covering.
   DEED RESTRICTION. A permanent restriction on the use, occupancy and transfer
of real property that runs with the land and is recorded against the property
in the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder’s office.
   DEMO/REBUILD. The destruction, demolition, or removal of 50% or more of the
gross residential floor area of an existing dwelling unit or structure. The
determination of the 50% shall be calculated upon “gross residential floor
area” as defined in this section.
   DENSITY CONTROL. Any requirement of this title that regulates the number or
size of dwelling units per unit of land.
   DESIGN REVIEW BOARD (DRB). Design Review Board established pursuant to Title
3, Chapter 4 of this code.
   DEVELOPMENT. The construction, improvement, alteration, installation,
erection or expansion of any building, structure or other improvement in the
town.
   DEVELOPMENT LOT. A delineation of property that may include one or more
structures and/or lot(s) that collectively share dimensional and/or design
standards or guidelines. Examples include, but are not limited to, a duplex
property containing two dwelling units, a condominium complex of one or more
buildings or a multi-unit townhome style development that share dimensional
(GRFA, site coverage and the like) and/or design (unified architectural and
landscape design) standards or guidelines.
   DORMER. An architectural structure projecting out from a sloping roof of a
building designed to provide light, air, access or interior volume to a space
and usually containing a vertical window or ventilating louver, having a gable
or shed roof, in which the total cumulative length of the dormer(s) does not
exceed 50% of the length of the sloping roof, per roof plane, from which the
dormer(s) projects.
   DORMITORY UNIT. A type of employee housing unit which houses not more than
five persons and includes common kitchen facilities, a common bathroom, and a
minimum of 250 square feet of GRFA for each person occupying the unit.
   DRUGSTORE. An establishment engaged in the retail sale of prescription
drugs, nonprescription medicines, cosmetics and related supplies.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building containing three or more dwelling
units, including townhouses, row houses, apartments and condominium units,
designed for or used by three or more families, each living as an independent
housekeeping unit.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building designed for or used as a
dwelling exclusively by one family as an independent housekeeping unit.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached building containing two dwelling units,
designed for or used as a dwelling exclusively by two families, each living as
an independent housekeeping unit.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms in a single-family, two-family or
multiple- family building with kitchen facilities designed for or used by one
family as an independent housekeeping unit.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who works an average of 30 hours per week or more on a
year round basis at a business located in Eagle County.
   EMPLOYEE HOUSING UNIT (EHU). A dwelling unit which shall not be leased or
rented for any period less than 30 consecutive days, and shall be occupied by
at least one person who is an employee. For the purposes of this definition
EMPLOYEE shall mean a person who works an average of 30 hours per week or more
on a year round basis in Eagle County, Colorado.
   ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT. A document outlining the effect of proposed
development or action on the environment.
   FACILITIES, HEALTHCARE. A facility principally engaged in providing services
for health maintenance, diagnosis or treatment of human diseases, pain, injury,
deformity or physical condition.
   FAMILY. Family shall be deemed to be either subsection (1) or (2) of this
definition:
      (1)   An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption, excluding domestic servants, together in a dwelling unit used as a
single housekeeping unit; or
      (2)   A group of unrelated persons not to exceed two persons per bedroom
plus an additional two persons per dwelling unit used as a single housekeeping
unit.
   FIRST FLOOR or STREET LEVEL. For the purposes of implementing horizontal
zoning, first floor or street level shall be any floor, or portion of any
floor, of a structure located at or nearest to (either above or below) the
level of the adjacent vehicular or pedestrian way, as determined by the
Administrator. More than one floor, or portions of a floor or floors, may be
defined as basement or garden level within a single structure. For the purposes
of determining floor level, the following factors may be considered: site
topography, location of building entrances and facades relative to the adjacent
vehicular or pedestrian ways, interior building layout, proximity to adjacent
vehicular or pedestrian ways and relationships to other floors in the
structure.
   FLOOD HAZARD ZONE. The land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on
the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been
completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined
into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that includes flood profiles and water surface elevation of
the base flood as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS RESIDENTIAL (GRFA). See Chapter 15 of this title for GRFA
definitions, regulations, and requirements for GRFA calculations.
   FLOOR AREA, NET. The total floor area within the enclosing walls of a
structure not including the following:
      (1)   Areas specifically designed and used for mechanical equipment to
operate the building;
      (2)   Stairways;
      (3)   Elevators;
      (4)   Common hallways;
      (5)   Common lobbies;
      (6)   Common restrooms;
      (7)   Areas designed and used for parking; and
      (8)   (a)   Areas designed and used as storage which do not have direct
access to an individual office or retail store, not to exceed 5% of the total
proposed net floor area for office and not to exceed 8% of the total proposed
net floor area for retail; and
         (b)   “Common areas” are spaces for which all tenants in the building
contribute toward the upkeep and maintenance thereof and are not used for
employee working areas.
   FLOOR AREA, SEATING (Used Only For Calculating Parking Requirements). The
floor area within the enclosing walls of a business or structure that is
devoted to the seating of guests for dining or meeting purposes, exclusive of
lobbies, prefunction areas and kitchen facilities.
   FRACTIONAL FEE. A tenancy in common interest in improved real property,
including condominiums, created or held by persons, partnerships, corporations
or joint ventures or similar entities, wherein the tenants in common have
formerly arranged by oral or written agreement or understanding, either
recorded or unrecorded, allowing for the use and occupancy of the property by
one or more cotenants to the exclusion of one or more cotenants during any
period, whether annually reoccurring or not which is binding upon any assignee
or future owner of a fractional fee interest or if such agreement continues to
be in any way binding or effective upon any cotenant for the sale of any
interest in the property.
   FRACTIONAL FEE CLUB. A fractional fee project in which each dwelling unit,
pursuant to recorded project documentation as approved by the Town of Vail, has
no fewer than six and no more than 12 owners per unit and whose use is
established by a reservation system and is managed on site with a front desk
operating 24 hours a day, seven days a week providing reservation and
registration capabilities. The project shall include, or be proximate to
transportation, retail shops, eating and drinking establishments and recreation
facilities.
   FRACTIONAL FEE CLUB UNIT. An individual dwelling unit in a fractional fee
club described as such in the project documentation and not an accommodation
unit within the fractional fee club. No offer of a fractional fee club unit
shall be made except pursuant to an application for registration and
certification as a subdivision developer of a timeshare program or an exemption
from registration approved by the State of Colorado Real Estate Commission
pursuant to C.R.S. §§ 12-10-501 et seq., and the rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto. Within ten days after receipt of a written
request, the developer of a fractional fee club unit shall provide to the
Department of Community Development a copy of the application or request for
exemption filed with the State of Colorado Real Estate Commission and/or
evidence of approval of the application or request for exemption.
   FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE. A person who works an average of 30 hours per week or
more on a year round basis in Eagle County, Colorado.
   FUNICULARS AND OTHER SIMILAR CONVEYANCES. Exterior, tramlike vehicles,
designed to move up and down steep slopes by use of rails or tracks.
   GEOLOGICALLY SENSITIVE AREA. An area within the Town of Vail which may be
subject to rockfalls, mudflows, debris flows, debris avalanches, and unstable
soil, slopes or rocks.
   GOLF COURSE. A recreational facility primarily used for:
      (1)   The playing of golf, exclusive of miniature golf, including holes
consisting of separate tees, fairways, and greens; and
      (2)   Nordic skiing; as well as related support facilities such as
clubhouses, driving ranges, shelters, and other similar buildings and uses
customarily incidental and accessory to a GOLF COURSE.
   GOLF COURSE CLUBHOUSE. The principal building associated with a golf course,
which contains facilities typically available in such buildings, including pro
shops, administrative offices, locker rooms, restrooms, golf cart storage,
eating and drinking establishments, meeting rooms, banquet facilities,
community space and other similar uses.
   GRADE, EXISTING. The existing grade shall be the existing or natural
topography of a site prior to construction.
   GRADE, FINISHED. The finished grade shall be the grade proposed upon
completion of a project.
   GRADE, INTERPOLATED. The reestablished topographic conditions of a
development site expressed in two-foot contour intervals and determined by
connecting surveyed spot elevations located at ten foot intervals around the
perimeter of a property boundary and used in the determination of maximum
allowable building height.
   GREENHOUSE. An outdoor structure, heated or unheated, constructed primarily
of glass or other rigid translucent material, which is devoted to the
protection or cultivation of food or ornamental crops.
   HABITABLE. Any area designed for sleeping, living, cooking, dining, meeting
or recreation as applied to floor area.
   HEIGHT. The distance measured vertically from any point on a proposed or
existing roof or eaves to the existing or finished grade (whichever is more
restrictive) located directly below said point of the roof or eaves. Within any
building footprint, height shall be measured vertically from any point on a
proposed or existing roof to the existing grade directly below said point on a
proposed or existing roof.
   HOME CHILD DAYCARE FACILITY. A residence or facility that provides regular
care and supervision, for an entire day, for more than two but not more than
six children from birth to 16 years of age who are not related to the owner,
operator or manager thereof, whether such facility is operated with or without
compensation for such care. Residents of the home under 12 years of age who are
on the premises and all children on the premises for supervision are counted
against the approved capacity. A daycare home shall comply with all applicable
standards for childcare centers of the Colorado Department of Social Services.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A use conducted entirely within a dwelling which is
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and
which does not change the residential character thereof.
   HOOP HOUSE/COLD FRAME. An unheated outdoor enclosure used for the purpose of
growing crops and/or for protecting seedlings and plants from cold weather but
not containing any mechanical or electrical systems or storage of any items.
   INCLUSIONARY ZONING. A zoning obligation based on the community’s need for
employee housing considering many factors and secondary impacts, including
scarcity of developable land; rising home values; inadequate availability of
employee housing in the market; and direct employee generation impacts.
   INDIVIDUALLY PLATTED TOWNHOUSE LOT. A portion of a townhouse project that is
subdivided and for zoning purposes is treated as a separate entity from the
remainder of the project.
   INTERPRETIVE NATURE WALKS. Unpaved pedestrian trails with either fixed signs
or marked points which are used to explain the natural flora, fauna, geology,
geography or history in the immediate area. This use would exclude all
mechanical vehicles except wheelchairs and maintenance equipment.
   KITCHEN FACILITIES. Fixtures and equipment for food storage and preparation
of meals, including a sink, stove, oven or microwave oven, and refrigerator and
food storage facilities.
   KITCHENETTE. A room containing the following fixtures and appliances only: a
microwave oven; sink; and refrigerator.
   LANDSCAPING. Natural or significant rock outcroppings, native vegetation,
planted areas and plant materials, including trees, shrubs, lawns, flowerbeds
and ground cover, shall be deemed landscaping together with the core
development such as walks, decks, patios, terraces, water features and like
features not occupying more than 20% of the landscaped area.
   LAUNDROMAT. A facility where patrons wash, dry or dry clean clothing or
other fabrics in machines operated by the patron.
   LIMITED EDITION. One of no more than nine copies produced from an original
artist’s mold.
   LOBBY. A communal space in or near the entrance area of a building.
     LODGE.
      (1)   A building or group of associated buildings designed for occupancy
primarily as the temporary lodging place of individuals or families either in
accommodation units or dwelling units, in which the gross residential floor
area devoted to accommodation units or fractional fee club units, is equal to
or greater than 70% of the total gross residential floor area on the site, and
in which all such units are operated under a single management providing the
occupants thereof customary hotel services and facilities.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the above for properties containing gross
residential floor area equal to or less than 80 square feet of gross
residential floor area for each 100 square feet of buildable site area, such
properties shall be defined as LODGES, provided that gross residential floor
area devoted to accommodation units or fractional fee club units exceeds the
gross residential floor area devoted to dwelling units.
   LODGE DWELLING UNIT. A small dwelling unit with limited kitchen and floor
area and which contains 650 square feet or less of floor area and is intended
to be rented on a short term basis.
   LODGE, LIMITED SERVICE A building or group of associated buildings designed
for occupancy primarily as the temporary lodging place of visitors, guests,
individuals or families, on a short term rental basis, in limited service lodge
units or any combination of accommodation units, limited service lodge units,
fractional fee club units or dwelling units in which the gross residential
floor area devoted to accommodation units, limited service lodge units and
fractional fee club units is equal to or greater than 70% of the total gross
residential floor area on the site, and in which all such units are operated
under a single management providing the occupants thereof customary lodge
services and facilities.
   LODGE UNIT, LIMITED SERVICE. Any room or group of rooms with “kitchen
facilities”, as defined herein, in a limited service lodge which are designed
for temporary occupancy by visitors, guests, individuals or families on a short
term rental basis, and accessible from common corridors, walks or balconies
without passing through another accommodation unit, LIMITED SERVICE LODGE UNIT,
fractional fee club unit or dwelling unit. A LIMITED SERVICE LODGE UNIT is not
intended for permanent residency and shall not be subdivided into an individual
condominium unit, pursuant to Title 13, “Subdivision Regulations”, of this
code.
   LOT or SITE. A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a use,
building, or structure under the provisions of this title and meeting the
minimum requirements of this title. A LOT or SITE may consist of a single lot
of record, a portion of a lot of record, a combination of lots of record or
portions thereof, or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds.
   LOT OR SITE LINE, FRONT. The boundary line of a lot or site adjoining a
street which provides the primary access or street address of the site, or
adjoining the primary access from a street to the lot or site.
   LOT OR SITE LINE, REAR. The boundary line of a lot or site extending between
the side lines and forming the boundary of the lot or site opposite the front
line. In the event of a lot or site having only three lot or site lines, a line
ten feet in length within the lot or site extending between the side lines and
parallel to the front line shall be deemed the rear line for purposes of
establishing setbacks.
   LOT OR SITE LINE, SIDE. The boundary line of a lot or site extending from
the front line towards the opposite or rearmost portion of the site.
   MAJOR ARCADE. A place of business where an individual, association,
partnership or corporation maintains five or more amusement devices.
   MEETING AND CONVENTION FACILITY. A building or buildings that contain space
for the convening of organizations or groups of people for the purposes of
educational, political, social or fraternal advancement.
   MICROBREWERY. A mixed use commercial operation that processes water, malt,
hops and yeast into beer or ale by mashing, cooking and fermenting that shall
also include an on site public restaurant and/or bar which sells the beer and
ale produced on site. The maximum brewing capacity for the MICROBREWERY shall
be 7,500 barrels per year. A barrel is equivalent to 31 gallons. The
MICROBREWERY use shall not exceed 8,000 square feet of floor area, excluding
enclosed areas for loading, trash, and delivery. The public restaurant and/or
bar shall have a minimum seating area of 2,000 square feet and shall be
excluded from the total MICROBREWERY maximum square footage limit.
   MINOR ARCADE. A place of business where an individual, association,
partnership or corporation maintains four or fewer amusement devices.
   MULTIPLE USE LOADING FACILITY. A facility where a single off-street loading
facility serves more than one use or one user.
   NATURE PRESERVES. Areas of land and/or water that are managed primarily to
safeguard the flora, fauna and physical features it contains, while not
precluding public access.
   NEXUS STUDY. The “2016 Vail Employer Survey, Summary of Results” dated
February 2017, prepared for the Town of Vail by RRC Associates, and on file
with the office of the Town Clerk, analyzing the current and future employee
housing needs resulting from new development and redevelopment in the town.
   OFF SITE. A location within the boundaries of the town other than the site
on which the commercial development is located.
   OFFICE, BUSINESS. An office for the conduct of general business and service
activities, such as offices of real estate or insurance agents, brokers,
secretarial or stenographic services, or offices for general business
activities and transactions, where storage, sale or display of merchandise on
the premises occupies less than 10% of the floor area.
   OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL. An office for the practice of a profession, such as
offices of physicians, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers, musicians,
teachers, accountants and others who through training are qualified to perform
services of a professional nature, where storage, sale or display of
merchandise on the premises occupies less than 10% of the floor area.
   OFFICE, TEMPORARY BUSINESS. An office for the conduct of general business
and service activities and transactions for a limited time period to
accommodate the temporary displacement of an existing business office within
the Town of Vail due to redevelopment construction activities.
   OUTDOOR DISPLAY. A temporary outdoor arrangement of objects, items or
products representative of the merchandise sold or rented by a retail
establishment, and further regulated by §
12-14-21 of this title.
   OUTDOOR RECREATION AREAS, ACTIVE. Outdoor recreational activities which
involve organized or structured recreation that is associated with recreational
facilities, excluding buildings. For example, active outdoor recreation would
include, but not be limited to, athletic fields, playgrounds, outdoor
basketball and tennis courts, outdoor swimming pools, sledding and skiing
areas, fitness trails with exercise stations and the like.
   OUTDOOR RECREATION AREAS, PASSIVE. Outdoor recreation activities which
involve unstructured recreation which does not require facilities or special
grounds. Passive outdoor recreation would include, picnicking, fishing,
walking, hiking, cross country skiing, informal playing fields and the like.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm, corporation or partnership that alone,
jointly or severally with others: has legal or equitable title to any premises,
dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof; or has charge, care or control of any premises, dwelling or dwelling
unit, as agent of the owner or as executor, administrator, trustee or guardian
of the estate of the beneficial owner. The person shown on the records of the
Recorder of Deeds of the county to be the owner of a particular property shall
be presumed to be the person in control of that property.
   PARAPET. The extension of the main walls of a building above the roof level.
   PARTY WALL. A common wall shared by two attached structures, buildings or
dwelling units.
   PATHS, BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN. A corridor for use by bicycles and
pedestrians, prohibited for use by motorized vehicles.
   PERSONAL SERVICES. A nonmedical commercial business where a service is
offered to the customer and where accessory retail sales of products related to
the services may be provided, including, but not limited to, beauty and barber
shops, tailor shops, dry cleaners, laundromats, repair shops and similar
services.
   PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION. The Commission established by Title
3, Chapter 2 of this code.
   PLANT PRODUCTS. Fertilizers and plant seeds packaged in quantities weighing
not more than 25 pounds, and trees, shrubs, bedding plants, ground cover and
Christmas trees and wreaths.
   PRIMARY ROOF. A roof which covers 500 or more square feet of building area.
A PRIMARY ROOF shall not include required secondary roof forms, dormers,
architectural projections, covered entryways, shopfront colonnades, awnings,
louvers, porte-cocheres, covered decks and other similar roof forms. This
definition is used in the determination of building height in the Lionshead
Mixed Use 1 and 2 Zone Districts. See Figures 8-15(a–c) in the Lionshead
Redevelopment Master Plan for additional clarification.
   PRIMARY ROOF RIDGELINE. Generally the highest or most dominant roof
ridgeline(s) atop a building mass or series of building masses used in the
determination of building height in the Lionshead Mixed Use 1 and 2 Zone
Districts. See Figures 8-15(a–c) in the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan for
additional clarification.
   PRIMARY ROOF RIDGELINE, ASSUMED. The established centerline portion of a
flat or mansard roof and/or the sloping ends of a gambrel or hip roof used in
the determination of building height in the Lionshead Mixed Use 1 and 2 Zone
Districts and as determined by the Administrator. See Figures 8-15(a–c) in the
Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan for additional clarification.
   PRIVATE. A use, area, property or facility which is not public.
   PRIVATE CLUB. An association of persons and its premises established for the
fraternal, social, educational, recreational or cultural enrichment of its
members and not primarily for profit, whose bona fide members pay dues and meet
certain prescribed qualifications for membership, use of such premises being
restricted to members and their guests. Parking structures may not be the sole
facility for a private club.
   PRIVATE PARKING STRUCTURES. A parking area within a building for the
exclusive use of its owners, to be considered an individual land use not to be
linked with parking requirements regulated in Chapter 10 of this title.
   PRIVATE UNSTRUCTURED PARKING. A parking area not within a building for the
exclusive use of its owners, to be considered an individual land use not to be
linked with parking requirements regulated in Chapter 10 of this title.
   PROPERTY OWNER. A person, persons or public or private entity with the right
to exclusive use, control, or possession of property due to transfer of
property through a deed or other legal document.
   PUBLIC. A use, area, property or facility which:
      (1)   Is owned and operated by a governmental entity, and functions or is
available for use by all persons whether with or without charge; or
      (2)   Is owned or operated by a person or entity other than a
governmental entity, and functions or is available for use by all persons
without charge.
   PUBLIC ART. Any original creation of artwork that is accessible to the
general public.
   PUBLIC PARKING STRUCTURES. A parking area within a building for use by the
public, to be considered an individual land use not to be linked with parking
requirements regulated in Chapter 10 of this title.
   PUBLIC UNSTRUCTURED PARKING. A parking area not within a building for use by
the public, to be considered an individual land use not to be linked with
parking requirements regulated in Chapter 10 of this title.
   PUBLIC UTILITY AND PUBLIC SERVICE USES. Any structure, not otherwise
exempted from the definition of “structure” elsewhere in this title, which is
reasonably necessary to facilitate adequate public utilities and public
services. PUBLIC UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES shall include, but not be
limited to, distribution, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems
for gas, electricity, water, wastewater, stormwater, telecommunications,
irrigation, solid waste, recycling, and other similar public utilities and
public services. For the purposes of this title, public utility and public
service uses shall not include public transportation facilities, sewage or
wastewater treatment facilities, sanitary landfills, salvage yards, storage
yards, business offices, or communications antennas and appurtenant equipment.
   QUASI-PUBLIC. A use which is characterized by its availability to the
public, with or without cost, but which is conducted by an entity,
organization, or person which is not a governmental entity.
   REAL ESTATE OFFICE. An office for the purpose of conducting real estate
transactions and/or property management.
   RECREATION AMENITIES TAX. A fee or dues levied on certain development that
is used to fund an exterior recreation based improvement or facility including,
but not limited to, swimming pools, hot tubs, athletic fields and courts, ice
rinks, skateparks, golf courses, driving ranges, playgrounds and other similar
amenities.
   RECREATION STRUCTURE. Any detached (i.e., not connected to any main
structure or structures) covering erected over a recreational amenity which is
not a seasonal structure. For the purposes of this title, RECREATION STRUCTURES
shall constitute site coverage but shall not be subject to building bulk
control standards. Any RECREATION STRUCTURE is subject to design review.
   RECREATIONAL AMENITY. An exterior recreation based improvement or facility
including, but not limited to, swimming pools, hot tubs, athletic fields and
courts, ice rinks, skateparks, golf courses, driving ranges, playgrounds and
other similar amenities.
   REDEVELOPMENT. The construction, improvement, alteration, installation,
erection, expansion or change in use of any existing building, structure or
other improvement in the town that results in an increase in net floor area or
GRFA.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A building or portion of a building used primarily
for public worship by any number of congregations, along with those incidental
and secondary uses such as a dwelling unit for members of the clergy or other
spiritual leaders, office space, meeting rooms and classrooms for religious
education and community meeting space, but excluding buildings used exclusively
for residential, educational, recreational or other uses not associated with
public worship. Includes churches, chapels, cathedrals, temples and similar
designations.
   REMODELING. The alteration or renovation of the interior only of an existing
residential dwelling unit in the Town of Vail, without any increase in GRFA.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. A development that includes at least one dwelling
unit, including single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, multiple-family
dwellings, fractional fee club units, lodge dwellings units, attached
accommodation units and timeshare units.
   ROOF, FLAT. A roof or portion of roof that has a sloping plane less than a
rise of two inches over a distance of 12 inches.
   ROOF, MANSARD. A roof with two slopes on each of four sides, the lower
steeper than the upper.
   ROOF, SLOPING. A roof or portion of roof with a pitch greater than or equal
to a rise of two inches over a distance of 12 inches.
   SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA. A dish shaped or parabolic shaped reception or
transmission antenna which is more than two feet in diameter (including dishes
stored or temporarily placed for more than one day) for the reception and/or
transmission of satellite signals, including, but not limited to, television
signals, AM radio signals, FM radio signals, telemetry signals, data
communications signals or any other reception or transmission signals using
free air space as a medium, whether for commercial or private use.
   SEASONAL PLANT PRODUCTS BUSINESS. Any person, corporation, company or
partnership which sells any “plant products” as defined in this section. A
seasonal plant products business shall only operate as a conditional use in
zone districts where it is allowed. A seasonal plant products business shall be
entitled to not more than two permits per lot for any one year, and each permit
shall not exceed 60 consecutive days each. Whenever a SEASONAL PLANT PRODUCTS
BUSINESS is not in operation, all structures, fixtures, materials for sale and
equipment relating to the business shall be removed from the site or location
of operation within a period not to exceed 72 hours.
   SEASONAL USE OR STRUCTURE. A temporary covering erected to accommodate or
extend educational, recreational and cultural activities. Such temporary
coverings may not be in place for more than seven consecutive months of any 12-
month period. For the purposes of this title, a seasonal use or structure shall
not constitute site coverage and shall not be subject to building bulk control
standards. Any seasonal use or structure is subject to design review.
   SETBACK. The distance from a lot or site line, creek or stream measured
horizontally to a line or location within the lot or site which establishes the
permitted location of uses, structures or buildings on the site.
   SETBACK AREA. The area within a lot or site between a lot or site line and
the corresponding setback line within the lot or site.
   SETBACK LINE. A line or location within a lot or site which establishes the
permitted location of uses, structures, or buildings on the site.
   SETBACK LINE, FRONT. The setback line extending the full width of the site
parallel to and measured from the front lot or site line.
   SETBACK LINE, REAR. The setback line extending the full width of the site
parallel to and measured from the rear lot or site line.
   SETBACK LINE, SIDE. The setback line extending from the front setback line
to the rear setback line parallel to and measured from the side lot or site
line.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult store, adult cabaret,
adult motion picture theater or adult theater, except an establishment where a
medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional
licensed by the State of Colorado engages in approved and recognized sexual
therapy.
   SHOPS, BEAUTY AND BARBER. A facility where one or more persons engage in the
practice of cosmetology, including hair, nail and skin care.
   SHOPS, ELECTRONICS SALES AND REPAIR. A facility where home electronics are
sold and/or repaired on the premises.
   SHORT TERM RENTAL. Shall be deemed to be a rental for a period not exceeding
30 days.
   SITE.
      (1)   A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a use,
building or structure under the provisions of this title and meeting the
minimum requirements of this title. A lot or SITE may consist of a single lot
of record, a portion of a lot of record, a combination of lots of record or
portions thereof, or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds.
      (2)   See also definition of LOT or SITE.
   SITE COVERAGE. The ratio of the total building area of a site to the total
area of a site, expressed as a percentage, subject to the following:
      (1)   In calculating site coverage, "building area of a site" means that
portion of a site occupied by a building, carport, portecochere, arcade or
covered or roofed walkway constructed at, below, or above grade as measured
from the exterior face of the sheathing of the perimeter walls or supporting
columns.
      (2)    A balcony or deck projecting from a higher elevation may extend
over a lower balcony, deck or walkway, and in such case the higher balcony or
deck shall not be deemed a roof or covering for the lower balcony, deck or
walkway.
      (3)   Building area shall also include any portion of roof overhangs,
eaves, covered stairs, covered decks, covered porches, covered terraces and
covered patios that extend more than four (4) feet from the exterior face of
the perimeter building walls or supporting columns.
      (4)   In the VVI, HDMF, CH-3, CC1, CC2, CC3, CSC, LMU-1, LMU-2, PA, PA-2,
SBR, and SBR2 zone districts, below-grade improvements are not included in the
calculation of site coverage.
   SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Shall mean and be limited to a final major
or minor subdivision plat, or a Special Development District development plan.
   SLOPE. The deviation of a surface from the horizontal, expressed in percent
or degrees and calculated through rise over run.
   SPA. A commercial establishment providing services including massage, body
or facial treatments, makeup consultation and application, manicures, pedicures
and similar services, but excluding beauty and barber shops.
   SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT, MAJOR AMENDMENT (PEC AND/OR COUNCIL REVIEW).
Any proposal to change uses; increase gross residential floor area; change the
number of dwelling or accommodation units; modify, enlarge or expand any
approved Special Development District (other than “minor amendments” as defined
in this section), except as provided under §
12-15-4, “Interior Conversions” or §
12-15-5, “Additional Gross Residential Floor Area (250 Ordinance)” of this
title.
   SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT, MINOR AMENDMENT (STAFF REVIEW). Modifications
to building plans, site or landscape plans that do not alter the basic intent
and character of the approved Special Development District, and are consistent
with the design criteria of Chapter 9, Article A of this title. Minor
amendments may include, but not be limited to, variations of not more than five
feet to approved setbacks and/or building footprints; changes to landscape or
site plans that do not adversely impact pedestrian or vehicular circulation
throughout the Special Development District; or changes to gross floor area
(excluding residential uses) of not more than 5% of the approved square footage
of retail, office, common areas and other nonresidential floor area.
   STORAGE AREA. An area within a dwelling unit which is designed and used
specifically for the purpose of storage and is not required by the latest
edition of the adopted building codes to provide either light, ventilation or
to comply with any code requirement for its function or existence.
   STORE, CONVENIENCE FOOD. Commercial retail entity that specializes in
selling fast food and beverage, and only includes counter service, not table
service.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground, but not including poles, lines, cables or other transmission or
distribution facilities of public utilities, or mailboxes or light fixtures. At
the discretion of the Design Review Board, swimming pools and tennis courts may
be exempted from this definition.
   STUDIO. A building or portion of a building used as a place of work by an
artist, photographer or an artisan in the field of light handicrafts, provided
that no use shall be permitted or no process or equipment employed which is
objectionable or injurious to persons or property in the vicinity by reason of
odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse or wastes, noise, vibration,
illumination, glare, unsightliness or hazard of fire or explosion.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure.
      (2)   Market value shall be determined by a qualified assessor designated
by the Administrator. The market value of a structure is determined either:
         (a)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         (b)   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
      (3)   For the purposes of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions.
   SUBSTANTIAL OFF SITE IMPACT. An impact resulting from development or
redevelopment on the surrounding neighborhood and public facilities in the
vicinity of a development or redevelopment site having a considerable amount of
effect upon the area. For example, SUBSTANTIAL OFF SITE IMPACTS may include,
but are not limited to, the following: deed restricted employee housing;
roadway improvements; pedestrian walkway improvements; streetscape
improvements; stream tract/bank restoration; loading/delivery; public art
improvements; and similar improvements.
   THEATER. An establishment for the rehearsal and presentation of performing
arts and/or the showing of movies or motion pictures.
   TIMESHARE ESTATE. Shall be defined in accordance with C.R.S. § 38-33-110.
   TIMESHARE LICENSE. A contractual right to exclusive occupancy of specified
premises; provided, that the occupancy of the premises is divided into five or
more separate time periods extending over a term of more than two years. The
premises may consist of one parcel, unit or dwelling or any of several parcels,
units or dwellings identified at the time the license is created to be
identified later. No timeshare is a TIMESHARE LICENSE if it meets the
definition of interval estate, timeshare or time span estate.
   TIMESHARE UNIT. A dwelling unit which includes the following forms of
interval property ownership: fractional fee; timeshare estate; or timeshare
license, as approved by the Town of Vail. No offer of a fractional fee,
timeshare estate or timeshare license in a timeshare unit shall be made except
pursuant to an application for registration and certification as a subdivision
developer of a timeshare program or an exemption from registration approved by
the State of Colorado Real Estate Commission pursuant to C.R.S. §§ 12-61-401 et
seq., and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. Within ten
days after receipt of a written request, the developer of a timeshare unit
shall provide to the staff of the Department of Community Development a copy of
the application or request for exemption filed with the State of Colorado Real
Estate Commission and/or evidence of approval of the application or request for
exemption.
   TOWNHOUSE PROJECT. A building or group of associated buildings consisting of
multiple-family dwelling units designed as attached or row dwellings that are
treated as one entity for zoning purposes.
   TRANSPORTATION BUSINESS. A business which provides transportation for
persons in the form of a shuttle service (e.g., van transportation) or by
providing automobiles for customers (e.g., car rental). TRANSPORTATION
BUSINESSES do not include businesses providing vehicles for the transportation
of goods or products including, but not limited to, panel trucks, moving vans
and trucks, and other similar vehicles.
   TRUSS TYPE STRUCTURAL SYSTEM. A structural system that includes trusses used
as structural support, perpendicular to the outside walls, on the inside of a
roof structure.
   UNDERLYING ZONE DISTRICT. The zone district existing on the property, or
imposed on the property at the time the Special Development District is
approved.
   USABLE OPEN SPACE. Outdoor space usable for outdoor living or recreational
activities, including patios, terraces, gardens, lawns, swimming pools, water
features or recreation areas, and decks or balconies, but excluding driveways,
parking areas, access walks, utility and service areas and required setback
areas. Patios used for restaurant and bar service shall not be considered as
USABLE OPEN SPACE.
   USABLE OPEN SPACE, GROUND LEVEL. Usable open space provided at grade or on
decks or similar structures not more than ten feet above ground level and
accessible from ground level.
   USE. The purpose for which a site or structure or portion thereof is
arranged, designed, intended, erected, moved, altered or enlarged, or for which
either a site or structure or portion thereof is or may be occupied or
maintained.
   USE, ACCESSORY. A use or activity that is subordinate and incidental to a
permitted or conditional use.
   USE, CONDITIONAL. A use or activity with unique or special characteristics
that requires additional review to ensure they are located properly with
respect to the objectives of the zoning regulations, and to ensure their
compatibility with other surrounding uses and the town at large. Due to their
unique characteristics and the potential for impacts to adjacent uses,
conditional uses are often allowed subject to specific limitations and
conditions.
   USE, PERMITTED. A principal use or activity allowed by right within a zone
district.
   VAIL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. An advisory master plan for the development of the
town. The Vail Comprehensive Plan is a compendium of planning documents that
are updated, amended and adopted by the Town Council. A copy of the current
Comprehensive Plan shall be kept by the Community Development Department and
available for inspection during business hours.
   VARIANCE. Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning
ordinance, as further regulated by this title.
   VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL. A vehicle that is designated for commercial use through
licensing requirements by the State of Colorado.
   VEHICLE STORAGE YARD. An area where vehicles are temporarily parked while
awaiting repair or disposition. Vehicles stored in a vehicle storage yard must
be licensed vehicles, and no one vehicle may remain in such a storage yard for
more than 120 consecutive or nonconsecutive days in a one-year period. A
VEHICLE STORAGE YARD does not include the repair and servicing of vehicles or
the removal and sale of vehicle parts or other accessories.
   VESTED PROPERTY RIGHT. The right to undertake and complete the development
and use of property under the terms and conditions of the site specific
development plan, and shall be deemed established upon approval of a site
specific development plan.
   VIEW CORRIDOR. An unobstructed location, position or area that permits an
unhindered panoramic vista of particular interest or pleasure or unique view to
a particular point from a public place, adopted by ordinance, as further
regulated by this title.
   VIEW POINT ORIGINATION. The survey point, called out as the instrument in
each legal description defining a view corridor boundary, which is the basis
for each view corridor.
   ZONE DISTRICT. A specifically delineated area in the Town of Vail with
uniform regulations and requirements which govern the use, placement, spacing
and size of land and buildings as mapped on the Town of Vail official zoning
map.
   ZONING MAP. A map that specifies the boundaries of zone districts within the
Town of Vail.
(Ord. 8(1973) §1.600; Ord. 19(1976) §2; Ord. 30(1977) §1; Ord. 12(1978) §1;
Ord. 16(1978) §1; Ord. 26(1980) §1; Ord. 37(1980) §1; Ord. 6(1982) §1(a - c);
Ord. 23(1982) §§1, 2; Ord. 26(1982) §§7, 8; Ord. 41(1982) §1(A - B); Ord. 9
(1985) §1; Ord. 36(1987) §1; Ord. 32(1988) §1; Ord. 31(1989) §§16 - 19; Ord. 27
(1990) §1; Ord. 15(1991) §1; Ord. 17(1991) §2; Ord. 35(1991) §1; Ord. 43(1991)
§§1, 2; Ord. 8(1992) §§1 - 3; Ord. 9(1993) §§1 - 5; Ord. 33(1993) §1; Ord. 17
(1994) §1; Ord. 21(1994) §§1 - 7; Ord. 6(1995) §6; Ord. 14(1996) §1; Ord. 22
(1996) §1; Ord. 1(1997) §§1, 2; Ord. 13(1997) §1; 1997 Code; Ord. 3(1999) §3;
Ord. 22(1999) §7; Ord. 23(1999) §2; Ord. 9(2000) §1; Ord. 5(2001) §6; Ord. 17
(2001) §2; Ord. 19(2001) §3; Ord. 24(2001) §10; Ord. 31(2001) §2; Ord. 28(2002)
§2; Ord. 29(2002) §2; Ord. 5(2003) §1; Ord. 18(2003) §1; Ord. 33(2003) §1; Ord.
14(2004) §1; Ord. 26(2004) §§1, 2; Ord. 18(2005) §2; Ord. 24(2005) §3; Ord. 29
(2005) §18; Ord. 2(2006) §2; Ord. 4(2006) §1; Ord. 7(2007) §1; Ord. 8(2007) §1;
Ord. 22(2007) §2; Ord. 28(2007) §2; Ord. 32(2007) §12; Ord. 39(2007) §1; Ord. 1
(2008) §1; Ord. 8(2008) §2; Ord. 12(2008) §1; Ord. 13(2008) §1; Ord. 22(2010)
§1; Ord. 2(2012) §2; Ord. 21(2012) §1; Ord. 8(2014) §1; Ord. 1(2016) §1; Ord. 2
(2016) §2; Ord. 26(2016) §1; Ord. 27(2016) §1; Ord. 12(2017) §1; Ord. 14(2018)
§1; Ord. 8(2019) §1; Ord. 15(2019) §1; Ord. 9(2022) § 1)
CHAPTER 3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
12-3-1 Administrator; appointment
12-3-2 Administrator; duties
12-3-3 Appeals and call-up
12-3-4 Determination of similar use
12-3-5 Declaration of site allocation
12-3-6 Hearings
12-3-7 Amendment
12-3-8 Zoning changes; town property
12-3-9 Compliance; violations; penalties
12-3-10 Notification of surface development
§ 12-3-1 ADMINISTRATOR; APPOINTMENT.
   The Town Manager shall appoint an Administrator who shall administer and
enforce this title. The position of Administrator may be combined with another
position of the town.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 21.100)
§ 12-3-2 ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES.
   (A)   Investigation; inspection. The Administrator shall be responsible for
such duties as prescribed in this title, and shall be responsible for
enforcement of the zoning regulations. The Administrator and his or her
designees shall have the right to enter on any site or to enter any structure
for the purpose of investigation or inspection related to any provision of this
title, provided that the right of entry shall be exercised only at reasonable
hours and that in no case shall any structure be entered in the absence of the
owner or tenant without the written order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   Serve notice. The Administrator may serve notice indicating the nature
of any violation, or requiring the removal of any structure or use in violation
of this title, on the owner or his or her authorized agent, or a tenant, or on
any other person who commits or participates in any violation of this title.
The Administrator may call upon the Town Attorney to institute necessary legal
proceedings to enforce the provisions of this title, and the Town Attorney is
authorized to institute appropriate actions to that end. The Administrator may
call upon the Chief of Police and his or her authorized agents to assist in the
enforcement of this title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 21.102)
§ 12-3-3 APPEALS AND CALL-UP.
   (A)   Appeals of administrative decisions.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this subsection A is to provide an avenue
to appeal a final administrative decision based on a belief that there was an
error in a final administrative decision made by the Administrator under Titles
11, 12, 13 and 14 of this Code.
      (2)   Applicability. This subsection A shall apply to final
administrative decisions of the Administrator. For purposes of this subsection
(A), a “final administrative decision” is a written decision of the
Administrator interpreting a specific provision of this Code.
      (3)   Standing. Only the following have standing to appeal: the affected
applicant; an owner of real property that is adjacent to the property that is
the subject of the application; or any adversely affected person. For purposes
of this Section, adversely affected person means any person who will suffer an
adverse effect to an interest protected by this Title, but only if the adverse
effect exceeds in degree the effect on others in the general interest in
community good shared by all persons.
      (4)   Procedure.
         (a)   A notice of appeal shall be filed within 20 days of the final
administrative decision. The notice of appeal shall include all information
required by the appeal application provided by the Department of Community
Development and the applicable fee as established by resolution of the Town
Council. Failure to timely file a complete appeal shall constitute a waiver of
the right to appeal.
         (b)   Within 7 days of receipt of a complete notice of appeal, the
Administrator shall determine whether the appellant has standing to appeal. If
the Administrator finds that the appellant does not have standing, the
Administrator shall notify the appellant, in writing, that the appeal has been
dismissed. The dismissal is not subject to further appeal.
         (c)   If the Administrator determines that the appellant has standing,
the Administrator shall determine the appropriate review body. Appeals of
administrative decisions related to design guidelines shall be heard by the
Design Review Board. All other appeals of administrative decisions shall be
heard by the Planning and Environmental Commission. The Administrator shall
schedule a public hearing before the applicable review body at its next
available meeting to occur within 60 days of the standing determination.  
         (d)   At least 15 days prior to the hearing, the Administrator shall
send written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to the
appellant, the applicant and adjacent property owners, by first class U.S.
Mail, postage prepaid. If adjacent property owners are in a planned community,
notice shall be sufficient if mailed to the owners’ association.
         (e)   All appeals shall be de novo, and the review body many consider
any evidence it deems to be relevant. The burden shall be on the appellant to
prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the decision being appealed was
incorrect. The review body may adopt procedures for the public hearing,
including without limitation time allowances for the presentation of evidence,
argument and public comment, if any.
         (f)   The review body shall review the appeal based on the applicable
standards and criteria in the Town Code. The review body shall affirm, modify
or overturn the final administrative decision, and shall issue written findings
to support its decision. The review body may request that the Town Attorney
draft such findings for adoption at a subsequent meeting, and the decision
shall not be final until such findings have been adopted.
         (g)   The decision of the review body is subject to further appeal as
set forth in subsection (B) hereof.
      (4)   Stay. The filing of a complete notice of appeal shall stay all
permit activity and any proceedings related to the application being appealed
or the property that is the subject of such application, unless the
Administrator determines that a stay poses imminent peril to life or property.
The stay shall continue until final resolution of the appeal.
   (B)   Appeals of decisions by the Planning and Environmental Commission,
Design Review Board, and Art in Public Places Board.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this subsection B is to provide an avenue
to appeal a final decision based on a belief that there was an error in a
decision made under the relevant Title of the Town Code.
      (2)   Applicability. This subsection (B) shall apply to final decisions
made by the Planning and Environmental Commission, Design Review Board, or Art
in Public Places Board with respect to the provisions of the Town Code.
      (3)   Standing. Only the following have standing to appeal: the affected
applicant; an owner of real property that is adjacent to the property that is
the subject of the application, or any adversely affected person. For purposes
of this Section, adversely affected person means any person who will suffer an
adverse effect to an interest protected by this Title, but only if the adverse
effect exceeds in degree the effect on others in the general interest in
community good shared by all persons.
      (4)   Procedure.
         (a)   A notice of appeal shall be filed within 20 days of the decision
being appealed. The notice of appeal shall include all information required by
the appeal application provided by the Department of Community Development and
the applicable fee established by resolution of the Town Council. Failure to
timely file a complete appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal.
         (b)   Within 7 days of receipt of a complete notice of appeal, the
Administrator shall determine whether the appellant has standing to appeal. If
the Administrator finds that the appellant does not have standing, the
Administrator shall notify the appellant, in writing, that the appeal has been
dismissed. The dismissal is not subject to further appeal.
         (c)   If the Administrator determines that the appellant has standing,
the Administrator shall schedule a public hearing before the Town Council to
occur within 60 days of such determination.
         (d)   At least 15 days prior to the hearing, the Administrator shall
send written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to the last
known addresses of the applicant, appellant and adjacent property owners by
first class U.S. Mail. If adjacent property owners are in a planned community,
notice shall be sufficient if mailed to the owners’ association.
         (e)   All appeals shall be de novo, and the Town Council may consider
any evidence it deems to be relevant. The burden shall be on the appellant to
prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the decision was incorrect. The
Town Council may adopt procedures for the public hearing, including without
limitation time allowances for the presentation of evidence, argument and
public comment, if any.
         (f)   The Town Council shall review the appeal based on the applicable
standards and criteria in the Town Code. The Town Council shall affirm, modify
or overturn the decision, and shall issue written findings to support its
decision. The Town Council may request that the Town Attorney draft such
findings for adoption at a subsequent meeting, and the Town Council’s decision
shall not be final until adoption of such findings.
      (5)   Stay. The filing of a complete notice of appeal shall stay all
permit activity and any proceedings related to the application being appealed
or the property that is the subject of such application, unless the
Administrator determines that a stay poses imminent peril to life or property.
The stay shall continue until final resolution of the appeal.
      (6)   Further review. The decision of the Town Council on any appeal is
final, subject only to judicial review as allowed by law.
   (C)   Call-up by Town Council. The Town Council may call up any decision of
the Planning and Environmental Commission or the Design Review Board or the Art
in Public Places Board, by a majority vote of those Town Council members
present, within 20 days of the decision being called up. Once called up, the
decision shall be reviewed in the same manner as an appeal, provided that no
finding of standing shall be necessary, and there shall be no burden of proof.
(Ord. 7(2023) § 1)
§ 12-3-4 DETERMINATION OF SIMILAR USE.
   (A)   Uses not listed. In order to ensure that the zoning regulations will
permit similar uses in certain prescribed commercial zones, the Town Council,
on its initiative or upon written request, shall determine whether a use not
specifically listed as a permitted use shall be deemed a permitted use on the
basis of similarity to uses specifically listed. The procedure prescribed in
this section shall not be substituted for the amendment procedure as a means of
adding new uses to the lists of permitted uses, but shall be followed to
determine whether the characteristics of a particular use not listed are
sufficiently similar to certain classes of permitted uses to justify a finding
that the use should be deemed a permitted use.
   (B)   Review use characteristics. The Administrator, upon request of the
Town Council, or written request of any person for a determination under this
section, shall review the characteristics of any use proposed to be determined
as similar to permitted uses, and shall transmit a report to the Council
advising in what respects the proposed use would be, in fact, similar to
specified permitted uses in the same zone district, or in what respects the
proposed use would not be similar to permitted uses, or would be similar to
uses specifically permitted only in other zone districts. After receipt of the
report, the Council may determine the proposed use to be similar to uses
specified as permitted uses in the same zone district if it finds that the
proposed use will not be substantially different in its operation or other
characteristics from uses specifically permitted in the same zone district. The
Council shall state the basis for its determination, and the use thereafter
shall be deemed a permitted use subject to the same regulations as specifically
permitted uses in the same zone district.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 21.200; Ord. 29(2005) § 19)
§ 12-3-5 DECLARATION OF SITE ALLOCATION.
   (A)   File with Administrator. Whenever a site used or intended to be used
pursuant to the provisions of this title cannot be clearly defined or
identified by means of a single lot of record or by portions of combinations
thereof, or by other recorded or legally recognized designation, the owner or
his or her authorized agent may file a declaration of site allocation with the
Administrator.
   (B)   Information provided. The declaration of site allocation shall be
filed on a form to be provided by the Administrator, and shall be accompanied
by a map drawn to scale indicating the exact location, shape and dimensions of
the site and such other information as may be required by the Administrator,
including existing or proposed structures or improvements on the same or
adjoining sites.
   (C)   Sworn; option. The Administrator may require that the declaration of
site allocation be sworn to by the owner or owners of the site.
   (D)   Lots to meet standards.
      (1)   No site declared under this section shall be recognized as a usable
site pursuant to the provisions of this title if it results in creation of any
site or parcel of land which does not fully meet the lot site and dimension
requirements of the zone district in which it is located.
      (2)   The declaration of site allocation procedure shall not be
substituted for the procedures prescribed in Title 13 of this code if the site
constitutes a portion of a parcel which can be further subdivided or otherwise
is subject to the provisions of Title 13 of this code.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 21.300; Ord. 29(2005) § 19)
§ 12-3-6 HEARINGS.
   (A)   Conduct. When required by statute or by this title, hearings before
the Planning and Environmental Commission and the Town Council shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Setting date. Upon the filing of an application, petition or appeal,
the disposition of which requires a hearing before either the Planning and
Environmental Commission or the Town Council or both, pursuant to this title, a
date for the hearing shall be set which shall be not more than 30 days from the
date of filing of the application or receipt of the document.
   (C)   Notice.
      (1)   Not less than 15 days prior to the date set for the hearing before
the Planning and Environmental Commission, the Administrator shall cause a copy
of the notice to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
town.
      (2)   In addition to the published notice, the Administrator shall cause
a copy of the notice to be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid to the
owner or owners of record of the property which is subject of the hearing and
the owner or owners of record of the property adjacent to the subject property
(if the adjacent property is a condominium project, notice may be mailed to the
managing agent, registered agent or any member of the board of directors
thereof), for:
         (a)   Application to change in zone district boundaries;
         (b)   Application for a conditional use permit;
         (c)   Application for a variance;
         (d)   Application relating to development plans for Special
Development Districts; or
         (e)   Application to change the density control sections of a zone
district.
      (3)   The within required notices shall state the time and place of the
hearing, name of the applicant, a general description of the subject property
indicating its location (which may be shown by map), a brief summary of the
subject matter of the hearing, and a statement that the application or
information relating to the proposed change or amendment is available in the
Administrator’s office during regular business hours for review or inspection
by the public.
   (D)   Evidence.
      (1)   The Planning and Environmental Commission shall base its
determinations upon statements contained in the application or petition, upon
reports from the town staff or consultants, if any, and upon evidence presented
to the Commission at the hearing.
      (2)   The Town Council shall base its determinations upon statements
contained in the application or petition, upon reports from the town staff or
consultants, if any, upon evidence submitted to the Planning and Environmental
Commission and the recommendations or findings of the Commission, and upon
evidence presented to the Council at the hearing.
      (3)   Hearings shall be conducted in such a manner as to afford an
applicant or petitioner and all interested parties the opportunity to submit
exceptions to the record, contentions and arguments with respect to the issues
entailed, provided that the Planning and Environmental Commission and the Town
Council may limit the taking of evidence to evidence not previously submitted
and made a matter of record.
(Ord. 8(1973) §§ 21.400, 21.403; Ord. 16(1978) § 7; Ord. 49(1979) § 1; Ord. 29
(2005) § 19)
§ 12-3-7 AMENDMENT.
   (A)   Prescription. The regulations prescribed in this title and the
boundaries of the zone districts shown on the official zoning map may be
amended, or repealed by the Town Council in accordance with the procedures
prescribed in this chapter.
   (B)   Initiation.
      (1)   An amendment of the regulations of this title or a change in zone
district boundaries may be initiated by the Town Council on its own motion, by
the Planning and Environmental Commission on its own motion, by petition of any
resident or property owner in the town, or by the Administrator.
      (2)   A petition for amendment of the regulations or a change in zone
district boundaries shall be filed on a form to be prescribed by the
Administrator. The petition shall include a summary of the proposed revision of
the regulations, or a complete description of proposed changes in zone district
boundaries and a map indicating the existing and proposed zone district
boundaries. If the petition is for a change in zone district boundaries, the
petition shall include a list of the owners of all properties within the
boundaries of the area to be rezoned or changed, and the property adjacent
thereto. The owners’ list shall include the names of all owners, their mailing
and street addresses, and the legal description of the property owned by each.
Accompanying the list shall be stamped, addressed envelopes to each owner to be
used for the mailing of the notice of hearing. The petition also shall include
such additional information as prescribed by the Administrator.
   (C)   Criteria and findings.
      (1)   Zone district boundary amendment.
         (a)   Factors, enumerated. Before acting on an application for a zone
district boundary amendment, the Planning and Environmental Commission and Town
Council shall consider the following factors with respect to the requested zone
district boundary amendment:
            1.   The extent to which the zone district amendment is consistent
with all the applicable elements of the adopted goals, objectives and policies
outlined in the Vail Comprehensive Plan and is compatible with the development
objectives of the town;
            2.   The extent to which the zone district amendment is suitable
with the existing and potential land uses on the site and existing and
potential surrounding land uses as set out in the town’s adopted planning
documents;
            3.   The extent to which the zone district amendment presents a
harmonious, convenient, workable relationship among land uses consistent with
municipal development objectives;
            4.   The extent to which the zone district amendment provides for
the growth of an orderly viable community and does not constitute spot zoning
as the amendment serves the best interests of the community as a whole;
            5.   The extent to which the zone district amendment results in
adverse or beneficial impacts on the natural environment, including, but not
limited to, water quality, air quality, noise, vegetation, riparian corridors,
hillsides and other desirable natural features;
            6.   The extent to which the zone district amendment is consistent
with the purpose statement of the proposed zone district;
            7.   The extent to which the zone district amendment demonstrates
how conditions have changed since the zoning designation of the subject
property was adopted and is no longer appropriate; and
            8.   Such other factors and criteria as the Commission and/or
Council deem applicable to the proposed rezoning.
         (b)   Necessary findings. Before recommending and/or granting an
approval of an application for a zone district boundary amendment, the Planning
and Environmental Commission and the Town Council shall make the following
findings with respect to the requested amendment:
            1.   That the amendment is consistent with the adopted goals,
objectives and policies outlined in the Vail Comprehensive Plan and compatible
with the development objectives of the town;
            2.   That the amendment is compatible with and suitable to adjacent
uses and appropriate for the surrounding areas; and
            3.   That the amendment promotes the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the town and promotes the coordinated and harmonious
development of the town in a manner that conserves and enhances its natural
environment and its established character as a resort and residential community
of the highest quality.
      (2)   Prescribed regulations amendment.
         (a)   Factors, enumerated. Before acting on an application for an
amendment to the regulations prescribed in this title, the Planning and
Environmental Commission and Town Council shall consider the following factors
with respect to the requested text amendment:
            1.   The extent to which the text amendment furthers the general
and specific purposes of the zoning regulations;
            2.   The extent to which the text amendment would better implement
and better achieve the applicable elements of the adopted goals, objectives and
policies outlined in the Vail Comprehensive Plan and is compatible with the
development objectives of the town;
            3.   The extent to which the text amendment demonstrates how
conditions have substantially changed since the adoption of the subject
regulation and how the existing regulation is no longer appropriate or is
inapplicable;
            4.   The extent to which the text amendment provides a harmonious,
convenient, workable relationship among land use regulations consistent with
municipal development objectives; and
            5.   Such other factors and criteria the Planning and Environmental
Commission and/or Council deem applicable to the proposed text amendment.
         (b)   Necessary findings. Before recommending and/or granting an
approval of an application for a text amendment the Planning and Environmental
Commission and the Town Council shall make the following findings with respect
to the requested amendment:
            1.   That the amendment is consistent with the applicable elements
of the adopted goals, objectives and policies outlined in the Vail
Comprehensive Plan and is compatible with the development objectives of the
town;
            2.   That the amendment furthers the general and specific purposes
of the zoning regulations; and
            3.   That the amendment promotes the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the town and promotes the coordinated and harmonious
development of the town in a manner that conserves and enhances its natural
environment and its established character as a resort and residential community
of the highest quality.
   (D)   Fee. The Town Council shall set a fee schedule for petitions for
amendment of the regulations of this title or a change in zone district
boundaries, sufficient to cover the cost of town staff time and other expenses
incidental to the review of the petition.
   (E)   Hearing. Upon filing of a petition for amendment or upon initiation of
an amendment by the Town Council, Planning and Environmental Commission or
Administrator, the Administrator shall set a date for hearing in accordance
with the provisions of §
12-3-6(B) and (C) of this chapter.
   (F)   Planning And Environmental Commission Recommendation. Within 20 days
of the closing of a public hearing on a proposed amendment, the Planning and
Environmental Commission shall act on the petition or proposal. The Commission
may recommend approval of the petition or proposal as initiated, may recommend
approval with such modifications as it deems necessary to accomplish the
purposes of this title, or may recommend denial of the petition or rejection of
the proposal. The Commission shall transmit its recommendation, together with a
report on the public hearing and its deliberations and findings, to the Town
Council.
   (G)   Hearing by Town Council. Upon receipt of the report and recommendation
of the Planning and Environmental Commission, the Town Council shall set a date
for hearing in accordance with §
12-3-6(B) of this chapter.
   (H)   Action by Town Council. Within 20 days of the closing of a public
hearing on a proposed amendment, the Town Council shall act on the petition or
proposal. The Town Council shall consider but shall not be bound by the
recommendation of the Planning and Environmental Commission. The Town Council
may cause an ordinance to be introduced to amend the regulations of this title
or to change zone district boundaries, either in accordance with the
recommendation of the Planning and Environmental Commission or in modified
form, or the Council may deny the petition. If the Council elects to proceed
with an ordinance amending the regulations or changing zone district
boundaries, or both, the ordinance shall be considered as prescribed by the
Charter of the town.
(Ord. 8(1973) §§ 21.501, 21.504, 21.506; Ord. 8(1978) § 21.500; Ord. 16(1978) §
8; Ord. 50(1978) § 17; Ord. 49(1979) §§ 2, 3; Ord. 4(2002) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) §
19)
§ 12-3-8 ZONING CHANGES; TOWN PROPERTY.
   (A)   Appropriate zoning. All real property owned by the town and acquired
by sale, purchase, gift, dedication or any other means shall be zoned or
rezoned to a zoning category appropriate to the use or proposed use thereof.
   (B)   Rezone requirements. The zoning classification of any real property
owned by the town shall not be changed without full compliance with the terms
and requirements of this title.
   (C)   Town bound by title. Property owned by the town shall not be used
contrary to the terms of this title, in particular, the restrictions of the
zoning district in which the property is located.
(Ord. 24(1978) § 1; Ord. 5(2003) § 19)
§ 12-3-9 COMPLIANCE; VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Compliance required. It is unlawful to use or occupy or to permit the
use or occupancy of any building or portion thereof, or site, or both, which
may be erected, converted, altered or placed into use in a manner or for a use
or a purpose which is not in conformity with the requirements of this title.
   (B)   Building permit.
      (1)   The Town shall not issue a building permit unless, at the time of
application, all of the following are in full compliance with all applicable
requirements of this Code: the real property on which construction will occur;
the proposed building or structure; and the use of the real property on which
construction will occur.
      (2)   The Town shall not issue a building permit if, at the time of
application, the applicant owns any other real property within the Town that is
not in full compliance with all applicable requirements of this Code.
      (3)   The Town shall not issue a building permit if, at the time of
application, the applicant maintains any activity on any property within the
Town that is not in full compliance with all applicable requirements of this
Code.
      (4)   The Town shall not issue a building permit if the applicant is
delinquent in any payments to the Town, including without limitation taxes,
fines and penalties.
      (5)   For purposes of this Section, if the applicant is a corporation,
company, trust or similar entity, "applicant" includes any of its members,
directors, trustees or principals who have a possessory interest in the
property that is the subject of the application.
   (C)   Not exclusive. In case any building or structure is erected,
structurally altered, extended, moved or maintained, or any building, structure
or land is used in violation of this title, any person may file a written
complaint in the Town Municipal Court alleging said violation. The filing of a
complaint to the Municipal Court shall be an additional remedy, and shall not
preclude the imposition of any other civil or administrative action or
sanction.
   (D)   Liability. The owner or general agent of a building or premises where
a violation of any provisions of this title has been committed or shall exist,
or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such
general agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in
which such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent,
architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits, takes part in,
or who assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises
in which any such violation shall exist, shall be guilty of a violation of this
code and subject to penalty as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code for each and every day that such violation continues. The
correction of a violation shall not restrain imposition of these penalties.
Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 22; 1997 Code; Ord. 5(2003) § 20; Ord. 16(2023) § 1)
§ 12-3-10 NOTIFICATION OF SURFACE DEVELOPMENT.
   It shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant to provide notice of
any application for development to any mineral estate owners and the Town of
Vail in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. Title 24, Article 65.5,
notification of surface development. It shall also be the sole responsibility
of the applicant to certify that said notice was provided to the mineral estate
owner pursuant to C.R.S. § 24-65.5-103(1).
(Ord. 18(2008) § 1)
CHAPTER 4: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
Section
12-4-1 Designated
12-4-2 Permitted uses
§ 12-4-1 DESIGNATED.
   The following zone districts are established:
   (A)   Hillside Residential (HR) District;
   (B)   Single-Family Residential (SFR) District;
   (C)   Two-Family Residential (R) District;
   (D)   Two-Family Primary/Secondary Residential (PS) District;
   (E)   Residential Cluster (RC) District;
   (F)   Low Density Multiple-Family (LDMF) District;
   (G)   Medium Density Multiple-Family (MDMF) District;
   (H)   High Density Multiple-Family (HDMF) District;
   (I)   West Vail Multi-Family (WVMF) Overlay District;
   (J)   Community Housing–1 (CH-1) District;
   (K)   Community Housing–2 (CH-2) District;
   (L)   Community Housing–3 (CH-3) District;
   (M)   Vail Village Townhouse (VVT) District;
   (N)   Public Accommodation (PA) District;
   (O)   Commercial Core 1 (CC1) District;
   (P)   Commercial Core 2 (CC2) District;
   (Q)   Commercial Core 3 (CC3) District;
   (R)   Commercial Service Center (CSC) District;
   (S)   Arterial Business (ABD) District;
   (T)   Heavy Service (HS) District;
   (U)   Lionshead Mixed Use 1 (LMU-1) District;
   (V)   Lionshead Mixed Use 2 (LMU-2) District;
   (W)   Public Accommodation-2 (PA-2) District;
   (X)   Agricultural and Open Space (A) District;
   (Y)   Outdoor Recreation (OR) District;
   (Z)   Natural Area Preservation (NAP) District;
   (AA)   Ski Base/Recreation (SBR) District;
   (BB)   Ski Base/Recreation 2 (SBR2) District;
   (CC)   Special Development (SDD) District;
   (DD)   Parking (P) District; and
   (EE)   General Use (GU) District.
   (FF)   Vail Village INN (VVI) District.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 1.201; Ord. 24(1974) § 3(A); Ord. 2(1976) § 3(A); Ord. 30(1977)
§ 2; Ord. 30(1986) § 1; Ord. 23(1987) § 1; Ord. 32(1988) § 2; Ord. 94-21(1994);
1997 Code; Ord. 3(1999) § 4; Ord. 3(2001) § 3; Ord. 4(2003) § 1; Ord. 29(2005)
§ 20; Ord. 2(2006) § 2; Ord. 2(2012) § 3; Ord. 6(2024), § 1; Ord. 15(2025) § 2)
§ 12-4-2 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Listed uses exclusive. The listing of any use as being a permitted use
in any particular zone district shall be deemed an exclusion of such use from
any other zone district unless expressly permitted as a permitted use,
conditional use or accessory use.
   (B)   Prohibited if not permitted. The permitted uses, conditional uses and
accessory uses in the particular districts shall be deemed to be exclusive uses
for those districts, and any use not specifically permitted as a permitted use
is prohibited unless a determination of similar use is made in accordance with
§
12-3-4 of this title.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 21; Ord. 29(2005) § 21)
CHAPTER 5: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
Section
12-5-1 Adopted
12-5-2 Filing
12-5-3 Changes
12-5-4 Replacement
12-5-5 Interpretation of boundaries
12-5-6 Property without zone district designation
§ 12-5-1 ADOPTED.
   The town is divided into districts as shown on the official zoning map of
the town which, together with all explanatory material thereon, is adopted by
reference and declared to be part of this title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 1.202)
§ 12-5-2 FILING.
   The official zoning map shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and
shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the Town Clerk,
and bear the seal of the town under the following words:
   This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in
Section 12-5-1 of the Zoning Title, Town of Vail, Colorado, together with the
date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in the Zoning Title and the date
of the most recent change in zone district boundaries shown thereon.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 1.202; Ord. 29(2005) § 22)
§ 12-5-3 CHANGES.
   No change shall be made in the zone district boundaries or other matter
shown on the official zoning map except by appropriate action of the Town
Council in accord with §§
12-3-1 through
12-3-7 of this title. Any change adopted by the Town Council shall be entered
on the official zoning map promptly, together with an entry noting the date of
the change and a brief description of the nature of the change, which entry
shall be attested by the Town Clerk. The date of the most recent change shall
at all times be indicated on any copies of the official zoning map subsequently
reproduced.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 1.203; Ord. 29(2005) § 22)
§ 12-5-4 REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed,
lost or difficult to interpret or reproduce because of the nature or number of
changes and additions, the Town Council may, by resolution, adopt a new
official zoning map, which shall supersede the prior official zoning map.
   (B)   The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or
omissions in the prior map and may add or revise street locations, lot
designations or other like designations, but no such correction or addition
shall have the effect of amending the zoning ordinance or revising the
boundaries of districts shown on the prior official zoning map.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 1.204)
§ 12-5-5 INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
official zoning map, the following rules shall apply.
   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of
streets or roads shall be construed to follow the centerline.
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines
shall be construed as following the lot lines.
   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the town limits shall
be construed as following the town limits.
   (D)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of centerlines, lot
lines, town limits or similar geographic lines shall be so construed.
   (E)   Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall
be determined by the scale of the map.
   (F)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the official zoning map or in circumstances not
covered by subsections (A) through (E) of this section, the Town Council shall
interpret the zone district boundaries.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 1.205; Ord. 29(2005) § 22)
§ 12-5-6 PROPERTY WITHOUT ZONE DISTRICT DESIGNATION.
   Any land, lot or site within the town municipal boundary which, according to
the official zoning map, does not have a designated zone district, shall be
designated natural area preservation zone district. Newly annexed property will
not be so designated for a period of not more than 90 days or any additional
period of time agreed upon between the property owners of said property and the
town for the imposition of zoning.
(Ord. 6(1987) § 1; Ord. 21(1994) § 10)
CHAPTER 6: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE 6A: HILLSIDE RESIDENTIAL (HR) DISTRICT
Section
12-6A-1 Purpose
12-6A-2 Permitted uses
12-6A-3 Conditional uses
12-6A-4 Accessory uses
12-6A-5 Lot area and site dimensions
12-6A-6 Setbacks
12-6A-7 Height
12-6A-8 Density control
12-6A-9 Site coverage
12-6A-10 Landscaping and site development
12-6A-11 Parking
§ 12-6A-1 PURPOSE.
   The Hillside Residential District is intended to provide sites for low
density single-family residential uses, together with such public facilities as
may be appropriately located in the same zone district. The Hillside
Residential District is intended to ensure adequate light, air, privacy and
open space for each dwelling, commensurate with single-family occupancy, and to
maintain the desirable low density high quality residential development of such
sites by establishing appropriate site development standards.
(Ord. 23(1987) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 23)
§ 12-6A-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the HR District:
   (A)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title; and
   (B)   Single-family residential dwellings.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 2)
§ 12-6A-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted, subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this
title:
   (A)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (B)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (C)   Equestrian facilities located on five acre minimum lot size area on
property bordering public land.
   (D)   Funiculars and other similar conveyances;
   (E)   Home child daycare facilities, as further regulated by §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (F)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (G)   Public park and recreation facilities; and
   (H)   Public utility and public service uses.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 2)
§ 12-6A-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the HR District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Private greenhouses, toolsheds, playhouses, garages or carports,
swimming pools, patios, or recreational facilities customarily incidental to
single-family uses; and
   (C)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 23(1987) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 23)
§ 12-6A-5 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 21,780 square feet of contiguous
buildable area. Each site shall have a minimum frontage of 50 feet. Each site
shall be of a size and shape capable of enclosing a square 80 feet on each side
within its boundaries.
(Ord. 23(1987) § 1)
§ 12-6A-6 SETBACKS.
   In the HR District, minimum front setbacks shall be 20 feet, minimum side
setbacks shall be 15 feet and minimum rear setbacks shall be 15 feet.
(Ord. 23(1987) § 1)
§ 12-6A-7 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 30
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 33 feet.
(Ord. 23(1987) § 1)
§ 12-6A-8 DENSITY CONTROL.
   (A)   Dwelling units. Not more than a total of two dwelling units shall be
permitted on each site.
   (B)   Gross residential floor area.
      (1)   The following gross residential floor area (GRFA) shall be
permitted on each site:
         (a)   Not more than 43 square feet of gross residential floor area
(GRFA) for each 100 square feet of the first 10,000 square feet of site area;
plus
         (b)   Twenty five square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA)
for each 100 square feet of site area over 10,000 square feet, not exceeding
22,000 square feet of site area; plus
         (c)   Seven square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA) for
each 100 square feet of site area in excess of 22,000 square feet.
      (2)   On any site containing two dwelling units, one of the units shall
not exceed 1,200 square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA).
         (a)   This unit shall not be subdivided or sold separately from the
main dwelling unit.
         (b)   This unit may be integrated into the main dwelling unit or may
be integrated within a garage structure serving the main unit, but shall not be
a separate freestanding structure.
(Ord. 23(1987) § 1; Ord. 37(1990) § 21; Ord. 14(2004) § 2)
§ 12-6A-9 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 15% of the total site area.
(Ord. 23(1987) § 1; Ord. 41(1990) § 2)
§ 12-6A-10 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 70% of each site shall be landscaped. The minimum width and length
of any area qualifying as landscaping shall be ten feet with a minimum area of
not less than 300 square feet.
(Ord. 23(1987) § 1)
§ 12-6A-11 PARKING.
   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 10 of this
title.
(Ord. 23(1987) § 1)
ARTICLE 6B: SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (SFR) DISTRICT
Section
12-6B-1 Purpose
12-6B-2 Permitted uses
12-6B-3 Conditional uses
12-6B-4 Accessory uses
12-6B-5 Lot area and site dimensions
12-6B-6 Setbacks
12-6B-7 Height
12-6B-8 Density control
12-6B-9 Site coverage
12-6B-10 Landscaping and site development
12-6B-11 Parking
§ 12-6B-1 PURPOSE.
   The Single-Family Residential District is intended to provide sites for low
density single-family residential uses, together with such public facilities as
may be appropriately located in the same zone district. The Single-Family
Residential District is intended to ensure adequate light, air, privacy and
open space for each dwelling, commensurate with single-family occupancy, and to
maintain the desirable residential qualities of such sites by establishing
appropriate site development standards.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 2.100; Ord. 29(2005) § 23)
§ 12-6B-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the SFR District:
   (A)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title; and
   (B)   Single-family residential dwellings.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 3)
§ 12-6B-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted, subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this
title:
   (A)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (B)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (C)   Dog kennels;
   (D)   Funiculars and other similar conveyances;
   (E)   Home child daycare facilities, as further regulated by §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (F)   Public and private schools;
   (G)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (H)   Public park and recreation facilities;
   (I)   Public utility and public service uses; and
   (J)   Ski lifts and tows.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 3)
§ 12-6B-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the SFR District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Private greenhouses, toolsheds, playhouses, garages or carports,
swimming pools, patios or recreation facilities customarily incidental to
single- family uses; and
   (C)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 2.400; Ord. 29(2005) § 23)
§ 12-6B-5 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 12,500 square feet of buildable area.
Each site shall have a minimum frontage of 30 feet. Each site shall be of a
size and shape capable of enclosing a square area, 80 feet on each side, within
its boundaries.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 3)
§ 12-6B-6 SETBACKS.
   In the SFR District, the minimum front setback shall be 20 feet, the minimum
side setback shall be 15 feet and the minimum rear setback shall be 15 feet.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 2)
§ 12-6B-7 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 30
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 33 feet.
(Ord. 37(1980) § 2)
§ 12-6B-8 DENSITY CONTROL.
   (A)   Dwelling units. Not more than one dwelling unit shall be permitted on
each site.
   (B)   Gross residential floor area.
      (1)   The following gross residential floor area (GRFA) shall be
permitted on each site:
         (a)   Not more than 40 square feet of gross residential floor area
(GRFA) for each 100 square feet of the first 10,000 square feet of site area;
plus
         (b)   Thirteen square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA) for
each 100 square feet of site area in excess of 10,000 square feet.
      (2)   No single-family residential lot except those located entirely in
the red hazard avalanche zone or the floodplain shall be so restricted that it
cannot be occupied by one single-family dwelling.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 2; Ord. 37(1990) § 3; Ord. 14(2004) § 3)
§ 12-6B-9 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 20% of the total site area.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 2.507; Ord. 19(1976) § 3; Ord. 41(1990) § 3)
§ 12-6B-10 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 60% of each site shall be landscaped. The minimum width and length
of any area qualifying as landscaping shall be ten feet, with a minimum area of
not less than 300 square feet.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 2.509; Ord. 19(1976) § 3)
§ 12-6B-11 PARKING.
   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 10 of this
title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 2.510)
ARTICLE 6C: TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R) DISTRICT
Section
12-6C-1 Purpose
12-6C-2 Permitted uses
12-6C-3 Conditional uses
12-6C-4 Accessory uses
12-6C-5 Lot area and site dimensions
12-6C-6 Setbacks
12-6C-7 Height
12-6C-8 Density control
12-6C-9 Site coverage
12-6C-10 Landscaping and site development
12-6C-11 Parking
§ 12-6C-1 PURPOSE.
   The Two-Family Residential District is intended to provide sites for low
density single-family or two-family residential uses, together with such public
facilities as may be appropriately located in the same zone district. The Two-
Family Residential District is intended to ensure adequate light, air, privacy
and open space for each dwelling, commensurate with single-family and two-
family occupancy, and to maintain the desirable residential qualities of such
sites by establishing appropriate site development standards.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 3.100; Ord. 29(2005) § 23)
§ 12-6C-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the R District:
   (A)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
   (B)   Single-family residential dwellings; and
   (C)   Two-family residential dwellings.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 4)
§ 12-6C-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the R District, subject
to issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 16 of this title:
   (A)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (B)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (C)   Dog kennels;
   (D)   Funiculars and other similar conveyances;
   (E)   Home child daycare facilities, as further regulated by §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (F)   Public and private schools;
   (G)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (H)   Public park and recreation facilities;
   (I)   Public utility and public service uses; and
   (J)   Ski lifts and tows.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 4)
§ 12-6C-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the R District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Private greenhouses, toolsheds, playhouses, garages or carports,
swimming pools, patios or recreation facilities customarily incidental to
single-family and two-family residential uses; and
   (C)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 3.400; Ord. 29(2005) § 23)
§ 12-6C-5 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 15,000 square feet of buildable site
area. Each site shall have a minimum frontage of 30 feet. Each site shall be of
a size and shape capable of enclosing a square area, 80 feet on each side,
within its boundaries.
(Ord. 24(1981) § 1)
§ 12-6C-6 SETBACKS.
   In the R District, the minimum front setback shall be 20 feet, the minimum
side setback shall be 15 feet and the minimum rear setback shall be 15 feet.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 2)
§ 12-6C-7 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 30
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 33 feet.
(Ord. 37(1980) § 2)
§ 12-6C-8 DENSITY CONTROL.
   (A)   Dwelling units. Not more than a total of two dwelling units shall be
permitted on each site with only one dwelling unit permitted on existing lots
less than 14,000 square feet.
      (1)   Exception. Properties that meet all of the following three
conditions shall be permitted a total of two dwelling units on existing lots
less than 14,000 square feet.
         (a)   The property was annexed into the Town of Vail with two existing
dwelling units on a lot less than 14,000 square feet.
         (b)   The property as of April 1, 2016, contained two dwelling units
on a lot less than 14,000 square feet.
         (c)   At no time between the property’s annexation and April 1, 2016,
did the property contain less than two dwelling units.
      (2)   Discontinuance of exception. If at any time any property as
described above develops or redevelops with only one dwelling unit, this
exception for the allowance of two units shall no longer be valid for such
property.
   (B)   Gross residential floor area.
      (1)   The following gross residential floor area (GRFA) shall be
permitted on each site:
         (a)   Not more than 46 square feet of gross residential floor area
(GRFA) for each 100 square feet of the first 10,000 square feet of site area;
plus
         (b)   Thirty eight square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA)
for each 100 square feet of site area over 10,000 square feet, not exceeding
15,000 square feet of site area; plus
         (c)   Thirteen square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA) for
each 100 square feet of site area over 15,000 square feet, not exceeding 30,000
square feet of site area; plus
         (d)   Six square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA) for each
100 square feet of site area in excess of 30,000 square feet.
   (C)   Employee housing units. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections
(A) and (B) of this section, a Type I employee housing unit shall be permitted
on lots of less than 14,000 square feet in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 13 of this title. Any Type I employee housing unit existing on or
before April 18, 2000, shall not be eliminated unless all dwelling units are
demolished, in which case the zoning on the property shall apply. However, an
existing Type I employee housing unit may be replaced with a Type II employee
housing unit on lots of 14,000 square feet or greater.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 1; Ord. 22(1979) § 1; Ord. 22(1981) § 1; Ord. 23(1981) § 1;
Ord. 12(1988) § 3; Ord. 37(1990) § 4; Ord. 8(1992) §§ 9, 10; Ord. 6(2000) §4;
Ord. 14(2004) § 4; Ord. 4(2016) § 2)
§ 12-6C-9 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 20% of the total site area.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 3.507; Ord. 19(1976) § 4; Ord. 41(1990) § 4)
§ 12-6C-10 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 60% of each site shall be landscaped. The minimum of any area
qualifying as landscaping shall be ten feet (width and length) with a minimum
area not less than 300 square feet.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 3.509; Ord. 19(1976) § 4)
§ 12-6C-11 PARKING.
   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 10 of this
title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 3.510)
ARTICLE 6D: TWO-FAMILY PRIMARY/SECONDARY RESIDENTIAL (PS) DISTRICT
Section
12-6D-1 Purpose
12-6D-2 Permitted uses
12-6D-3 Conditional uses
12-6D-4 Accessory uses
12-6D-5 Lot area and site dimensions
12-6D-6 Setbacks
12-6D-7 Height
12-6D-8 Density control
12-6D-9 Site coverage
12-6D-10 Landscaping and site development
12-6D-11 Parking
§ 12-6D-1 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Two-Family Primary/Secondary Residential District is intended to
provide sites for single-family residential uses or two-family residential uses
in which one unit is a larger primary residence and the second unit is a
smaller caretaker apartment, together with such public facilities as may
appropriately be located in the same zone district.
   (B)   The Two-Family Primary/Secondary Residential District is intended to
ensure adequate light, air, privacy and open space for each dwelling,
commensurate with single-family and two-family occupancy, and to maintain the
desirable residential qualities of such sites by establishing appropriate site
development standards.
(Ord. 30(1977) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 23)
§ 12-6D-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted:
   (A)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
   (B)   Single-family residential dwellings; and
   (C)   Two-family residential dwellings.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 5)
§ 12-6D-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted, subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this
title:
   (A)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (B)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (C)   Funiculars and other similar conveyances;
   (D)   Home child daycare facilities, as further regulated by §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (E)   Public and private schools;
   (F)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (G)   Public park and recreation facilities;
   (H)   Public utility and public service uses; and
   (I)   Ski lifts and tows.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 5)
§ 12-6D-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accord with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Private greenhouses, toolsheds, playhouses, garages or carports,
swimming pools, patios or recreation facilities customarily incidental to
single-family and two-family residential uses; and
   (C)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 30(1977) § 2)
§ 12-6D-5 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   (A)   The minimum lot or site area shall be 15,000 square feet of buildable
area, and each site shall have a minimum frontage of 30 feet.
   (B)   Each site shall be of a size and shape capable of enclosing a square
area, 80 feet on each side, within its boundaries.
(Ord. 30(1977) § 2; Ord. 12(1978) § 3)
§ 12-6D-6 SETBACKS.
   In the Primary/Secondary Residential District, the minimum front setback
shall be 20 feet, the minimum side setback shall be 15 feet and the minimum
rear setback shall be 15 feet.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 2)
§ 12-6D-7 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 30
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 33 feet.
(Ord. 37(1980) § 2)
§ 12-6D-8 DENSITY CONTROL.
   (A)   Dwelling units. Not more than a total of two dwelling units shall be
permitted on each site with only one dwelling unit permitted on existing lots
less than 14,000 square feet.
      (1)   Exception. Properties that meet all of the following three
conditions shall be permitted a total of two dwelling units on existing lots
less than 14,000 square feet.
         (a)   The property was annexed into the Town of Vail with two existing
dwelling units on a lot less than 14,000 square feet.
         (b)   The property as of April 1, 2016, contained two dwelling units
on a lot less than 14,000 square feet.
         (c)   At no time between the property’s annexation and April 1, 2016,
did the property contain less than two dwelling units.
      (2)   Discontinuance of exception. If at any time any property as
described above develops or redevelops with only one dwelling unit, this
exception for the allowance of two units shall no longer be valid for such
property.
   (B)   Gross residential floor area.
      (1)   The following gross residential floor area (GRFA) shall be
permitted on each site:
         (a)   Not more than 46 square feet of gross residential floor area
(GRFA) for each 100 square feet of the first 10,000 square feet of site area;
plus
         (b)   Thirty eight square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA)
for each 100 square feet of site area over 10,000 square feet, not exceeding
15,000 square feet of site area; plus
         (c)   Thirteen square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA) for
each 100 square feet of site area over 15,000 square feet, not exceeding 30,000
square feet of site area; plus
         (d)   Six square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA) for each
100 square feet of site area in excess of 30,000 square feet.
      (2)   The secondary unit shall not exceed 40% of the allowable gross
residential floor area (GRFA).
   (C)   Employee housing units. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections
(A) and (B) of this section, a Type I employee housing unit shall be permitted
on lots of less than 14,000 square feet in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 13 of this title. Any Type I employee housing unit existing on or
before April 18, 2000, shall not be eliminated unless all dwelling units are
demolished, in which case the zoning on the property shall apply. However, an
existing Type I employee housing unit may be replaced with a Type II employee
housing unit on lots of 14,000 square feet or greater.
(Ord. 30(1977) § 2; Ord. 12(1978) § 2; Ord. 22(1979) § 1; Ord. 35(1980) § 1;
Ord. 22(1981) § 1; Ord. 23(1981) § 2; Ord. 23(1986) § 1; Ord. 12(1988) § 4;
Ord. 19(1990) § 1; Ord. 37(1990) § 5; Ord. 8(1992) §§ 13, 14; Ord. 6(2000) § 4;
Ord. 14(2004) § 5; Ord. 29(2005) § 23; Ord. 4(2016) § 3)
§ 12-6D-9 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 20% of the total site area.
(Ord. 30(1977) § 2; Ord. 41(1990) § 5)
§ 12-6D-10 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 60% of each site shall be landscaped. The minimum of any area
qualifying as landscaping shall be ten feet (width and length) with a minimum
area not less than 300 square feet.
(Ord. 30(1978) § 2)
§ 12-6D-11 PARKING.
   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 10 of this
title.
(Ord. 30(1977) § 2)
ARTICLE 6E: RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER (RC) DISTRICT
Section
12-6E-1 Purpose
12-6E-2 Permitted uses
12-6E-3 Conditional uses
12-6E-4 Accessory uses
12-6E-5 Lot area and site dimensions
12-6E-6 Setbacks
12-6E-7 Height
12-6E-8 Density control
12-6E-9 Site coverage
12-6E-10 Landscaping and site development
12-6E-11 Parking
§ 12-6E-1 PURPOSE.
   The Residential Cluster District is intended to provide sites for single-
family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings at a density not exceeding six
dwelling units per acre, together with such public facilities as may
appropriately be located in the same zone district. The Residential Cluster
District is intended to ensure adequate light, air, privacy and open space for
each dwelling, commensurate with residential occupancy, and to maintain the
desirable residential qualities of the zone district by establishing
appropriate site development standards.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 23.100; Ord. 24(1974) § 3(B); Ord. 29(2005) § 23)
§ 12-6E-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the RC District:
   (A)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
   (B)   Multiple-family residential dwellings, including attached or row
dwellings and condominium dwellings with no more than four units in any new
building;
   (C)   Single-family residential dwellings; and
   (D)   Two-family residential dwellings.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 6; Ord. 2(2012) § 6)
§ 12-6E-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the RC District,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
   (A)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (B)   Business offices, as further regulated by §
12-16-7(A)(13) of this title;
   (C)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (D)   Dog kennels;
   (E)   Funiculars and other similar conveyances;
   (F)   Home child daycare facilities, as further regulated by §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (G)   Private clubs;
   (H)   Professional offices, as further regulated by §
12-16-7(A)(13) of this title;
   (I)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (J)   Public or private schools;
   (K)   Public park and recreation facilities;
   (L)   Public utility and public service uses;
   (M)   Religious institutions; and
   (N)   Ski lifts and tows.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 6; Ord. 2(2016) § 3)
§ 12-6E-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the RC District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accord with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Private greenhouses, toolsheds, playhouses, attached garages or
carports, swimming pools, patios or recreation facilities customarily
incidental to single-family, two-family or low density multiple- family
residential uses; and
   (C)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 23.400; Ord. 24(1974) § 3(B); Ord. 16(1976) § 1(a); Ord. 94-21
(1994) § 12; Ord. 29(2005) § 23)
§ 12-6E-5 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 15,000 square feet, containing no less
than 8,000 square feet of buildable area. Each site shall have a minimum
frontage of 30 feet. Each site shall be of a size and shape capable of
enclosing a square area, 80 feet on each side, within its boundaries.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 23.501; Ord. 24(1974) § 3(B); Ord. 12(1978) § 3)
§ 12-6E-6 SETBACKS.
   In the RC District, the minimum front setback shall be 20 feet, the minimum
side setback shall be 15 feet, and the minimum rear setback shall be 15 feet.
(Ord. 59(1978))
§ 12-6E-7 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 30
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 33 feet.
(Ord. 37(1980) § 2)
§ 12-6E-8 DENSITY CONTROL.
   (A)   Gross residential floor area.
      (1)   Not more than 36 square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA)
shall be permitted for each 100 square feet of buildable site area. Total
density shall not exceed six dwelling units per acre of buildable site area.
      (2)   A dwelling unit in a multiple-family building may include one
attached accommodation unit no larger than one-third of the total floor area of
the dwelling.
   (B)   Exemptions. All projects that have received final Design Review Board
approval as of December 19, 1978, shall be exempt from the changes in this
section as long as the project commences within one year from the date of final
approval. If the project is to be developed in stages, each stage shall be
commenced within one year after the completion of the previous stage.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 18; Ord. 19(1979) § 5; Ord. 16(1991) § 1; Ord. 31(2001) § 5;
Ord. 14(2004) § 6)
§ 12-6E-9 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 25% of the total site area.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 23.507; Ord. 24(1974) § 3(B); Ord. 17(1991) § 3)
§ 12-6E-10 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 60% of each site shall be landscaped.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 23.509; Ord. 24(1974) § 3(B))
§ 12-6E-11 PARKING.
   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 10 of this
title. No parking shall be located in any required front setback area, except
as may be specifically authorized in accordance with Chapter 17 of this title.
At least one parking space per dwelling unit shall be located within the main
building or buildings or within an accessory garage whenever the development is
reasonable and appropriate for the site and is required by the Design Review
Board.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 23.510; Ord. 24(1974) § 3(B))
ARTICLE 6F: LOW DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY (LDMF) DISTRICT
Section
12-6F-1 Purpose
12-6F-2 Permitted uses
12-6F-3 Conditional uses
12-6F-4 Accessory uses
12-6F-5 Lot area and site dimensions
12-6F-6 Setbacks
12-6F-7 Height
12-6F-8 Density control
12-6F-9 Site coverage
12-6F-10 Landscaping and site development
12-6F-11 Parking
§ 12-6F-1 PURPOSE.
   The Low Density Multiple-Family District is intended to provide sites for
single-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings at a density not
exceeding nine dwelling units per acre, together with such public facilities as
may appropriately be located in the same zone district. The Low Density
Multiple- Family District is intended to ensure adequate light, air, privacy
and open space for each dwelling, commensurate with low density occupancy, and
to maintain the desirable residential qualities of the zone district by
establishing appropriate site development standards.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 4.100; Ord. 30(1977) § 4; Ord. 29(2005) § 23)
§ 12-6F-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the LDMF District:
   (A)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
   (B)   Multiple-family residential dwellings, including attached or row
dwellings and condominium dwellings;
   (C)   Single-family residential dwellings; and
   (D)   Two-family residential dwellings.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 7; Ord. 2(2012) § 6)
§ 12-6F-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the LDMF District,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
   (A)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (B)   Dog kennels;
   (C)   Funiculars and other similar conveyances;
   (D)   Home child daycare facilities, as further regulated by §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (E)   Private clubs;
   (F)   Public and private schools;
   (G)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (H)   Public park and recreation facilities;
   (I)   Public utility and public service uses;
   (J)   Religious institutions; and
   (K)   Ski lifts and tows.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 7; Ord. 2(2016) § 4; Ord. 2(2016) § 5)
§ 12-6F-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the LDMF District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Private greenhouses, toolsheds, playhouses, attached garages or
carports, swimming pools, patios or recreation facilities customarily
incidental to single-family, two-family or low density multiple-family
residential uses; and
   (C)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 4.400; Ord. 16(1976) § 1(a); Ord. 21(1994) § 12; Ord. 29(2005)
§ 23)
§ 12-6F-5 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   (A)   The minimum lot or site area shall be 10,000 square feet of buildable
area and each site shall have a minimum frontage of 30 feet.
   (B)   Each site shall be of a size and shape capable of enclosing a square
area, 80 feet on each side, within its boundaries.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 3)
§ 12-6F-6 SETBACKS.
   In the LDMF District, the minimum front setback shall be 20 feet, the
minimum side setback shall be 20 feet, and the minimum rear setback shall be 20
feet.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 2)
§ 12-6F-7 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 35
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 38 feet.
(Ord. 37(1980) § 2)
§ 12-6F-8 DENSITY CONTROL.
   (A)   Gross residential floor area.
      (1)   Not more than 44 square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA)
shall be permitted for each 100 square feet of buildable site area. Total
density shall not exceed nine dwelling units per acre of buildable site area.
      (2)   A dwelling unit in a multiple-family building may include one
attached accommodation unit no larger than one-third of the total floor area of
the dwelling.
   (B)   Exemptions. All projects that have received final Design Review Board
approval as of December 19, 1978, shall be exempt from the changes in this
section as long as the project commences within one year from the date of final
approval. If the project is to be developed in stages, each stage shall be
commenced within one year after the completion of the previous stage.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 18; Ord. 19(1979) § 5; Ord. 16(1991) § 2; Ord. 31(2001) § 5;
Ord. 14(2004) § 7)
§ 12-6F-9 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 35% of the total site area.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 4.507; Ord. 17(1991) § 4)
§ 12-6F-10 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 40% of each site shall be landscaped. The minimum of any area
qualifying as landscaping shall be 15 feet with a minimum area not less than
300 square feet.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 4.509; Ord. 19(1976) § 5)
§ 12-6F-11 PARKING.
   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 10 of this
title. No parking shall be located in any required front setback area, except
as may be specifically authorized in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
17 of this title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 4.510)
ARTICLE 6G: MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY (MDMF) DISTRICT
Section
12-6G-1 Purpose
12-6G-2 Permitted uses
12-6G-3 Conditional uses
12-6G-4 Accessory uses
12-6G-5 Lot area and site dimensions
12-6G-6 Setbacks
12-6G-7 Height
12-6G-8 Density control
12-6G-9 Site coverage
12-6G-10 Landscaping and site development
12-6G-11 Parking
§ 12-6G-1 PURPOSE.
   The Medium Density Multiple-Family District is intended to provide sites for
multiple-family dwellings at densities to a maximum of 18 dwelling units per
acre, together with such public facilities as may appropriately be located in
the same zone district. The Medium Density Multiple-Family District is intended
to ensure adequate light, air, open space and other amenities commensurate with
multiple-family occupancy, and to maintain the desirable residential qualities
of the zone district by establishing appropriate site development standards.
Certain nonresidential uses are permitted as conditional uses, and where
permitted, are intended to blend harmoniously with the residential character of
the zone district.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 5.100; Ord. 30(1977) § 5; Ord. 37(1980) § 6; Ord. 29(2005) §
23)
§ 12-6G-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the MDMF District:
   (A)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
   (B)   Multiple-family residential dwellings, including attached or row
dwellings and condominium dwellings;
   (C)   Single-family residential dwellings; and
   (D)   Two-family residential dwellings.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 8; Ord. 2(2012) § 6)
§ 12-6G-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the MDMF District,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
   (A)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (B)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (C)   Dog kennels;
   (D)   Funiculars and other similar conveyances;
   (E)   Home child daycare facilities, as further regulated by §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (F)   Private clubs and civic, cultural and fraternal organizations;
   (G)   Public and private schools;
   (H)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (I)   Public park and recreation facilities;
   (J)   Public utility and public service uses;
   (K)   Religious institutions; and
   (L)   Ski lifts and tows.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 8; Ord. 2(2016) § 5)
§ 12-6G-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the MDMF District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Private greenhouses, toolsheds, playhouses, attached garages or
carports, swimming pools, patios or recreation facilities customarily
incidental to permitted residential uses; and
   (C)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 5.400; Ord. 29(2005) § 23)
§ 12-6G-5 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 10,000 square feet of buildable area,
and each site shall have a minimum frontage of 30 feet. Each site shall be of a
size and shape capable of enclosing a square area, 80 feet on each side, within
its boundaries.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 3)
§ 12-6G-6 SETBACKS.
   In the MDMF District, the minimum front setback shall be 20 feet, the
minimum side setback shall be 20 feet, and the minimum rear setback shall be 20
feet.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 2)
§ 12-6G-7 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 35
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 38 feet.
(Ord. 37(1980) § 2)
§ 12-6G-8 DENSITY CONTROL.
   (A)   Gross residential floor area.
      (1)   Not more than 56 square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA)
shall be permitted for each 100 square feet of buildable site area. Total
density shall not exceed 18 dwelling units per acre of buildable site area.
      (2)   A dwelling unit in a multiple-family building may include one
attached accommodation unit no larger than one-third of the total floor area of
the dwelling.
   (B)   Exemptions. All projects that have received final Design Review Board
approval as of December 19, 1978, shall be exempt from the changes in this
section as long as the project commences within one year from the date of final
approval. If the project is to be developed in stages, each stage shall be
commenced within one year after the completion of the previous stage.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 18; Ord. 19(1979) § 5; Ord. 16(1991) § 3; Ord. 4(1996) § 1;
Ord. 31(2001) § 5; Ord. 14(2004) § 8)
§ 12-6G-9 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 45% of the total site area.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 5.507; Ord. 17(1991) § 5)
§ 12-6G-10 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 30% of the total site area shall be landscaped. The minimum width
and length of any area qualifying as landscaping shall be 15 feet with a
minimum area not less than 300 square feet.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 5.509; Ord. 19(1976) § 6)
§ 12-6G-11 PARKING.
   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 10 of this
title. At least one-half of the required parking shall be located within the
main building or buildings and hidden from public view or shall be completely
hidden from public view from adjoining properties within a landscaped berm. No
parking or loading area shall be located in any required front setback area.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 5.510; Ord. 19(1976) § 6)
ARTICLE 6H: HIGH DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY (HDMF) DISTRICT
Section
12-6H-1 Purpose
12-6H-2 Permitted uses
12-6H-3 Conditional uses
12-6H-4 Accessory uses
12-6H-5 Lot area and site dimensions
12-6H-6 Setbacks
12-6H-7 Height
12-6H-8 Density control
12-6H-9 Site coverage
12-6H-10 Landscaping and site development
12-6H-11 Parking and loading
§ 12-6H-1 PURPOSE.
   The High Density Multiple-Family District is intended to provide sites for
multiple-family dwellings at densities to a maximum of 25 dwelling units per
acre, together with such public and semipublic facilities and lodges, private
recreation facilities and related visitor oriented uses as may appropriately be
located in the same zone district. The High Density Multiple-Family District is
intended to ensure adequate light, air, open space and other amenities
commensurate with high density apartment, condominium and lodge uses, and to
maintain the desirable residential and resort qualities of the zone district by
establishing appropriate site development standards. Certain nonresidential
uses are permitted as conditional uses, which relate to the nature of Vail as a
winter and summer recreation and vacation community and, where permitted, are
intended to blend harmoniously with the residential character of the zone
district.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 6.100; Ord. 30(1977) § 6; Ord. 37(1980) § 6; Ord. 29(2005) §
23)
§ 12-6H-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the HDMF District:
   (A)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
   (B)   Lodges, including accessory eating, drinking, recreational or retail
establishments, located within the principal use and not occupying more than
10% of the total gross residential floor area (GRFA) of the main structure or
structures on the site; additional accessory dining areas may be located on an
outdoor deck, porch or terrace; and
   (C)   Multiple-family residential dwellings, including attached or row
dwellings and condominium dwellings.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 9)
§ 12-6H-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the HDMF District,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
   (A)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (B)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (C)   Dog kennels;
   (D)   Funiculars and other similar conveyances;
   (E)   Home child daycare facilities, as further regulated by §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (F)   Private clubs and civic, cultural and fraternal organizations;
   (G)   Private parking structures;
   (H)   Private unstructured parking;
   (I)   Public and private schools;
   (J)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (K)   Public park and recreation facilities;
   (L)   Public parking structures;
   (M)   Public transportation terminals;
   (N)   Public unstructured parking;
   (O)   Public utility and public service uses;
   (P)   Religious institutions;
   (Q)   Ski lifts and tows; and
   (R)   Timeshare units.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 9; Ord. 2(2016) § 6)
§ 12-6H-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the HDMF District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Private greenhouses, toolsheds, playhouses, attached garages or
carports, swimming pools or recreation facilities customarily incidental to
permitted residential and lodge uses; and
   (C)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 6.400; Ord. 29(2005) § 23)
§ 12-6H-5 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 10,000 square feet of buildable area,
and each site shall have a minimum frontage of 30 feet. Each site shall be of a
size and shape capable of enclosing a square area, 80 feet on each side, within
its boundaries.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 3)
§ 12-6H-6 SETBACKS.
   The minimum front setback shall be 20 feet, the minimum side setback shall
be 20 feet and the minimum rear setback shall be 20 feet.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 2)
§ 12-6H-7 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 45
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 48 feet.
(Ord. 37(1980) § 2)
§ 12-6H-8 DENSITY CONTROL.
   (A)   (1)   Not more than 76 square feet of gross residential floor area
(GRFA) shall be permitted for each 100 square feet of buildable site area.
Total density shall not exceed 25 dwelling units per acre of buildable site
area.
      (2)   Each accommodation unit shall be counted as one-half of a dwelling
unit for purposes of calculating allowable units per acre.
   (B)   A dwelling unit in a multiple-family building may include one attached
accommodation unit no larger than one-third of the total floor area of the
dwelling.
(Ord. 12(1977) § 2; Ord. 50(1978) § 19; Ord. 31(2001) §§ 3, 5; Ord. 14(2004) §
9)
§ 12-6H-9 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 55% of the total site area.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 6.507; Ord. 17(1991) § 6)
§ 12-6H-10 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 30% of the total site area shall be landscaped. The minimum width
and length of any area qualifying as landscaping shall be 15 feet with a
minimum area not less than 300 square feet.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 6.509; Ord. 19(1976) § 7)
§ 12-6H-11 PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title. At least 75% of the required parking shall be located within
the main building or buildings and hidden from public view or shall be
completely hidden from public view from adjoining properties within a
landscaped berm. No parking shall be located in any required front setback
area.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 6.510; Ord. 19(1976) § 7)
ARTICLE 6I: RESERVED
[Chapter repealed by Ord. 6(2024) § 2.]
ARTICLE 6J: VAIL VILLAGE TOWNHOUSE (VVT) DISTRICT
Section
12-6J-1 Purpose
12-6J-2 Permitted uses
12-6J-3 Conditional uses
12-6J-4 Accessory uses
12-6J-5 Lot area and site dimensions
12-6J-6 Setbacks
12-6J-7 Height
12-6J-8 Density control
12-6J-9 Gross residential floor area
12-6J-10 Site coverage
12-6J-11 Landscaping and site development
12-6J-12 Parking and loading
12-6J-13 Compliance burden
§ 12-6J-1 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Vail Village Townhouse District is intended to provide sites for,
and maintain the unique residential character of, existing townhouse properties
in the East Gore Creek subarea of the Vail Village Master Plan area. This zone
district was specifically developed to only be applied to the properties known
at the time of the establishment of this district as the Vail townhouses
condominium, Vail row houses, Vail trails chalets, Vail trails east
condominiums and the Texas townhomes. The Vail Village Townhouse District is
intended to ensure adequate light, air, open space and other amenities
commensurate with townhomes, and to maintain the desirable residential and
resort qualities of the zone district by establishing appropriate site
development standards. Certain nonresidential uses are permitted as conditional
uses, which relate to the nature of Vail as a winter and summer recreation and
year round community and, where permitted, are intended to blend harmoniously
with the residential character of the zone district.
   (B)   This zone district was established to regulate existing townhome
properties that were legally nonconforming in the High Density Multiple-Family
District. The Vail Village Townhouse District is meant to encourage and provide
incentives for redevelopment of existing townhouse properties in accordance
with the Vail Village Master Plan. The incentives in this zone district include
addressing both townhouse projects and individually platted townhouse lots,
reductions in lot area standards, reductions in setbacks, increases in density,
increases in gross residential floor area (GRFA) and changes in parking design
requirements. More restrictive design considerations have been applied to these
properties in accordance with the Vail Village Master Plan to maintain the
unique residential character of existing townhouse developments in Vail
Village.
(Ord. 2(2012) § 4)
§ 12-6J-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the VVT District:
   (A)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title; and
   (B)   Multiple-family residential dwellings, including attached and row
dwellings and condominium dwellings.
(Ord. 2(2012) § 4)
§ 12-6J-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the VVT District,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
   (A)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (B)   Home child daycare facilities, as further regulated by §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (C)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (D)   Public utility and public service uses; and
   (E)   Timeshare units.
(Ord. 2(2012) § 4)
§ 12-6J-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the VVT District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title; and
   (B)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 2(2012) § 4)
§ 12-6J-5 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area for a townhouse project shall be 10,000 square
feet of total site area. Each site shall have a minimum frontage of 20 feet.
The minimum lot or site area for individually platted townhouse lots shall be
2,000 square feet of total site area, each site shall have a minimum frontage
of 20 feet.
(Ord. 2(2012) § 4)
§ 12-6J-6 SETBACKS.
   The minimum setback shall be 20 feet from the front and rear property lines.
The minimum setback shall be 20 feet from the side property lines, except the
setback shall be zero feet from the side property lines between attached
dwelling units.
(Ord. 2(2012) § 4)
§ 12-6J-7 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 35 feet. For a
sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 38 feet.
(Ord. 2(2012) § 4)
§ 12-6J-8 DENSITY CONTROL.
   The existing number of legally established units on a development site or 25
dwelling units per acre of total site area, whichever is greater, shall be
allowed. A dwelling unit may include one attached accommodation unit no larger
than one-third of the total floor area of the dwelling.
(Ord. 2(2012) § 4)
§ 12-6J-9 GROSS RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA.
   An unlimited amount of gross residential floor area (GRFA) shall be
permitted on each site.
(Ord. 2(2012) § 4)
§ 12-6J-10 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 55% of the total site area.
(Ord. 2(2012) § 4)
§ 12-6J-11 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 30% of the total site area shall be landscaped.
(Ord. 2(2012) § 4)
§ 12-6J-12 PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title. Required parking legally established within the street right-
of- way may be continued subject to a revocable right-of- way permit issued by
the Town of Vail.
(Ord. 2(2012) § 4)
§ 12-6J-13 COMPLIANCE BURDEN.
   It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove by a preponderance of the
evidence before the Design Review Board and/or Administrator that the proposed
new construction, addition or minor exterior alteration is in compliance with
the applicable elements of the Vail Village Master Plan, Vail Village Urban
Design Guide Plan and the Vail Village design considerations.
(Ord. 2(2012) § 4)
ARTICLE 6K: WEST VAIL MULTI-FAMILY (WVMF) OVERLAY DISTRICT
Section
12-6K-1 Purpose
12-6K-2 Applicability
12-6K-3 Permitted Uses
12-6K-4 Conditional uses
12-6K-5 Accessory uses
12-6K-6 Lot area and site dimensions
12-6K-7 Setbacks
12-6K-8 Height
12-6K-9 Density control
12-6K-10 Site coverage
12-6K-11 Landscaping
12-6K-12 Employee Housing
12-6K-13 Parking
12-6K-14 Employee Housing Incentives
§ 12-6K-1 PURPOSE.
   The West Vail Multi-Family (WVMF) overlay district is intended to provide
employee housing in new or redeveloped multi-family dwellings in areas well-
connected to transit. It is also intended to provide limited waivers of certain
development standards to accommodate redevelopment with employee housing.
(Ord. 19(2023) § 1)
§ 12-6K-2 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The WVMF overlay district only applies to property located within the
project boundary of the West Vail Master Plan.
   (B)   As an overlay district, the WVMF overlay district shall supplement,
but not replace, the underlying zone district. In the case of a conflict
between the underlying zone district regulations and this Article, this Article
shall control. Where this Article is silent, the underlying zone district
regulations and any other applicable requirements of this Code shall apply.
   (C)   The WVMF overlay district shall only apply after a rezoning is
approved in accordance with §
12-3-7.
(Ord. 19(2023) § 1)
§ 12-6K-3 PERMITTED USES.
The following uses are permitted:
   (A)   Employee housing, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this Title;
and
   (B)   Multi-family residential dwellings, including without limitation
attached dwellings and row dwellings.
(Ord. 19(2023) § 1)
§ 12-6K-4 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional use is permitted, subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16 of this Title: bed and breakfasts
as further regulated by §
12-14-18.
(Ord. 19(2023) § 1)
§ 12-6K-5 ACCESSORY USES.
The following accessory uses are permitted:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to the issuance of a home occupation permit
pursuant to §
12-14-12;
   (B)   Home child daycare facilities, as further regulated by §
12-14-12;
   (C)   Private greenhouses, playhouses, attached garages and carports,
swimming pools, patios, and recreation facilities customarily incidental to
multi-family residential uses; and
   (D)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 19(2023) § 1)
§ 12-6K-6 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   (A)   The minimum lot size shall be as required by the underlying zone
district.
   (B)   Each lot shall have a minimum frontage of thirty (30) feet.
(Ord. 19(2023) § 1)
§ 12-6K-7 SETBACKS.
   The minimum front setback shall be twenty (20) feet, the minimum side
setback shall be fifteen (15) feet, and the minimum rear setback shall be
fifteen (15) feet.
(Ord. 19(2023) § 1)
§ 12-6K-8 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed
thirty-five (35) feet, and for a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall
not exceed thirty-eight (38) feet.
(Ord. 19(2023) § 1)
§ 12-6K-9 DENSITY CONTROL.
   (A)   Gross residential floor area shall not exceed forty-six (46) square
feet per each one hundred (100) square feet of lot area except as provided in §
12-6K-14.
   (B)   The maximum density shall be eighteen (18) dwelling units per acre and
the minimum density shall be nine (9) dwelling units per acre.
(Ord. 19(2023) § 1)
§ 12-6K-10 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total site area
except as provided in §
12-6K-14.
(Ord. 19(2023) § 1)
§ 12-6K-11 LANDSCAPING.
   At least forty percent (40%) of the site shall be landscaped except as
provided in §
12-6K-14.
(Ord. 19(2023) § 1)
§ 12-6K-12 EMPLOYEE HOUSING.
   (A)   Forty percent (40%) of all newly constructed gross residential floor
area shall be employee housing in compliance with Chapter 24 of this Title.
   (B)   All employee housing shall be provided on site, except that
developments that require a total of less than four hundred thirty-eight (438)
square feet of employee housing may provide the required employee housing in
accordance with §
12-24-6.
(Ord. 19(2023) § 1)
§ 12-6K-13 PARKING.
   Off-street parking shall comply with Chapter 10 of this Title except as
provided in §
12-6K-14.
(Ord. 19(2023) § 1)
§ 12-6K-14 EMPLOYEE HOUSING INCENTIVES.
   The following incentives shall be available for developments with affordable
housing:
   (A)   Gross Floor Area. Developments with at least one (1) employee housing
unit on-site shall be allowed a gross residential floor area of up to sixty
(60) square feet per each one hundred (100) square feet of lot area.
   (B)   Site Coverage. Developments with at least two (2) employee housing
units on-site shall be allowed a five percent (5%) increase in the percentage
of site coverage permitted.
   (C)   Landscaping and Parking. Developments with at least three (3) employee
housing units on-site shall be allowed:
      (1)   A five   percent (5%) reduction in the percentage of landscaping
required; and
      (2)   A minimum of one (1) parking space per employee housing dwelling
unit.
   (D)   Density. Developments with at least four (4) employee housing units
on-site shall have no maximum density.
(Ord. 19(2023) § 1)
ARTICLE 6L: COMMUNITY HOUSING-1 (CH-1) DISTRICT
Section
12-6L-1 Purpose
12-6L-2 Permitted uses
12-6L-3 Conditional uses
12-6L-4 Accessory uses
12-6L-5 Setbacks
12-6L-6 Site coverage
12-6L-7 Landscaping and site development
12-6L-8 Lot Area
12-6L-9 Height
12-6L-10 Density
12-6L-11 Gross residential floor area
12-6L-12 Parking
12-6L-13 Mobility
§ 12-6L-1 PURPOSE.
   The Community Housing-1 (CH-1) District is intended to provide adequate
sites for employee housing which, because of the nature and characteristics of
employee housing, cannot be adequately regulated by the development standards
prescribed for other residential zone districts. This zone district allows
flexibility to provide for the critical need for housing to serve local
citizens and businesses, and to provide for the public welfare. The CH-
1 District is intended to ensure that employee housing is appropriately located
and designed to meet the needs of residents of the Town, to harmonize with
surrounding uses, and to ensure adequate light, air, open spaces and other
amenities appropriate to the allowed types of uses.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 3)
§ 12-6L-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in the CH-1 District:
   (A)   Bicycle and pedestrian paths;
   (B)   Wireless communications facilities;
   (C)   Employee housing units;
   (D)   Passive outdoor recreation areas and open space;
   (E)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (F)   Public parks and recreational facilities; and
   (G)   Public utilities installations including transmission lines and
appurtenant equipment.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 3)
§ 12-6L-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses are permitted in the CH-1 District, subject
to issuance of a conditional use permit: public and private schools.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 3)
§ 12-6L-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses are permitted in the CH-1 District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation;
   (B)   Childcare facilities;
   (C)   Private greenhouses, toolsheds, playhouses, attached garages or
carports, swimming pools or recreation facilities customarily incidental to
permitted residential uses;
   (D)   Dwelling units other than employee housing units, if:
      (1)   Such dwelling units are created solely for the purpose of
subsidizing employee housing on the property;
      (2)   Such dwelling units are not the primary use of the property;
      (3)   The GRFA for such dwelling units does not exceed 30% of the total
GRFA constructed on the property;
      (4)   Such dwelling units are only created in conjunction with employee
housing; and
      (5)   Such dwelling units are compatible with the proposed uses and
buildings on the site and are compatible with buildings and uses on adjacent
properties.
   (E)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 3)
§ 12-6L-5 SETBACKS.
   The minimum front setback shall be 20 feet, the minimum side setback shall
be 15 feet, and the minimum rear setback shall be 15 feet.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 3)
§ 12-6L-6 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 55% of the total site area. If at least 75%
of the required parking spaces are enclosed, site coverage may be increased to
65%.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 3)
§ 12-6L-7 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 25% of the total site area shall be landscaped.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 3)
§ 12-6L-8 LOT AREA.
   The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 3)
§ 12-6L-9 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 35
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 43 feet.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 3)
§ 12-6L-10 DENSITY.
   There is no limitation on the number of dwelling units per acre.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 3)
§ 12-6L-11 GROSS RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA.
   There is no limitation on the amount of gross residential floor area.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 3)
§ 12-6L-12 PARKING.
   Parking shall be provided at a rate of 1.05 parking spaces per dwelling
unit. Applications shall include: number and layout of parking spaces being
provided onsite; details of any offsite parking being provided; details of
bicycle parking provided onsite; and provisions for guest parking and assigned
parking spaces.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 3)
§ 12-6L-13 MOBILITY.
   (A)   General. Developments providing less than the prescribed number of
parking spaces shall require a Mobility Management Plan approved by the
Planning and Environmental Commission.
   (B)   Mobility Management Plan. The Mobility Management Plan shall include:
      (1)   Layout of proposed covered and uncovered parking including
applicable dimensions, provisions for stacked parking and compact spaces, if
proposed;
      (2)   Information on how proposed parking spaces will be allocated to
units and if this allocation is on the form of a deed restriction;
      (3)   A professionally produced parking study, unless a determination is
made by the Administrator that such study is unnecessary due to the scale and
character of the proposal;
      (4)   Existence of any bike or vehicle share/shuttle program;
      (5)   Covered/protected/secured bike parking/storage;
      (6)   Provisions for guest parking and management;
      (7)   Provisions for seasonal variations; and
      (8)   Provisions for off-site vehicle storage, which may be located at
any distance from the site.
   (C)   Review criteria. To be approved, a Mobility Management Plan shall:
      (1)   Provide adequate off-street parking for the quantity of proposed
beds in relation to the proximity of the development to core services and
public transit, based on:
         (a)   Hierarchy of bus routes (regional vs. local);
         (b)   Proximity to job centers; and
         (c)   Proximity to commercial areas.
      (2)   Provide adequate off-street parking in consideration of other
provided mobility options including vehicle share/shuttle programs.
   (D)   Performance standards. After implementation of a Mobility Management
Plan, the following performance standards shall be maintained:
      (1)   Personal vehicles shall not be parked in areas designated for fire
service or in a dedicated emergency access easement.
      (2)   Personal vehicles shall not be parked on adjacent properties unless
permission has been obtained in writing and provided to and approved by the
Town.
      (3)   Personal vehicles shall not be parked in the public right-of- way.
      (4)   Personal vehicles shall not be parked in areas other than
designated spaces as shown on the approved site plan.
      (5)   At no time shall parking extend into required drive aisles.
      (6)   Goods, trailers, campers, or unlicensed vehicles shall not be
stored in designated parking areas.
      (7)   Bike parking shall be maintained at all times in a clean, safe and
functional condition.
   (E)   Reporting. For the first two years following the implementation of a
Mobility Management Plan, a report shall be submitted to the Community
Development Department, within 30 days of the date of the anniversary of the
first-issued certificate of occupancy for the development, including the
following information:
      (1)   Number of occupied units and number of residents per unit;
      (2)   Usage of mobility services;
      (3)   Results of surveys of residents concerning parking;
      (4)   Reports of any code enforcement/fire/parking complaints; and
      (5)   A parking utilization study during summer and winter.
   (F)   Amendments. Amendments to an approved Mobility Management Plan shall
be submitted to the Planning and Environmental Commission Meeting for approval
at a public hearing in accordance with §
12-3-6 .
(Ord. 6(2024) § 3)
ARTICLE 6M: COMMUNITY HOUSING-2 (CH-2) DISTRICT
Section
12-6M-1 Purpose
12-6M-2 Permitted uses
12-6M-3 Conditional uses
12-6M-4 Accessory uses
12-6M-5 Setbacks
12-6M-6 Site coverage
12-6M-7 Landscaping and site development
12-6M-8 Lot area
12-6M-9 Height
12-6M-10 Density
12-6M-11 Gross residential floor area
12-6M-12 Parking
12-6M-13 Mobility
12-6M-14 Location of business activity
§ 12-6M-1 PURPOSE.
   The CH-2 District is intended to provide adequate sites for employee housing
which, because of the nature and characteristics of employee housing, cannot be
adequately regulated by the development standards prescribed for other
residential zone districts. The CH-2 District provides flexibility to provide
for the critical need for housing to serve local citizens and businesses, and
to provide for the public welfare. The CH-2 District is intended to ensure that
employee housing is appropriately located and designed to meet the needs of
Town residents, to harmonize with surrounding uses, and to ensure adequate
light, air, open spaces and other amenities appropriate to the allowed types of
uses. The CH-2 District is intended to apply to properties located in areas
developed with low- to medium-density residential uses.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 4)
§ 12-6M-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in the CH-2 District:
   (A)   Bicycle and pedestrian paths;
   (B)   Wireless communication facilities;
   (C)   Employee housing units;
   (D)   Passive outdoor recreation areas, and open space;
   (E)   Public buildings, grounds, and facilities;
   (F)   Public parks and recreational facilities; and
   (G)   Public utilities installations including transmission lines and
appurtenant equipment.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 4)
§ 12-6M-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses are permitted in the CH-2 District, subject
to issuance of a conditional use permit:
   (A)   Public and private schools; and
   (B)   Commercial uses which are secondary and incidental to the use of
employee housing and specifically serving the needs of the residents of the
development, and developed in conjunction with employee housing, in which case
the following uses may be allowed subject to a conditional use permit:
      (1)   Automated teller machines;
      (2)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (3)   Business offices and professional offices;
      (4)   Eating and drinking establishments;
      (5)   Funiculars and other similar conveyances;
      (6)   Health clubs;
      (7)   Personal services, including without limitation laundromats, beauty
and barber shops, tailor shops and similar services; and
      (8)   Retail stores and establishments.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 4)
§ 12-6M-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses are permitted in the CH-2 District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit;
   (B)   Private greenhouses, toolsheds, playhouses, attached garages or
carports, swimming pools or recreation facilities customarily incidental to
permitted residential uses;
   (C)   Childcare facilities;
   (D)   Dwelling units other than employee housing units if such dwelling
units:
      (1)   Are created solely for the purpose of subsidizing employee housing
on the property;
      (2)   Are not the primary use of the property;
      (3)   Do not exceed 30% of the total GRFA constructed on the property;
and
      (4)   Are compatible with the proposed uses and buildings on the site and
are compatible with buildings and uses on adjacent properties.
   (E)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 4)
§ 12-6M-5 SETBACKS.
   The minimum front setback shall be 20 feet, the minimum side setback shall
be 15 feet, and the minimum rear setback shall be 15 feet.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 4)
§ 12-6M-6 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 55% of the total site area. If at least 75%
of the required parking spaces are underground or enclosed, site coverage may
be increased to 65%.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 4)
§ 12-6M-7 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 25% of the total site area shall be landscaped.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 4)
§ 12-6M-8 LOT AREA.
   The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 4)
§ 12-6M-9 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 45
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 53 feet.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 4)
§ 12-6M-10 DENSITY.
   There is no limitation on the number of dwelling units per acre.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 4)
§ 12-6M-11 GROSS RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA.
   There is no limitation on the amount of gross residential floor area.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 4)
§ 12-6M-12 PARKING.
   Parking shall be provided at a rate of 1.05 parking spaces per dwelling unit
or employee housing unit, which represents all parking, including visitor
parking. Applications shall include the number and layout of onsite parking
spaces; details of any offsite parking being provided; onsite bicycle parking;
provisions for guest parking; and assigned parking spaces.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 4)
§ 12-6M-13 MOBILITY.
   (A)   General. Developments providing less than the prescribed number of
parking spaces shall require a Mobility Management Plan approved by the
Planning and Environmental Commission.
   (B)   Mobility Management Plan. The Mobility Management Plan shall include:
      (1)   Layout of proposed covered and uncovered parking including
applicable dimensions, provisions for stacked parking and compact spaces, if
proposed;
      (2)   Information on how proposed parking spaces will be allocated to
units and if this allocation is on the form of a deed restriction;
      (3)   A professionally produced parking study, unless a determination is
made by the Administrator that such study is unnecessary due to the scale and
character of the proposal;
      (4)   Existence of any bike or vehicle share/shuttle program;
      (5)   Covered/protected/secured bike parking/storage;
      (6)   Provisions for guest parking and management;
      (7)   Provisions for seasonal variations; and
      (8)   Provisions for off-site vehicle storage, which may be located at
any distance from the site.
   (C)   Review criteria. To be approved, a Mobility Management Plan shall:
      (1)   Provide adequate off-street parking for the quantity of proposed
beds in relation to the proximity of the development to core services and
public transit, based on:
         (a)   Hierarchy of bus routes (regional vs. local);
         (b)   Proximity to job centers; and
         (c)   Proximity to commercial area.
      (2)   Provide adequate off-street parking in consideration of other
provided mobility options including vehicle share/shuttle programs.
   (D)   Performance standards. After implementation of a Mobility Management
Plan, the following performance standards shall be maintained:
      (1)   Personal vehicles shall not be parked in areas designated for fire
service or in a dedicated emergency access easement.
      (2)   Personal vehicles shall not be parked on adjacent properties unless
permission has been obtained in writing and provided to and approved by the
Town.
      (3)   Personal vehicles shall not be parked in the public right-of-way.
      (4)   Personal vehicles shall not be parked in areas other than
designated spaces as shown on the approved development plan.
      (5)   At no time shall parking extend into required drive aisles.
      (6)   Goods, trailers, campers, or unlicensed vehicles shall not be
stored in designated parking areas.
      (7)   Bike parking shall be maintained at all times in a clean, safe and
functional condition.
   (E)   Reporting. For the first two years following the implementation of a
Mobility Management Plan, a report shall be submitted to the Community
Development Department, within 30 days of the date of the anniversary of the
first-issued certificate of occupancy for the development, including the
following information:
      (1)   Number of occupied units and number of residents per unit;
      (2)   Usage of mobility services;
      (3)   Results of survey of residents concerning parking;
      (4)   Reports of any code enforcement complaints; and
      (5)   A parking utilization study during summer and winter.
   (F)   Amendments. Amendments to an approved Mobility Management Plan shall
be submitted to the Planning and Environmental Commission Meeting for approval
at a public hearing in accordance with §
12-3-6 .
(Ord. 6(2024) § 4)
§ 12-6M-14 LOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Limitation. All conditional uses shall be operated and conducted
entirely within a building, except for permitted loading areas and such
activities as specifically authorized to be unenclosed by a conditional use
permit, and the outdoor display of goods.
   (B)   Outdoor display areas. The area to be used for outdoor display shall
be located directly in front of the establishment displaying the goods and
entirely upon the establishment's own property. Sidewalks, building entrances
and exits, driveways and streets shall not be obstructed by outdoor display.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 4)
ARTICLE 6N: COMMUNITY HOUSING-3 (CH-3) DISTRICT
Section
12-6N-1 Purpose
12-6N-2 Permitted uses
12-6N-3 Conditional uses
12-6N-4 Accessory uses
12-6N-5 Setbacks
12-6N-6 Site coverage
12-6N-7 Landscaping and site development
12-6N-8 Lot area
12-6N-9 Height
12-6N-10 Density
12-6N-11 Gross residential floor area
12-6N-12 Parking
12-6N-13 Mobility
12-6N-14 Location of business activity
§ 12-6N-1 PURPOSE.
   The CH-3 District is intended to provide adequate sites for employee housing
which, because of the nature and characteristics of employee housing, cannot be
adequately regulated by the development standards prescribed for other
residential zone districts. The CH-3 District provides flexibility to provide
for the critical need for housing to serve local citizens and businesses, and
to provide for the public welfare. The CH-3 District is intended to ensure that
employee housing is appropriately located and designed to meet the needs of
Town residents, to harmonize with surrounding uses, and to ensure adequate
light, air, open spaces and other amenities appropriate to the allowed types of
uses. The CH-3 District is intended to apply to properties located in high-
density residential or mixed- use areas.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 5)
§ 12-6N-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in the CH-3 District:
   (A)   Bicycle and pedestrian paths;
   (B)   Wireless communication facilities;
   (C)   Employee housing units;
   (D)   Passive outdoor recreation areas, and open space;
   (E)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (F)   Public parks and recreational facilities; and
   (G)   Public utilities installations including transmission lines and
appurtenant equipment.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 5)
§ 12-6N-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses are permitted in the CH-3 District, subject
to issuance of a conditional use permit:
   (A)   Public and private schools; and
   (B)   Commercial uses which are secondary and incidental to the use of
employee housing and specifically serving the needs of the residents of the
development, and developed in conjunction with employee housing, in which case
the following uses may be allowed subject to a conditional use permit:
      (1)   Automated teller machines;
      (2)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (3)   Business offices and professional offices;
      (4)   Eating and drinking establishments;
      (5)   Funiculars and other similar conveyances;
      (6)   Health clubs;
      (7)   Personal services, including without limitation laundromats, beauty
and barber shops, tailor shops and similar services; and
      (8)   Retail stores and establishments.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 5)
§ 12-6N-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses are permitted in the CH-3 District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit;
   (B)   Private greenhouses, toolsheds, playhouses, attached garages or
carports, swimming pools or recreation facilities customarily incidental to
permitted residential uses;
   (C)   Childcare facilities;
   (D)   Dwelling units other than employee housing units, if such dwelling
units:
      (1)   Are created solely for the purpose of subsidizing employee housing
on the property;
      (2)   Are not the primary use of the property;
      (3)   Do not exceed 30% of the total GRFA constructed on the property;
and
      (4)   Are compatible with the proposed uses and buildings on the site and
are compatible with buildings and uses on adjacent properties; and
   (E)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 5)
§ 12-6N-5 SETBACKS.
   The minimum front setback shall be 20 feet, the minimum side setback shall
be 15 feet, and the minimum rear setback shall be 15 feet.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 5)
§ 12-6N-6 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 55% of the total site area. If at least 75%
of the required parking spaces are underground or enclosed, site coverage may
be increased to 65%.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 5)
§ 12-6N-7 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 25% of the total site area shall be landscaped.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 5)
§ 12-6N-8 LOT AREA.
   The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 5)
§ 12-6N-9 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 70
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 82.5 feet.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 5)
§ 12-6N-10 DENSITY.
   There is no limitation on the number of dwelling units per acre.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 5)
§ 12-6N-11 GROSS RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA.
   There is no limitation on the amount of gross residential floor area.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 5)
§ 12-6N-12 PARKING.
   Parking shall be provided at a rate of 1.05 parking spaces per dwelling unit
or employee housing unit, which represents all parking, including visitor
parking. Applications shall include number and layout of onsite parking spaces;
details of any offsite parking being provided; onsite bicycle parking;
provisions for guest parking; and assigned parking spaces.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 5)
§ 12-6N-13 MOBILITY.
   (A)   General. Developments providing less than the prescribed number of
parking spaces shall require a Mobility Management Plan approved by the
Planning and Environmental Commission.
   (B)   Mobility Management Plan. The Mobility Management Plan shall include:
      (1)   Layout of proposed covered and uncovered parking including
applicable dimensions, provisions for stacked parking and compact spaces, if
proposed;
      (2)   Information on how proposed parking spaces will be allocated to
units and if this allocation is on the form of a deed restriction;
      (3)   A professionally produced parking study, unless a determination is
made by the Administrator that such study is unnecessary due to the scale and
character of the proposal;
      (4)   Existence of any bike or vehicle share/shuttle program;
      (5)   Covered/protected/secured bike parking/storage;
      (6)   Provisions for guest parking and management;
      (7)   Provisions for seasonal variations; and
      (8)   Provisions for off-site vehicle storage, which may be located at
any distance from the site.
   (C)   Review criteria. To be approved, a Mobility Management Plan shall:
      (1)   Provide adequate off-street parking for the quantity of proposed
beds in relation to the proximity of the development to core services and
public transit, based on:
         (a)   Hierarchy of bus routes (regional vs. local);
         (b)   Proximity to job centers; and
         (c)   Proximity to commercial area.
      (2)   Provide adequate off-street parking in consideration of other
provided mobility options including vehicle share/shuttle programs.
   (D)   Performance standards. After implementation of a Mobility Management
Plan, the following performance standards shall be maintained:
      (1)   Personal vehicles shall not be parked in areas designated for fire
service or in a dedicated emergency access easement.
      (2)   Personal vehicles shall not be parked on adjacent properties unless
permission has been obtained in writing and provided to and approved by the
Town.
      (3)   Personal vehicles shall not be parked in the public right-of- way.
      (4)   Personal vehicles shall not be parked in areas other than
designated spaces as shown on the approved development plan.
      (5)   At no time shall parking extend into required drive aisles.
      (6)   Goods, trailers, campers, or unlicensed vehicles shall not be
stored in designated parking areas.
      (7) Bike parking shall be maintained at all times in a clean, safe and
functional condition.
   (E)   Reporting. For the first two years following the implementation of a
Mobility Management Plan, a report shall be submitted to the Community
Development Department, within 30 days of the date of the anniversary of the
first-issued certificate of occupancy for the development, including the
following information:
      (1)   Number of occupied units and number of residents per unit;
      (2)   Usage of mobility services;
      (3)   Results of survey of residents concerning parking;
      (4)   Reports of any code enforcement complaints; and
      (5)   A parking utilization study during summer and winter.
   (F)   Amendments. Amendments to an approved Mobility Management Plan shall
be submitted to the Planning and Environmental Commission Meeting for approval
at a public hearing in accordance with §
12-3-6 .
(Ord. 6(2024) § 5)
§ 12-6N-14 LOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Limitation. All conditional uses shall be operated and conducted
entirely within a building, except for permitted loading areas and such
activities as specifically authorized to be unenclosed by a conditional use
permit, and the outdoor display of goods.
   (B)   Outdoor display areas. The area to be used for outdoor display shall
be located directly in front of the establishment displaying the goods and
entirely upon the establishment's own property. Sidewalks, building entrances
and exits, driveways and streets shall not be obstructed by outdoor display.
(Ord. 6(2024) § 5)
CHAPTER 7: COMMERCIAL AND BUSINESS DISTRICTS
ARTICLE 7A: PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION (PA) DISTRICT
Section
12-7A-1 Purpose
12-7A-2 Permitted uses
12-7A-3 Conditional uses
12-7A-4 Accessory uses
12-7A-5 Lot area and site dimensions
12-7A-6 Setbacks
12-7A-7 Height
12-7A-8 Density control
12-7A-9 Site coverage
12-7A-10 Landscaping and site development
12-7A-11 Parking and loading
12-7A-12 Exterior alterations or modifications
12-7A-13 Compliance burden
12-7A-14 Mitigation of development impacts
12-7A-15 Addition of gross residential floor area to existing PA properties
12-7A-16 Location of business activity
§ 12-7A-1 PURPOSE.
   The Public Accommodation District is intended to provide sites for lodges
and residential accommodations for visitors, together with such public and
semipublic facilities and limited professional offices, medical facilities,
private recreation, commercial/retail and related visitor oriented uses as may
appropriately be located within the same zone district and compatible with
adjacent land uses. The Public Accommodation District is intended to ensure
adequate light, air, open space and other amenities commensurate with lodge
uses, and to maintain the desirable resort qualities of the zone district by
establishing appropriate site development standards. Additional nonresidential
uses are permitted as conditional uses which enhance the nature of Vail as a
vacation community, and where permitted uses are intended to function
compatibly with the high density lodging character of the zone district.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 7.100; Ord. 30(1977) § 7; Ord. 23(1999) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) §
24)
§ 12-7A-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the PA District:
   (A)   Automated teller machines (ATMs) exterior to a building;
   (B)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title; and
   (C)   Lodges, including accessory eating, drinking or retail establishments
located within the principal use and not occupying more than 10% of the total
gross residential floor area of the main structure or structures on the site;
additional accessory dining areas may be located on an outdoor deck, porch or
terrace.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 11)
§ 12-7A-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the PA District,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
   (A)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (B)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (C)   Fractional fee club units, as further regulated by §
12-16-7(A)(8) of this title;
   (D)   Healthcare facilities;
   (E)   Lodges, including accessory eating, drinking, or retail establishments
located within the principal use and occupying between 10% and 15% of the total
gross residential floor area of the main structure or structures on the site;
   (F)   Major arcades;
   (G)   Private clubs and civic, cultural and fraternal organizations;
   (H)   Private parking structures;
   (I)   Private unstructured parking;
   (J)   Professional and business offices;
   (K)   Public and private schools;
   (L)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (M)   Public parking structures;
   (N)   Public parks and recreational facilities;
   (O)   Public transportation terminals;
   (P)   Public unstructured parking;
   (Q)   Public utility and public service uses;
   (R)   Religious institutions;
   (S)   Ski lifts and tows; and
   (T)   Theaters and convention facilities.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 11)
§ 12-7A-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the PA District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Meeting rooms;
   (C)   Minor arcades;
   (D)   Swimming pools, tennis courts, patios or other recreation facilities
customarily incidental to permitted lodge uses; and
   (E)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 7.400; Ord. 6(1982) § 8(b); Ord. 23(1999) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) §
24)
§ 12-7A-5 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 10,000 square feet of buildable area
and each site shall have a minimum frontage of 30 feet. Each site shall be of a
size and shape capable of enclosing a square area, 80 feet on each side, within
its boundaries.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 3; Ord. 23(1999) § 1)
§ 12-7A-6 SETBACKS.
   In the PA District, the minimum front setback shall be 20 feet, the minimum
side setback shall be 20 feet and the minimum rear setback shall be 20 feet. At
the discretion of the Planning and Environmental Commission and/or the Design
Review Board, variations to the setback standards outlined above may be
approved during the review of exterior alterations or modifications (§
12-7A-12 of this article) subject to the applicant demonstrating compliance
with the following criteria:
   (A)   Proposed building setbacks provide necessary separation between
buildings and riparian areas, geologically sensitive areas and other
environmentally sensitive areas;
   (B)   Proposed building setbacks comply with applicable elements of the Vail
Village Urban Design Guide Plan and Design Considerations;
   (C)   Proposed building setbacks will provide adequate availability of
light, air and open space;
   (D)   Proposed building setbacks will provide a compatible relationship with
buildings and uses on adjacent properties; and
   (E)   Proposed building setbacks will result in creative design solutions or
other public benefits that could not otherwise be achieved by conformance with
prescribed setback standards.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 2; Ord. 23(1999) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7A-7 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 45
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 48 feet.
(Ord. 37(1980) § 2; Ord. 23(1999) § 1)
§ 12-7A-8 DENSITY CONTROL.
   (A)   Up to 150 square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA) may be
permitted for each 100 square feet of buildable site area. Final determination
of allowable gross residential floor area shall be made by the Planning and
Environmental Commission in accordance with §
12-7A-12 of this article. Specifically, in determining allowable gross
residential floor area the Planning and Environmental Commission shall make a
finding that proposed gross residential floor area is in conformance with
applicable elements of the Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan and Design
Considerations. Total density shall not exceed 25 dwelling units per acre of
buildable site area. For the purposes of calculating density, employee housing
units, accommodation units and fractional fee club units shall not be counted
towards density.
   (B)   A dwelling unit in a multiple-family building may include one attached
accommodation unit no larger than one-third of the total floor area of the
dwelling.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 2; Ord. 50(1978) § 19; Ord. 23(1999) § 1; Ord. 31(2001) §§ 3,
5; Ord. 5(2003) §4; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7A-9 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 65% of the total site area. Final
determination of allowable site coverage shall be made by the Planning and
Environmental Commission and/or the Design Review Board in accordance with §
12-7A-12 of this article. Specifically, in determining allowable site coverage
the Planning and Environmental Commission and/or the Design Review Board shall
make a finding that the proposed site coverage is in conformance with
applicable elements of the Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan and Design
Considerations.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 7.507; Ord. 17(1991) § 7; Ord. 23(1999) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) §
24)
§ 12-7A-10 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 30% of the total site area shall be landscaped. The minimum width
and length of any area qualifying as landscaping shall be 15 feet with a
minimum area not less than 300 square feet.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 7.509; Ord. 19(1976) § 8; Ord. 23(1999) § 1)
§ 12-7A-11 PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title. At least 75% of the required parking shall be located within
the main building or buildings and hidden from public view. No at grade or
above grade surface parking or loading area shall be located in any required
front setback area. Below grade underground structured parking and short term
guest loading and drop off shall be permitted in the required front setback
subject to the approval of the Planning and Environmental Commission and/or the
Design Review Board.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 7.510; Ord. 19(1976) § 8; Ord. 23(1999) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) §
24)
§ 12-7A-12 EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS OR MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Review required. The construction of a new building or the alteration
of an existing building shall be reviewed by the Design Review Board in
accordance with Chapter 11 of this title. However, any project which adds
additional dwelling units, accommodation units, fractional fee club units, any
project which adds more than 1,000 square feet of commercial floor area or
common space, or any project which has substantial off site impacts (as
determined by the Administrator) shall be reviewed by the Planning and
Environmental Commission as a major exterior alteration in accordance with this
chapter and §
12-3-6 of this title. Complete applications for major exterior alterations
shall be submitted in accordance with administrative schedules developed by the
Department of Community Development for Planning and Environmental Commission
and Design Review Board review. The following submittal items are required.
      (1)   Application. An application shall be made by the owner of the
building or the building owner’s authorized agent or representative on a form
provided by the Administrator. Any application for condominiumized buildings
shall be authorized by the condominium association in conformity with all
pertinent requirements of the condominium association’s declarations.
      (2)   Application; contents. The Administrator shall establish the
submittal requirements for an exterior alteration or modification application.
A complete list of the submittal requirements shall be maintained by the
Administrator and filed in the Department of Community Development. Certain
submittal requirements may be waived and/or modified by the Administrator and/
or the reviewing body if it is demonstrated by the applicant that the
information and materials required are not relevant to the proposed development
or applicable to the planning documents that comprise the Vail Comprehensive
Plan. The Administrator and/or the reviewing body may require the submission of
additional plans, drawings, specifications, samples and other materials if
deemed necessary to properly evaluate the proposal.
      (3)   Work sessions/conceptual review. If requested by either the
applicant or the Administrator, submittals may proceed to a work session with
the Planning and Environmental Commission, a conceptual review with the Design
Review Board, or a work session with the Town Council.
      (4)   Hearing. The public hearing before the Planning and Environmental
Commission shall be held in accordance with §
12-3-6 of this title. The Planning and Environmental Commission may approve the
application as submitted, approve the application with conditions or
modifications, or deny the application. The decision of the Planning and
Environmental Commission may be appealed to the Town Council in accordance with
§
12-3-3 of this title.
      (5)   Lapse of approval. Approval of an exterior alteration as prescribed
by this article shall lapse and become void three years following the date of
approval by the Design Review Board unless, prior to the expiration, a building
permit is issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued to
completion. Administrative extensions shall be allowed for reasonable and
unexpected delays as long as code provisions affecting the proposal have not
changed.
(Ord. 23(1999) § 1; Ord. 31(2001) § 7; Ord. 5(2003) § 5; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7A-13 COMPLIANCE BURDEN.
   It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove by a preponderance of the
evidence before the Planning and Environmental Commission and the Design Review
Board that the proposed exterior alteration or new development is in compliance
with the purposes of the Public Accommodation District, that the proposal is
consistent with applicable elements of the Vail Village Master Plan, the Vail
Village Urban Design Guide Plan and the Vail Streetscape Master Plan, and that
the proposal does not otherwise have a significant negative effect on the
character of the neighborhood, and that the proposal substantially complies
with other applicable elements of the Vail Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 23(1999) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7A-14 MITIGATION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS.
   Property owners/developers shall also be responsible for mitigating direct
impacts of their development on public infrastructure and in all cases
mitigation shall bear a reasonable relation to the development impacts. Impacts
may be determined based on reports prepared by qualified consultants. The
extent of mitigation and public amenity improvements shall be balanced with the
goals of redevelopment and will be determined by the Planning and Environmental
Commission in review of development projects and conditional use permits.
Substantial off site impacts may include, but are not limited to, the
following: deed restricted employee housing; roadway improvements; pedestrian
walkway improvements; streetscape improvements; stream tract/bank restoration;
loading/delivery; public art improvements; and similar improvements. The intent
of this section is to only require mitigation for large scale redevelopment/
development projects which produce substantial off site impacts.
(Ord. 23(1999) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7A-15 ADDITION OF GROSS RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA TO EXISTING PA PROPERTIES.
   For any gross residential floor area added to a public accommodation zoned
property following the effective date hereof, a minimum of 70% of the added
gross residential floor area shall be devoted to accommodation units, or
fractional fee club units subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit.
This limitation shall not apply to gross residential floor area being added in
accordance with §§
12-15-4 and
12-15-5 of this title.
(Ord. 23(1999) § 1)
§ 12-7A-16 LOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Limitations; exception. All permitted and conditional uses shall be
operated and conducted entirely within a building except for permitted parking
and loading areas and such activities as may be specifically authorized to be
unenclosed by a conditional use permit and the outdoor display of goods. For
purposes of this section, CONDUCTED ENTIRELY WITHIN A BUILDING means that all
activities related to the permitted use, including contacting potential
customers and clients, must occur completely inside of a building, and not in
an open doorway of the building.
   (B)   Outdoor displays. The area to be used for an outdoor display shall be
located directly in front of the establishment displaying the goods and
entirely upon the establishment’s own property. Sidewalks, building entrances
and exits, driveways and streets shall not be obstructed by outdoor displays.
(Ord. 11(2019) § 9)
ARTICLE 7B: COMMERCIAL CORE 1 (CC1) DISTRICT
Section
12-7B-1 Purpose
12-7B-2 Permitted and conditional uses; basement or garden level
12-7B-3 Permitted and conditional uses; first floor or street level
12-7B-4 Permitted and conditional uses; second floor
12-7B-5 Permitted and conditional uses; above second floor
12-7B-6 Conditional uses; generally
12-7B-7 Exterior alterations or modifications
12-7B-8 Conditional uses; factors applicable
12-7B-9 Accessory uses
12-7B-10 Lot area and site dimensions
12-7B-11 Setbacks
12-7B-12 Height
12-7B-13 Density control
12-7B-14 Reconstruction of existing uses; generally
12-7B-15 Site coverage
12-7B-16 Landscaping and site development
12-7B-17 Parking and loading
12-7B-18 Location of business activity
12-7B-19 Reconstruction of existing uses; compliance required
12-7B-20 Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan
12-7B-21 Conversion of existing eating and drinking establishments
§ 12-7B-1 PURPOSE.
   The Commercial Core 1 District is intended to provide sites and to maintain
the unique character of the Vail Village commercial area, with its mixture of
lodges and commercial establishments in a predominantly pedestrian environment.
The Commercial Core 1 District is intended to ensure adequate light, air, open
space and other amenities appropriate to the permitted types of buildings and
uses. The zoning regulations in accordance with the Vail Village Urban Design
Guide Plan and Design Considerations prescribe site development standards that
are intended to ensure the maintenance and preservation of the tightly
clustered arrangements of buildings fronting on pedestrianways and public
greenways, and to ensure continuation of the building scale and architectural
qualities that distinguish the village.
(Ord. 21(1980) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7B-2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES; BASEMENT OR GARDEN LEVEL.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in basement or
garden levels within a structure:
      (1)   Retail shops and establishments, including the following:
         (a)   Apparel stores;
         (b)   Art supply stores and galleries;
         (c)   Bakeries and confectioneries;
         (d)   Bookstores;
         (e)   Camera stores and photographic studios;
         (f)   Candy stores;
         (g)   Chinaware and glassware stores;
         (h)   Delicatessens and specialty food stores;
         (i)   Drugstores;
         (j)   Florists;
         (k)   Gift shops;
         (l)   Health food stores;
         (m)   Hobby stores;
         (n)   Jewelry stores;
         (o)   Leather goods stores;
         (p)   Music and record stores;
         (q)   Newsstands and tobacco stores;
         (r)   Sporting goods stores;
         (s)   Stationery stores;
         (t)   Toy stores;
         (u)   Variety stores; and
         (v)   Yardage and dry goods stores.
      (2)   Personal services and repair shops, including the following:
         (a)   Beauty and barber shops;
         (b)   Commercial ski storage/ski club;
         (c)   Small appliance repair shops;
         (d)   Tailors and dressmakers; and
         (e)   Travel and ticket agencies.
      (3)   Eating and drinking establishments, including the following:
         (a)   Bakeries and delicatessens with food service, restricted to
preparation of products specifically for sale on the premises;
         (b)   Cocktail lounges and bars;
         (c)   Coffee shop;
         (d)   Fountains and sandwich shops; and
         (e)   Restaurants.
      (4)   Professional offices, business offices and studios;
      (5)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (6)   Additional uses determined to be similar to permitted uses
described in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(5) of this section, in accordance
with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title so long as they do not encourage vehicular traffic.
      (7)   Lodges; and
      (8)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in basement or
garden levels within a structure, subject to issuance of a conditional use
permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
      (1)   Electronic sales and repair shops;
      (2)   Household appliance stores;
      (3)   Liquor stores;
      (4)   Luggage stores;
      (5)   Major arcades;
      (6)   Meeting rooms;
      (7)   Multiple-family dwellings;
      (8)   Outdoor patios;
      (9)   Religious institutions; and
      (10)   Theaters.
(Ord. 39(2007) § 2; Ord. 1(2008) § 12; Ord. 8(2014) § 2; Ord. 2(2016) § 7)
§ 12-7B-3 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES; FIRST FLOOR OR STREET LEVEL.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted on the first
floor or street level within a structure:
      (1)   Retail stores and establishments, including the following:
         (a)   Apparel stores;
         (b)   Art supply stores and galleries;
         (c)   Bakeries and confectioneries;
         (d)   Bookstores;
         (e)   Camera stores and photographic studios;
         (f)   Candy stores;
         (g)   Chinaware and glassware stores;
         (h)   Delicatessens and specialty food stores;
         (i)   Drugstores;
         (j)   Florists;
         (k)   Gift shops;
         (l)   Hobby stores;
         (m)   Jewelry stores;
         (n)   Leather goods stores;
         (o)   Luggage stores;
         (p)   Music and record stores;
         (q)   Newsstands and tobacco stores;
         (r)   Sporting goods stores;
         (s)   Stationery stores;
         (t)   Toy stores;
         (u)   Travel and ticket agencies;
         (v)   Variety stores; and
         (w)   Yardage and dry goods stores.
      (2)   Eating and drinking establishments, including the following:
         (a)   Bakeries and delicatessens with food service, restricted to
preparation of products specifically for sale on the premises;
         (b)   Cocktail lounges and bars;
         (c)   Coffee shops;
         (d)   Fountains and sandwich shops; and
         (e)   Restaurants.
      (3)   Lodges;
      (4)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
      (5)   Additional uses determined to be similar to permitted uses
described in subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section, in accordance with
the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title so long as they do not encourage vehicular traffic; and
      (6)   Automated teller machines (ATMs) exterior to a building.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted on the first
floor or street level floor within a structure, subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this
title:
      (1)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (2)   Beauty and barber shops;
      (3)   Electronics sales and repair shops;
      (4)   Household appliance stores;
      (5)   Liquor stores; and
      (6)   Outdoor patios.
(Ord. 39(2007) § 2; Ord. 1(2008) § 12; Ord. 12(2008) § 12)
§ 12-7B-4 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES; SECOND FLOOR.
   (A)   Permitted uses; exception. The following uses shall be permitted on
the second floor within a structure; provided, however, that a conditional use
permit will be required in accordance with Chapter 16 of this title for any use
which eliminates any existing dwelling or accommodation unit or any portion
thereof:
      (1)   Multiple-family residential dwelling;
      (2)   Lodges;
      (3)   Professional offices, business offices and studios;
      (4)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (5)   Personal services and repair shops, including the following:
         (a)   Beauty and barber shops;
         (b)   Business and office services;
         (c)   Tailors and dressmakers; and
         (d)   Travel and ticket agencies.
      (6)   Retail stores and establishments, including the following:
         (a)   Apparel stores;
         (b)   Art supply stores and galleries;
         (c)   Bakeries and confectioneries;
         (d)   Bookstores;
         (e)   Camera stores and photographic studios;
         (f)   Candy stores;
         (g)   Chinaware and glassware stores;
         (h)   Delicatessens and specialty food stores;
         (i)   Drugstores;
         (j)   Florists;
         (k)   Gift shops;
         (l)   Hobby stores;
         (m)   Jewelry stores;
         (n)   Leather goods stores;
         (o)   Music and record stores;
         (p)   Newsstands and tobacco stores;
         (q)   Photographic studios;
         (r)   Sporting goods stores;
         (s)   Toy stores;
         (t)   Variety stores; and
         (u)   Yardage and dry goods stores.
      (7)   Eating and drinking establishments, including the following:
         (a)   Bakeries and delicatessens with food service, restricted to
preparation of products specifically for sale on the premises;
         (b)   Cocktail lounges and bars;
         (c)   Coffee shops;
         (d)   Fountains and sandwich shops; and
         (e)   Restaurants.
      (8)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted on second
floors, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
      (1)   Dog kennels;
      (2)   Electronics sales and repair shops;
      (3)   Household appliance stores;
      (4)   Liquor stores;
      (5)   Luggage stores;
      (6)   Meeting rooms;
      (7)   Outdoor patios;
      (8)   Religious institutions; and
      (9)   Theaters.
(Ord. 39(2007) § 2; Ord. 1(2008) § 12; Ord. 12(2008) § 12; Ord. 2(2016) § 8)
§ 12-7B-5 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES; ABOVE SECOND FLOOR.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted on any floor
above the second floor:
      (1)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
      (2)   Lodges; and
      (3)   Multiple-family residential dwellings.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted on any floor
above the second floor, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this title. Any permitted or
conditional use which eliminates any existing dwelling or accommodation unit,
or any portion thereof, shall require a conditional use permit. Such uses may
include:
      (1)   Retail stores and establishments, including the following:
         (a)   Apparel stores;
         (b)   Art supply stores and galleries;
         (c)   Bakeries and confectioneries;
         (d)   Bookstores;
         (e)   Camera stores and photographic studios;
         (f)   Chinaware and glassware stores;
         (g)   Delicatessens and specialty food stores;
         (h)   Drugstores;
         (i)   Electronics sales and repair shops;
         (j)   Florists;
         (k)   Gift shops;
         (l)   Hobby stores;
         (m)   Jewelry stores;
         (n)   Leather goods stores;
         (o)   Liquor stores;
         (p)   Luggage stores;
         (q)   Music and record stores;
         (r)   Newsstands and tobacco stores;
         (s)   Photographic studios;
         (t)   Sporting goods stores;
         (u)   Stationery stores;
         (v)   Toy stores;
         (w)   Variety stores; and
         (x)   Yardage and dry goods stores.
      (2)   Eating and drinking establishments, including the following:
         (a)   Bakeries and delicatessens with food service, restricted to
preparation of products specifically for sale on the premises;
         (b)   Cocktail lounges and bars;
         (c)   Coffee shops;
         (d)   Fountains and sandwich shops; and
         (e)   Restaurants.
      (3)   Professional offices, business offices, and studios;
      (4)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (5)   Personal services and repair shops, including the following:
         (a)   Beauty and barber shops;
         (b)   Business and office services;
         (c)   Small appliance repair shops;
         (d)   Tailors and dressmakers; and
         (e)   Travel and ticket agencies.
      (6)   Theaters; and
      (7)   Additional uses determined to be similar to permitted uses
described in subsections (B)(1) through (B)(5) of this section in accordance
with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title, so long as they do not encourage vehicular traffic.
(Ord. 39(2007) § 2; Ord. 1(2008) § 12; Ord. 12(2008) § 12)
§ 12-7B-6 CONDITIONAL USES; GENERALLY.
   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this
title:
   (A)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (B)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (C)   Public park and recreation facilities;
   (D)   Public utility and public service uses; and
   (E)   Ski lifts and tows.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 8.300; Ord. 16(1975) § 3(B); Ord. 31(1989) § 8; Ord. 29(2005) §
24)
§ 12-7B-7 EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS OR MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Applicability. The construction of a new building, the alteration of
an existing building which adds or removes any enclosed floor area, the
alteration of an existing building which modifies exterior rooflines, the
replacement of an existing building, the addition of a new outdoor dining deck
or the modification of an existing outdoor dining deck shall require approval
from the Planning and Environmental Commission (PEC).
      (1)   Application. An application shall be made by the owner of the
building or the building owner's authorized agent or representative on a form
provided by the Administrator. Any application for a building in a common
interest community shall be duly authorized by the condominium association.
      (2)   Application contents. The Administrator shall establish the
submittal requirements for an exterior alteration or modification application.
A complete list of the submittal requirements shall be maintained by the
Department of Community Development. Certain submittal requirements may be
waived by the Administrator or reviewing body if the applicant demonstrates
that the information and materials required are not relevant to the
application. The Administrator or the reviewing body may require the submission
of additional plans, drawings, specifications, samples and other materials if
deemed necessary to properly evaluate the proposal.
      (3)   Hearing. The public hearing before the Planning and Environmental
Commission shall be held in accordance with §
12-3-6  of this Title. The Planning and Environmental Commission may approve
the application as submitted, approve the application with conditions or
modifications, or deny the application. The decision of the Planning and
Environmental Commission may be appealed to the Town Council in accordance with
§
12-3-3  of this Title.
      (4)   Burden of proof. At the hearing, the applicant shall prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that the proposed exterior alteration is in
compliance with the purposes of the CC1 District as specified in §
12-7B-1  of this Article; that the proposal is consistent with applicable
elements of the Vail Village Master Plan, the Town of Vail Streetscape Master
Plan and the Vail Comprehensive Plan; that the proposal does not otherwise
negatively alter the character of the neighborhood; and that the proposal
substantially complies with the Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan and the
Vail Village design considerations, including without limitation the following
urban design considerations: pedestrianization, vehicular penetration,
streetscape framework, street enclosure, street edge, building height, views,
service/delivery and sun/shade analysis.
      (5)   Approval. Approval of an exterior alteration under this Section
shall constitute approval of the basic form and location of improvements
including siting, building setbacks, height, building bulk and mass, site
improvements and landscaping.
      (6)   Lapse of approval. Approval of an exterior alteration shall lapse
and become void two years following the date of approval unless, prior to the
expiration, a building permit is issued and construction is commenced and
diligently pursued to completion.
      (7)   Design Review Board review. Any modification or change to the
exterior facade of a building or to a site within the CC1 District shall be
reviewed by the Design Review Board in accordance with Chapter 11 of this
title.
   (B)   Compliance burden. It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove by
a preponderance of the evidence before the Design Review Board that the
proposed building modification is in compliance with the purposes of the CC1
District as specified in §
12-7B-1  of this article; that the proposal substantially complies with the
Vail Village design considerations, and that the proposal does not otherwise
alter the character of the neighborhood.
(Ord. 21(1980) § 1; Ord. 25(1982) § 1(d); Ord. 41(1983) § 1; Ord. 4(1993) § 1;
1997 Code; Ord. 1(1998) § 1; Ord. 5(2003) § 6; Ord. 29(2005) § 24; Ord. 2(2024)
§ 1)
§ 12-7B-8 CONDITIONAL USES; FACTORS APPLICABLE.
   In considering, in accordance with Chapter 16 of this title, an application
for a conditional use permit within Commercial Core 1 District, the following
development factors shall be applicable:
   (A)   Effects of vehicular traffic on Commercial Core 1 District;
   (B)   Reduction of vehicular traffic in Commercial Core 1 District;
   (C)   Reduction of nonessential off-street parking;
   (D)   Control of delivery, pick up, and service vehicles;
   (E)   Development of public spaces for use by pedestrians;
   (F)   Continuance of the various commercial, residential, and public uses in
Commercial Core 1 District so as to maintain the existing character of the
area;
   (G)   Control quality of construction, architectural design, and landscape
design in Commercial Core 1 District so as to maintain the existing character
of the area; and
   (H)   Effects of noise, odor, dust, smoke, and other factors on the
environment of Commercial Core 1 District.
(Ord. 16(1975) § 4; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7B-9 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the CC1 District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Minor arcade. Amusement devices shall not be visible or audible from
any public way, street, walkway or mall area;
   (C)   Outdoor dining areas operated in conjunction with permitted eating and
drinking establishments;
   (D)   Swimming pools, patios, or other recreational facilities customarily
incidental to permitted residential or lodge uses; and
   (E)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 8.400; Ord. 16(1975) § 3(C); Ord. 6(1982) § 3(b); Ord. 29(2005)
§ 24)
§ 12-7B-10 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 5,000 square feet of buildable area,
and each site shall have a minimum frontage of 30 feet.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 3)
§ 12-7B-11 SETBACKS.
   There shall be no required setbacks, except as may be established pursuant
to the Vail Village Design Guide Plan and Design Considerations.
(Ord. 21(1980) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7B-12 HEIGHT.
   Height shall be as regulated in the Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan and
Design Considerations.
(Ord. 37(1980) § 2; Ord. 11(1982) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7B-13 DENSITY CONTROL.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided in the Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan,
not more than 80 square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA) shall be
permitted for each 100 square feet of buildable site area. Total density shall
not exceed 25 dwelling units per acre of buildable site area. Each
accommodation unit shall be counted as one-half of a dwelling unit for purposes
of calculating allowable units per acre.
   (B)   A dwelling unit in a multiple-family building may include one attached
accommodation unit no larger than one-third of the total floor area of the
dwelling.
(Ord. 21(1980) § 1; Ord. 31(2001) §§ 3, 5; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7B-14 RECONSTRUCTION OF EXISTING USES; GENERALLY.
   If any building or structure located within Commercial Core 1 District on
June 1, 1978, is subsequently destroyed by fire or other casualty to the degree
provided in §
12-18-9 of this title, that structure or building may be reconstructed to the
same or substantially the same size, dimensions, lot coverage and height in
accordance with the procedures outlined in §
12-18-9 of this title, so long as the appearance of the building or structure
is the same or substantially the same as existed prior to its destruction.
(Ord. 13(1978) § 2; Ord. 19(1979) § 3(a); Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7B-15 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 80% of the total site area, unless otherwise
specified in the Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan and Design
Considerations. In Commercial Core 1 District, ground level patios and decks
shall be included in site coverage calculations.
(Ord. 21(1980) § 1; Ord. 17(1991) § 8; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7B-16 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   No reduction in landscape area shall be permitted without sufficient cause
shown by the applicant or as specified in the Vail Village design
considerations as adopted in §
12-7B-20 of this article.
(Ord. 21(1980) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7B-17 PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title; provided, that no parking shall be provided on site. All
parking requirements shall be met in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
10 of this title. Loading requirements shall continue to be applicable to
properties within Commercial Core 1 District; provided that no loading areas
shall be located in any required front setback area.
(Ord. 13(1978) § 3; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7B-18 LOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Limitations; exception. All offices, businesses and services permitted
by §§
12-7B-2 through
12-7B-5 shall be operated and conducted entirely within a building, except for
permitted unenclosed parking or loading areas, and the outdoor display of
goods. For purposes of this section, CONDUCTED ENTIRELY WITHIN A BUILDING means
that all activities related to the permitted use, including contacting
potential customers and clients, must occur completely inside of a building,
and not in an open doorway of the building.
   (B)   Outdoor displays. The area to be used for an outdoor display shall be
located directly in front of the establishment displaying the goods and
entirely upon the establishment’s own property. Sidewalks, building entrances
and exits, driveways and streets shall not be obstructed by outdoor displays.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 8.511; Ord. 19(1976) § 9; Ord. 34(1982) § 1; Ord. 11(2019) § 1)
§ 12-7B-19 RECONSTRUCTION OF EXISTING USES; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Any building or structure located within Commercial Core 1 District may be
reconstructed to the same or substantially the same enclosed floor area in
accordance with the procedures outlined in §
12-18-9 of this title. The building, however, shall substantially comply with
the applicable provisions of the Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan and
Design Considerations.
(Ord. 21(1980) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7B-20 VAIL VILLAGE URBAN DESIGN GUIDE PLAN.
   (A)   Adoption. The Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan and Design
Considerations are adopted for the purposes of maintaining and preserving the
character and vitality of the Vail Village (CC1) and to guide the future
alteration, change and improvement in the CC1 District. Copies of the Vail
Village Design Guide Plan and Design Considerations shall be on file in the
Department of Community Development.
   (B)   Revisions. Revisions to the Vail Village urban design guide plan and
Design Considerations shall be reviewed by the Planning and Environmental
Commission with official action to be taken by the Town Council by resolution
on a semiannual basis to ensure that the plan reflects the purposes and intent
for which it has been adopted. The review and action shall take place within 30
days following the public hearing on the applications.
(Ord. 21(1980) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7B-21 CONVERSION OF EXISTING EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to limit the conversion of
existing eating and drinking establishments in the Commercial Core 1 (CC1)
district to promote the goals of the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan and
Vail Village Master Plan by increasing vibrancy and pedestrian activity in
Lionshead and Vail Village.
   (B)   Definition. For purposes of this Section, eating and drinking
establishment means a premises where the principal use is the retail sale of
food and/or beverage to the public for on-premises consumption within the
principal building or in an outdoor seating area which is part of or adjacent
to the premises, including without limitation a restaurant, coffee shop,
tavern, café, brewery, cidery, distillery and winery.
   (C)   Applicability.
      (1)   This Section shall apply to all eating and drinking establishments
existing in the CC1 district on November 1, 2025, whether permitted by right or
conditionally.
      (2)   This Section shall not apply to the conversion of an eating and
drinking establishment that received final approval from the Planning and
Environmental Commission on or before November 1, 2025.
   (D)   Permit required. A conversion of an existing eating and drinking
establishment shall require a conversion permit in accordance with this
Section.
   (E)   Application. An application for a conversion permit shall be submitted
to the Director of Community Development (the Director) on forms provided by
the Town, along with the applicable application fee.
   (F)   Criteria and decision. The Director shall issue a conversion permit
upon a determination that one of the following criteria are met:
      (1)   The conversion will not result in a net loss of total eating and
drinking establishment interior square footage in the CC1 district, as
demonstrated by evidence that the applicant has established a new eating and
drinking establishment at a premises within the CC1 district with the same or
greater interior square footage as the premises proposed for conversion; or
      (2)   The conversion will occur at a premises with a prior eating and
drinking establishment, and the premises has been vacant for at least eighteen
(18) consecutive months despite diligent efforts to establish a new eating and
drinking establishment on the premises, as demonstrated by evidence that the
applicant has publicly and reasonably advertised the premises, but no viable
tenant exists.
   (G)   Appeals. If the Director denies an application for a conversion
permit, the Director shall send a written notice to the applicant. The
applicant may appeal the Director's decision pursuant to Section 12-3-3.A.
(Ord. 27(2025) § 1)
ARTICLE 7C: COMMERCIAL CORE 2 (CC2) DISTRICT
Section
12-7C-1 Purpose
12-7C-2 Requirements for establishment; development plan
12-7C-3 Permitted and conditional uses
12-7C-4 Conditional uses; generally
12-7C-5 Exterior alterations or modifications
12-7C-6 Accessory uses
12-7C-7 Lot area and site dimensions
12-7C-8 Setbacks
12-7C-9 Height
12-7C-10 Density control
12-7C-11 Site coverage
12-7C-12 Landscaping and site development
12-7C-13 Parking and loading
12-7C-14 Location of business activity
12-7C-15 Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan And Design Considerations
12-7C-16 Conversion of existing eating and drinking establishments
§ 12-7C-1 PURPOSE.
   The Commercial Core 2 District is intended to provide sites for a mixture of
multiple dwellings, lodges and commercial establishments in a clustered,
unified development. Commercial Core 2 District in accordance with the Vail
Village Urban Design Guide Plan and Design Considerations, as adopted in §
12-7C-15 of this article is intended to ensure adequate light, air, open space
and other amenities appropriate to the permitted types of building and uses and
to maintain the desirable qualities of the zone district by establishing
appropriate site development standards.
(Ord. 21(1980) § 2; 1997 Code; Ord. 31(2001) § 8; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7C-2 REQUIREMENTS FOR ESTABLISHMENT; DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Review required. Prior to the establishment of any Commercial Core 2
District or enlargement of any existing Commercial Core 2 District by change of
zone district boundaries, the Town Council shall by resolution adopt a general
development plan for the proposed zone district. The general development plan
may be prepared by an applicant for the establishment of such zone district or
may be prepared by the town. The development plan shall be submitted to the
Planning and Environmental Commission for review, and the Planning and
Environmental Commission shall submit its findings and recommendations on the
plan to the Town Council.
   (B)   Development plan content. The Administrator shall establish the
submittal requirements for a development plan application.
      (1)   A complete list of the submittal requirements shall be maintained
by the Administrator and filed in the Department of Community Development.
Certain submittal requirements may be waived and/or modified by the
Administrator and/or the reviewing body if it is demonstrated by the applicant
that the information and materials required are not relevant to the proposed
development or applicable to the planning documents that comprise the Vail
Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   The Administrator and/or the reviewing body may require the
submission of additional plans, drawings, specifications, samples and other
materials if deemed necessary to properly evaluate the proposal.
   (C)   Plan used as guide. The development plan shall be used as a guide for
the subsequent development of sites and the design and location of buildings
and grounds within the zone district. All plans subsequently approved by the
Design Review Board in accordance with Chapter 11 of this title, shall
substantially conform to the development plan adopted by the Town Council.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 9.200; Ord. 31(2001) § 8; Ord. 5(2003) § 7; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7C-3 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES.
   In the CC2 District, permitted and conditional uses for specific floors
shall be the same as those permitted in the Commercial Core 1 District as
prescribed by §§
12-7B-2 through
12-7B-5 of this chapter. Retail stores and establishments shall not occupy more
than 8,000 square feet of floor area.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 9.300; Ord. 50(1978) § 7; Ord. 31(2001) § 8; Ord. 29(2005) §
24)
§ 12-7C-4 CONDITIONAL USES; GENERALLY.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted, subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this
title:
   (A)   Bed and breakfasts as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (B)   Brewpubs;
   (C)   Commercial storage;
   (D)   Laundromats;
   (E)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (F)   Public park and recreation facilities;
   (G)   Public utility and public service uses;
   (H)   Religious institutions;
   (I)   Ski lifts and tows;
   (J)   Television stations; and
   (K)   Theaters, meeting rooms and convention facilities.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 9.400; Ord. 50(1978) § 8; Ord. 8(1981) § 2; Ord. 21(1983) § 1;
Ord. 31(1989) § 9; Ord. 23(1990) § 1; Ord. 16(1996) § 1; Ord. 10(1998) §§ 5, 6,
7; Ord. 31(2001) § 8; Ord. 29(2005) § 24; Ord. 2(2016) § 9)
§ 12-7C-5 EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS OR MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Applicability. The construction of a new building, the alteration of
an existing building which adds or removes any enclosed floor area, the
alteration of an existing building which modifies exterior rooflines, the
replacement of an existing building, the addition of a new outdoor dining deck
or the modification of an existing outdoor dining deck shall require approval
from the Planning and Environmental Commission (PEC).
      (1)   Application. An application shall be made by the owner of the
building or the building owner's authorized agent or representative on a form
provided by the Administrator. Any application for a building in a common
interest community shall be duly authorized by the condominium association.
      (2)   Application contents. The Administrator shall establish the
submittal requirements for an exterior alteration or modification application.
A complete list of the submittal requirements shall be maintained by the
Department of Community Development. Certain submittal requirements may be
waived by the Administrator or reviewing body if the applicant demonstrates
that the information and materials required are not relevant to the
application. The Administrator or the reviewing body may require the submission
of additional plans, drawings, specifications, samples and other materials if
deemed necessary to properly evaluate the proposal.
      (3)   Burden of proof. At the hearing, the applicant shall prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that the proposed exterior alteration is in
compliance with the purposes of the CC2 District as specified in §
12-7C-1  of this Article; that the proposal is consistent with applicable
elements of the Vail Village Master Plan, the Town of Vail Streetscape Master
Plan and the Vail Comprehensive Plan; that the proposal does not otherwise
negatively alter the character of the neighborhood; and that the proposal
substantially complies with the Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan and the
Vail Village design considerations, including without limitation the following
urban design considerations: pedestrianization, vehicular penetration,
streetscape framework, street enclosure, street edge, building height, views,
service/delivery and sun/shade analysis.
      (4)   Approval. Approval of an exterior alteration under this Section
shall constitute approval of the basic form and location of improvements
including siting, building setbacks, height, building bulk and mass, site
improvements and landscaping.
      (5)   Lapse of approval. Approval of an exterior alteration shall lapse
and become void two years following the date of approval by the Planning and
Environmental Commission unless, prior to the expiration, a building permit is
issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued to completion.
      (6)   Design Review Board review. Any modification or change to the
exterior facade of a building or to a site within the CC2 District shall be
reviewed by the Design Review Board in accordance with Chapter 11 of this
title.
   (B)   Compliance burden. It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove by
a preponderance of the evidence before the Design Review Board that the
proposed building modification is in compliance with the purposes of the CC2
District as specified in §
12-7C-1  of this article; that the proposal substantially complies with the
Vail Village design considerations or that the proposal does not otherwise
alter the character of the neighborhood.
(Ord. 21(1980) § 2; Ord. 25(1982) § 1(e); Ord. 4(1983) § 1; Ord. 7(1984) § 1;
Ord. 4(1993) § 2; 1997 Code; Ord. 1(1998) § 1; Ord. 31(2001) § 8; Ord. 5(2003)
§ 8; Ord. 29(2005) § 24; Ord. 2(2024) § 2)
Editor’s note:
   The submittal deadlines contained in subsection (A)(3) of this section are
hereby waived for project applications for the 1998 calendar year.
§ 12-7C-6 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the CC2 District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Minor arcades. Amusement devices shall not be visible or audible from
public way, street, walkway or mall area;
   (C)   Outdoor dining areas operated in conjunction with permitted eating and
drinking establishments;
   (D)   Swimming pools, tennis courts, patios or other recreation facilities
customarily incidental to permitted residential or lodge uses; and
   (E)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 9.500; Ord. 6(1982) § 4(a); Ord. 31(2001) § 8; Ord. 29(2005) §
24)
§ 12-7C-7 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 10,000 square feet of buildable area,
and each site shall have a minimum frontage of 30 feet. Each site shall be of a
size and shape capable of enclosing a square area, 80 feet on each side, within
its boundaries.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 3; Ord. 31(2001) § 8)
§ 12-7C-8 SETBACKS.
   In the CC2 District the minimum front setback shall be ten feet; the minimum
side setback shall be ten feet; and the minimum rear setback shall be ten feet
unless otherwise specified in the Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan and
Design Considerations.
(Ord. 21(1980) § 2; Ord. 31(2001) § 8; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7C-9 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 45
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 48 feet.
These restrictions pertain unless otherwise specified by the Vail Village Urban
Design Guide Plan and urban design considerations.
(Ord. 37(1980) § 2; Ord. 31(2001) § 8; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7C-10 DENSITY CONTROL.
   Unless otherwise specified in the Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan, not
more than 80 square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA) shall be
permitted for each 100 square feet of buildable site area. Total density shall
not exceed 25 dwelling units per acre of buildable site area. Each
accommodation unit shall be counted as one-half of a dwelling unit for purposes
of calculating allowable units per acre. A dwelling unit in a multiple-family
building may include one attached accommodation unit no larger than one-third
of the total floor area of the dwelling.
(Ord. 21(1980) § ; Ord. 31(2001) §§ 3, 5, 8; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7C-11 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 70% of the total site area, unless otherwise
specified in the Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan and Design
Considerations.
(Ord. 21(1980) § 2; Ord. 17(1991) § 9; Ord. 31(2001) § 8; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7C-12 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 20% of the total site area shall be landscaped unless otherwise
specified in the Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan and Design
Considerations.
(Ord. 21(1980) § 2; Ord. 31(2001) § 8; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7C-13 PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title. At least one-half the required parking shall be located
within the main building or buildings. No parking or loading area shall be
located in any required front setback area.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 9.610; Ord. 31(2001) § 8)
§ 12-7C-14 LOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Limitations; exception. All offices, businesses and services permitted
by §
12-7C-3 shall be operated and conducted entirely within a building, except for
permitted unenclosed parking or loading areas and the outdoor display of goods.
For purposes of this section, CONDUCTED ENTIRELY WITHIN A BUILDING means that
all activities related to the permitted use, including contacting potential
customers and clients, must occur completely inside of a building, and not in
an open doorway of the building.
   (B)   Outdoor displays. The area to be used for an outdoor display shall be
located directly in front of the establishment displaying the goods and
entirely upon the establishment’s own property. Sidewalks, building entrances
and exits, driveways and streets shall not be obstructed by outdoor displays.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 9.611; Ord. 34(1982) § 2; Ord. 31(2001) § 8; Ord. 11(2019) § 2)
§ 12-7C-15 VAIL VILLAGE URBAN DESIGN GUIDE PLAN AND DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS.
   (A)   Adoption. The Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan and Design
Considerations are adopted for the purpose of maintaining and preserving the
character and vitality of Vail Village (CC2) and to guide the future
alterations, change and improvement in the CC2 District. Copies of the Vail
Village Urban Design Guide Plan and Design Considerations shall be on file in
the Department of Community Development.
   (B)   Revisions. Revisions to the Vail Village Urban Design Guide Plan and
Design Considerations shall be reviewed by the Planning and Environmental
Commission with official action to be taken by the Town Council by resolution
on a semiannual basis to ensure that the plan reflects the purposes and intent
for which it has been adopted. The review and action shall take place within 30
days following the public hearing on the applications.
(Ord. 21(1980) § 2; Ord. 31(2001) § 8; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7C-16 CONVERSION OF EXISTING EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to limit the conversion of
existing eating and drinking establishments in the Commercial Core 2 (CC2)
district to promote the goals of the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan and
Vail Village Master Plan by increasing vibrancy and pedestrian activity in
Lionshead and Vail Village.
   (B)   Definition. For purposes of this Section, eating and drinking
establishment means a premises where the principal use is the retail sale of
food and/or beverages to the public for on-premises consumption within the
principal building or in an outdoor seating area which is part of or adjacent
to the premises, including without limitation a restaurant, coffee shop,
tavern, café, brewery, cidery, distillery and winery.
   (C)   Applicability.
      (1)   This Section shall apply to all eating and drinking establishments
existing in the CC2 district on November 1, 2025, whether permitted by right or
conditionally.
      (2)   This Section shall not apply to the conversion of an eating and
drinking establishment that received final approval from the Planning and
Environmental Commission on or before November 1, 2025.
   (D)   Permit required. A conversion of any existing eating and drinking
establishment shall require a conversion permit in accordance with this
Section.
   (E)   Application. An application for a conversion permit shall be submitted
to the Director of Community Development (the Director) on forms provided by
the Town, along with the applicable application fee.
   (F)   Criteria and decision. The Director shall issue a conversion permit
upon a determination that one of the following criteria are met:
      (1)   The conversion will not result in a net loss of total eating and
drinking establishment interior square footage in the CC2 district, as
demonstrated by evidence that the applicant has established a new eating and
drinking establishment at a premises within the CC2 district with the same or
greater interior square footage as the premises proposed for conversion; or
      (2)   The conversion will occur at a premises with a prior eating and
drinking establishment, and the premises has been vacant for at least eighteen
(18) consecutive months despite diligent efforts to establish a new eating and
drinking establishment on the premises, as demonstrated by evidence that the
applicant has publicly and reasonably advertised the premises, but no viable
tenant exists.
   (G)   Appeals. If the Director denies an application for a conversion
permit, the Director shall send a written notice to the applicant. The
applicant may appeal the Director's decision pursuant to Section
12-3-3 .A.
(Ord. 27(2025) § 2)
ARTICLE 7D: COMMERCIAL CORE 3 (CC3) DISTRICT
Section
12-7D-1 Permitted uses
12-7D-2 Conditional uses
12-7D-3 Accessory uses
12-7D-4 Lot area and site dimensions
12-7D-5 Setbacks
12-7D-6 Height
12-7D-7 Density control
12-7D-8 Site coverage
12-7D-9 Landscaping and site development
12-7D-10 Parking and loading
12-7D-11 Location of business activity
§ 12-7D-1 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the Commercial Core 3 District:
   (A)   Automated teller machines (ATMs) exterior to a building;
   (B)   Banks and financial institutions;
   (C)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (D)   Eating and drinking establishments, including the following:
      (1)   Cocktail lounges and bars;
      (2)   Coffee shops;
      (3)   Fountain and sandwich shops; and
      (4)   Restaurants.
   (E)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
   (F)   Health clubs;
   (G)   Personal services and repair shops, including the following:
      (1)   Beauty and barber shops;
      (2)   Business and office services;
      (3)   Cleaning and laundry pick up agencies without bulk cleaning or
dyeing;
      (4)   Laundromats;
      (5)   Shoe repair;
      (6)   Small appliance repair shops, excluding furniture repair;
      (7)   Tailors and dressmakers; and
      (8)   Travel and ticket agencies.
   (H)   Professional offices, business offices, and studios;
   (I)   Retail stores and establishments without limit as to floor area
including the following:
      (1)   Apparel stores;
      (2)   Art supply stores and galleries;
      (3)   Auto parts stores;
      (4)   Bakeries and confectioneries, preparation of products for sale on
the premises;
      (5)   Bookstores;
      (6)   Building materials stores without outdoor storage;
      (7)   Camera stores and photographic studios;
      (8)   Candy stores;
      (9)   Chinaware and glassware stores;
      (10)   Delicatessens and specialty food stores;
      (11)   Department and general merchandise stores;
      (12)   Drugstores;
      (13)   Electronics sales and repair shops;
      (14)   Florists;
      (15)   Food stores;
      (16)   Furniture stores;
      (17)   Gift shops;
      (18)   Hardware stores;
      (19)   Health food stores;
      (20)   Hobby stores;
      (21)   Household appliance stores;
      (22)   Jewelry stores;
      (23)   Leather goods stores;
      (24)   Liquor stores;
      (25)   Music and record stores;
      (26)   Newsstands and tobacco stores;
      (27)   Photographic studios;
      (28)   Radio and television broadcasting studios;
      (29)   Sporting goods stores;
      (30)   Stationery stores;
      (31)   Supermarkets;
      (32)   Toy stores;
      (33)   Variety stores; and
      (34)   Yardage and dry goods stores.
   (J)   Additional offices, business, or services determined to be similar to
permitted uses in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 13)
§ 12-7D-2 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the Commercial Core 3
District, subject to issuance of a conditional use permit in accord with the
provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
   (A)   Any use permitted by §
12-7D-1 of this article which is not conducted entirely within a building.
   (B)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by section
12-14-18 of this title;
   (C)   Brewpubs;
   (D)   Child daycare center;
   (E)   Commercial laundry and cleaning services, bulk plant;
   (F)   Commercial storage;
   (G)   Dog kennels;
   (H)   Drive-up facilities;
   (I)   Major arcades;
   (J)   Massage parlors;
   (K)   Outside car wash;
   (L)   Pet shops;
   (M)   Public buildings, grounds, and facilities;
   (N)   Public park and recreation facilities;
   (O)   Public utility and public service uses;
   (P)   Radio and television signal relay transmission facilities;
   (Q)   Religious institutions;
   (R)   Theaters, meeting rooms and convention facilities; and
   (S)   Transportation businesses.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 13; Ord. 2(2016) § 10)
§ 12-7D-3 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the Commercial Core 3
District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Minor arcades;
   (C)   Swimming pools, tennis courts, patios, or other recreation facilities
customarily incidental to conditional residential; and
   (D)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 11(1981) § 1; Ord. 6(1982) § 5(b); Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7D-4 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 25,000 square feet of buildable area,
and each site shall have a minimum frontage of 100 feet.
(Ord. 11(1981) § 1)
§ 12-7D-5 SETBACKS.
   In the Commercial Core 3 District, the setback shall be 20 feet on all
exterior boundaries of the zone district.
(Ord. 11(1981) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7D-6 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 35
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 38 feet.
(Ord. 11(1981) § 1)
§ 12-7D-7 DENSITY CONTROL.
   Not more than 30 square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA) shall be
permitted for each 100 square feet of buildable site area. Total density shall
not exceed 12 dwelling units per acre of buildable site area.
(Ord. 11(1981) § 1)
§ 12-7D-8 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 40% of the total site area.
(Ord. 11(1981) § 1; Ord. 17(1991) § 10)
§ 12-7D-9 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   At least 25% of the total site shall be landscaped.
   (B)   The minimum width and length of any area qualifying as landscaping
shall be 15 feet with a minimum area not less than 300 square feet.
(Ord. 11(1981) § 1)
§ 12-7D-10 PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title. No parking or loading area shall be located in any required
front setback area.
(Ord. 11(1981) § 1)
§ 12-7D-11 LOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Limitation; exception. All permitted and conditional uses shall be
operated and conducted entirely within a building, except for permitted loading
areas and such activities as may be specifically authorized to be unenclosed by
a conditional use permit and the outdoor display of goods. For purposes of this
section, CONDUCTED ENTIRELY WITHIN A BUILDING means that all activities related
to the permitted use, including contacting potential customers and clients,
must occur completely inside of a building, and not in an open doorway of the
building.
   (B)   Outdoor displays. The area to be used for an outdoor display shall be
located directly in front of the establishment displaying the goods and
entirely upon the establishment’s own property. Sidewalks, building entrances
and exits, driveways and streets shall not be obstructed by outdoor displays.
(Ord. 11(1981) § 1; Ord. 34(1982) § 3; Ord. 11(2019) § 3)
ARTICLE 7E: COMMERCIAL SERVICE CENTER (CSC) DISTRICT
Section
12-7E-1 Purpose
12-7E-2 Requirements for establishment; development plan
12-7E-3 Permitted uses
12-7E-4 Conditional uses
12-7E-5 Accessory uses
12-7E-6 Lot area and site dimensions
12-7E-7 Setbacks
12-7E-8 Height
12-7E-9 Density control
12-7E-10 Site coverage
12-7E-11 Landscaping and site development
12-7E-12 Parking and loading
12-7E-13 Location of business activity
§ 12-7E-1 PURPOSE.
   The Commercial Service Center District is intended to provide sites for
general shopping and commercial facilities serving the town, together with
limited multiple-family dwelling and lodge uses as may be appropriate without
interfering with the basic commercial functions of the zone district. The
Commercial Service Center District is intended to ensure adequate light, air,
open space and other amenities appropriate to permitted types of buildings and
uses, and to maintain a convenient shopping center environment for permitted
commercial uses.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 10.100; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7E-2 REQUIREMENTS FOR ESTABLISHMENT; DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Review required. Prior to the establishment of any Commercial Service
Center District or enlargement of zone district boundaries, the Town Council
shall by resolution adopt a general development plan for the proposed zone
district. The development plan may be prepared by an applicant for the
establishment of the zone district or may be prepared by the town. The
development plan shall be submitted to the Planning and Environmental
Commission for review, and the Planning and Environmental Commission shall
submit its findings and recommendations on the plan to the Town Council.
   (B)   Plan content. The Administrator shall establish the submittal
requirements for a development plan application. A complete list of the
submittal requirements shall be maintained by the Administrator and filed in
the Department of Community Development. Certain submittal requirements may be
waived and/or modified by the Administrator and/or the reviewing body if it is
demonstrated by the applicant that the information and materials required are
not relevant to the proposed development or applicable to the planning
documents that comprise the Vail Comprehensive Plan. The Administrator and/or
the reviewing body may require the submission of additional plans, drawings,
specifications, samples and other materials if deemed necessary to properly
evaluate the proposal.
   (C)   Plan to be guide. The development plan shall be used as a guide for
the subsequent development of sites and the design and location of buildings
and grounds within the zone district. All plans subsequently approved by the
Design Review Board in accordance with Chapter 11 of this title shall
substantially conform to the development plan adopted by the Town Council.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 10.200; Ord. 5(2003) § 9; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7E-3 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the CSC District:
   (A)   Automated teller machines (ATMs) exterior to a building;
   (B)   Banks and financial institutions;
   (C)   Eating and drinking establishments, including the following:
      (1)   Bakeries and delicatessens with food service;
      (2)   Cocktail lounges and bars;
      (3)   Coffee shops;
      (4)   Fountains and sandwich shops; and
      (5)   Restaurants.
   (D)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
   (E)   Personal services and repair shops, including the following:
      (1)   Beauty and barber shops;
      (2)   Business and office services;
      (3)   Cleaning and laundry pick up agencies without bulk cleaning or
dyeing;
      (4)   Laundromats;
      (5)   Small appliance repair shops, excluding furniture repair;
      (6)   Tailors and dressmakers; and
      (7)   Travel and ticket agencies.
   (F)   Professional offices, business offices, and studios;
   (G)   Retail stores and establishments without limit as to floor area
including the following:
      (1)   Apparel stores;
      (2)   Art supply stores and galleries;
      (3)   Bakeries and confectioneries, including preparation of products for
sale on the premises;
      (4)   Bookstores;
      (5)   Building materials stores without outdoor storage;
      (6)   Camera stores and photographic studios;
      (7)   Candy stores;
      (8)   Chinaware and glassware stores;
      (9)   Delicatessens and specialty food stores;
      (10)   Department and general merchandise stores;
      (11)   Drugstores;
      (12)   Electronics sales and repair shops;
      (13)   Florists;
      (14)   Food stores;
      (15)   Furniture stores;
      (16)   Gift shops;
      (17)   Hardware stores;
      (18)   Hobby stores;
      (19)   Household appliance stores;
      (20)   Jewelry stores;
      (21)   Leather goods stores;
      (22)   Liquor stores;
      (23)   Luggage stores;
      (24)   Music and record stores;
      (25)   Newsstands and tobacco stores;
      (26)   Pet shops;
      (27)   Photographic studios;
      (28)   Radio and television broadcasting studios;
      (29)   Sporting goods stores;
      (30)   Stationery stores;
      (31)   Supermarkets;
      (32)   Toy stores;
      (33)   Variety stores; and
      (34)   Yardage and dry goods stores.
   (H)   Additional offices, businesses, or services determined to be similar
to permitted uses in accordance with the provisions of §
12-7E-1 of this article.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 14)
§ 12-7E-4 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the CSC District,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
   (A)   Any use permitted by §
12-7E-3 of this article, which is not conducted entirely within a building;
   (B)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by section
12-14-18 of this title;
   (C)   Bowling alley;
   (D)   Brewpubs;
   (E)   Child daycare centers;
   (F)   Commercial laundry and cleaning services;
   (G)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (H)   Dog kennels;
   (I)   Major arcades;
   (J)   Multiple-family residential dwellings and lodges;
   (K)   Outdoor operation of the accessory uses as set forth in §
12-7E-5 of this article;
   (L)   Private clubs;
   (M)   Private parking structures;
   (N)   Private unstructured parking;
   (O)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (P)   Public park and recreation facilities;
   (Q)   Public utility and public service uses;
   (R)   Religious institutions;
   (S)   Ski lifts and tows; and
   (T)   Theaters, meeting rooms, and convention facilities.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 14; Ord. 2(2016) § 11)
§ 12-7E-5 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the CSC District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Minor arcades;
   (C)   Swimming pools, tennis courts, patios, or other recreation facilities
customarily incidental to conditional residential or lodge uses; and
   (D)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 10.500; Ord. 6(1982) § 6(b); Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7E-6 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 20,000 square feet of buildable area,
and each site shall have a minimum frontage of 100 feet.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 3)
§ 12-7E-7 SETBACKS.
   In the CSC District, the minimum front setback shall be 20 feet, the minimum
side setback shall be 20 feet, and the minimum rear setback shall be 20 feet.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7E-8 HEIGHT.
   For a flat or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 35
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 38 feet.
(Ord. 37(1980) § 2)
§ 12-7E-9 DENSITY CONTROL.
   (A)   Not more than 40 square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA)
shall be permitted for each 100 square feet of buildable site area, and gross
residential floor area shall not exceed 50% of total building floor area on any
site. Total density shall not exceed 18 dwelling units per acre of buildable
site area.
   (B)   A dwelling unit in a multiple-family building may include one attached
accommodation unit no larger than one-third of the total floor area of the
dwelling.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 2; Ord. 50(1978) § 19; Ord. 31(2001) § 5)
§ 12-7E-10 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 75% of the total site area.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 10.607; Ord. 17(1991) § 11)
§ 12-7E-11 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 20% of the total site shall be landscaped. The minimum width and
length of any area qualifying as landscaping shall be 15 feet with a minimum
area not less than 300 square feet.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 10.609; Ord. 19(1976) § 11A)
§ 12-7E-12 PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title. At least one-half of the required parking shall be located
within the main building or buildings. No parking or loading area shall be
located in any required front setback area.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 10.610; Ord. 19(1976) § 11A)
§ 12-7E-13 LOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Limitations; exception. All permitted and conditional uses shall be
operated and conducted entirely within a building except for permitted parking
and loading areas and such activities as may be specifically authorized to be
unenclosed by a conditional use permit and the outdoor display of goods. For
purposes of this section, CONDUCTED ENTIRELY WITHIN A BUILDING means that all
activities related to the permitted use, including contacting potential
customers and clients, must occur completely inside of a building, and not in
an open doorway of the building.
   (B)   Outdoor displays. The area to be used for an outdoor display shall be
located directly in front of the establishment displaying the goods and
entirely upon the establishment’s own property. Sidewalks, building entrances
and exits, driveways and streets shall not be obstructed by outdoor displays.
(Ord. 34(1982) § 4; Ord. 11(2019) § 4)
ARTICLE 7F: ARTERIAL BUSINESS (ABD) DISTRICT
Section
12-7F-1 Purpose
12-7F-2 General circulation and access plan
12-7F-3 Permitted uses
12-7F-4 Conditional uses
12-7F-5 Accessory uses
12-7F-6 Lot area and site dimensions
12-7F-7 Setbacks
12-7F-8 Height
12-7F-9 Density control
12-7F-10 Site coverage
12-7F-11 Floor area ratio
12-7F-12 Landscaping and site development
12-7F-13 Parking and loading
12-7F-14 Location of business activity
§ 12-7F-1 PURPOSE.
   The Arterial Business District is intended to provide sites for office
space, public utilities, service stations, limited light industry having no
adverse environmental impacts that provides significant on site tourist
amenities and limited shopping and commercial facilities serving the town and
Upper Eagle Valley residents and guests. Multiple-family dwellings for use as
employee housing will be appropriate under specific circumstances. The Arterial
Business District is intended to ensure adequate light, air, open space and
other amenities appropriate to permitted and conditional types of buildings and
uses, and to maintain a convenient (limited) shopping, business, service and
residential environment.
(Ord. 32(1988) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7F-2 GENERAL CIRCULATION AND ACCESS PLAN.
   (A)   Plan required. Prior to any Design Review Board approval for a
building in the Arterial Business District or enlargement of an existing
Arterial Business District by change of zone district boundaries the Planning
and Environmental Commission shall adopt a general circulation and access plan
for the proposed zone district.
   (B)   Plan content. The Administrator shall establish the submittal
requirements for a general circulation and access plan application. A complete
list of the submittal requirements shall be maintained by the Administrator and
filed in the Department of Community Development. Certain submittal
requirements may be waived and/or modified by the Administrator and/or the
reviewing body if it is demonstrated by the applicant that the information and
materials required are not relevant to the proposed development or applicable
to the planning documents that comprise the Vail Comprehensive Plan. The
Administrator and/or the reviewing body may require the submission of
additional plans, drawings, specifications, samples and other materials if
deemed necessary to properly evaluate the proposal.
   (C)   Plan used as guide. The general circulation and access plan shall be
used as a guide for the subsequent development of sites and the design and
location of buildings and grounds within the zone district. All plans
subsequently approved by the Design Review Board in accordance with Chapter 11
of this title shall substantially conform to the plan adopted by the Planning
and Environmental Commission.
   (D)   Amendments to plan. The general circulation and access plan can be
amended by the Planning and Environmental Commission at a public hearing.
   (E)   Prior approval required. Before a building permit is issued on any
building, design guidelines for streets and parking lot lights, pavement
treatment and benches, must be submitted and approved by the Department of
Community Development.
(Ord. 5(1982) § 1; Ord. 5(2003) § 10; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7F-3 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the Arterial Business District:
   (A)   Eating and drinking establishments, as follows, are permitted on the
first (street) level:
      (1)   Cocktail lounges and bars; and
      (2)   Coffee shops, fountains, sandwich shops and restaurant.
   (B)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
   (C)   Personal services and repair shops, as follows, are deemed to be
generally accessory and/or supportive of office uses and shall be permitted on
the first (street) level:
      (1)   Beauty and barber shops;
      (2)   Shoe repair;
      (3)   Tailors and dressmakers; and
      (4)   Travel and ticket agencies.
   (D)   Professional offices, business offices and studios;
   (E)   Radio and television broadcasting studios;
   (F)   Retail stores and establishments, as follows, are deemed to be
generally accessory and/or supportive of office uses and are therefore
permitted so long as they do not exceed 8,000 square feet in floor area for
each such business use and so long as they are located on the first (street)
level:
      (1)   Art supply stores;
      (2)   Bookstores;
      (3)   Drugstores;
      (4)   Florists;
      (5)   Newsstands;
      (6)   Stationery stores; and
      (7)   Tobacco stores.
   (G)   Additional offices, businesses or services determined to be similar to
permitted uses in accordance with the provisions of §
12-7F-1 of this article.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 15)
§ 12-7F-4 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Enumerated. The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the
Arterial Business District, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
      (1)   Any use permitted by §
12-7F-3 of this article, which is not conducted entirely within a building;
      (2)   Bed and breakfasts, as further provided by §
12-14-18 of this title;
      (3)   Brewpubs;
      (4)   Child daycare centers;
      (5)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
      (6)   Microbreweries;
      (7)   Private unstructured parking;
      (8)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
      (9)   Public park and recreation facilities;
      (10)   Public utility and public service uses, including screened outside
storage;
      (11)   Service yards; and
      (12)   Transportation businesses.
   (B)   Subject to review. The following uses shall be permitted on the first
(street) level floor within a structure subject to the issuance of a
conditional use permit and are listed as such due to their potential individual
and cumulative impacts of generating traffic in the Arterial Business District
and will receive review under the provisions of Chapter 16 of this title with
specific emphasis on the criteria of traffic generation:
      (1)   Apparel stores;
      (2)   Automotive service stations;
      (3)   Bakeries and confectioneries;
      (4)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (5)   Brewpubs;
      (6)   Business and office services;
      (7)   Camera stores and photographic studios;
      (8)   Child daycare center;
      (9)   Cleaning and laundry pick up agencies without bulk cleaning or
dyeing;
      (10)   Convenience food stores, restricted to a maximum of 8,000 square
feet and no more than 33% of the gross building area of the entire structure;
      (11)   Furniture stores;
      (12)   Hardware stores;
      (13)   Health clubs;
      (14)   Health food stores;
      (15)   Hobby stores;
      (16)   Household appliance stores;
      (17)   Liquor stores;
      (18)   Music and record stores;
      (19)   Nursery and garden supply;
      (20)   Outside car wash;
      (21)   Pet shops;
      (22)   Small appliance repair shops, excluding furniture repair;
      (23)   Theater; and
      (24)   Yardage and dry goods stores.
(Ord. 5(1982) § 1; Ord. 35(1982) § 2; Ord. 33(1986) § 1; Ord. 32(1988) § 1;
Ord. 31(1989) § 12; Ord. 5(1990) § 1; Ord. 8(1992) §§ 24, 25; Ord. 16(1996) §§
5, 6; Ord. 1(1997) § 4; Ord. 10(1998) §§ 5, 8; Ord. 6(2000) § 2; Ord. 17(2001)
§ 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 24; Ord. 1(2008) § 15; Ord. 12(2008) § 15)
§ 12-7F-5 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the Arterial Business
District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Minor arcades;
   (C)   Swimming pools, tennis courts, patios, or other recreation facilities
customarily incidental to conditional residential; and
   (D)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 5(1982) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7F-6 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site shall be 25,000 square feet of buildable site area,
and each site shall have a minimum frontage of 100 feet.
(Ord. 5(1982) § 1)
§ 12-7F-7 SETBACKS.
   In the Arterial Business District, setbacks shall be as follows:
   (A)   Side. Fifteen feet where building height is less than 20 feet; 20 feet
where building height is over 20 feet;
   (B)   Rear. Ten feet;
   (C)   Underground parking. There will be no setback required for underground
parking;
   (D)   Property line adjacent to south frontage road. Where a setback occurs
at a property line adjacent to the South Frontage Road, a maximum of 60% of the
length of the setback may be kept to the minimum 15 foot distance from the
property line. The remaining 40% of the length of the setback shall be 20 feet
or more distant from the property line.
(Ord. 5(1982) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7F-8 HEIGHT.
   No more than 70% of the roof area may exceed 32 feet and none of the roof
area may exceed 40 feet. Minimum slope of the roof shall be three feet in 12
feet. Ten percent of the roof may be flat to allow for a transition of
rooflines.
(Ord. 5(1982) § 1)
§ 12-7F-9 DENSITY CONTROL.
   Not more than 60 square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA) shall be
permitted for each 100 square feet of buildable site area.
(Ord. 5(1982) § 1; Ord. 6(2000) § 2)
§ 12-7F-10 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 60% of the total site area.
(Ord. 5(1982) § 1; Ord. 17(1991) § 12)
§ 12-7F-11 FLOOR AREA RATIO.
   (A)   Not more than seventy five one-hundredths floor area ratio (FAR) shall
be permitted on any site or lot.
   (B)   Up to five-tenths FAR will not require any covered parking.
   (C)   All FAR above five-tenths will require covered or enclosed parking
equal in percentage to the FAR. FAR is calculated by dividing the total gross
floor area within the enclosing walls of a structure by the total site area of
the property.
(Ord. 5(1982) § 1)
§ 12-7F-12 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   At least 25% of the total site shall be landscaped, plus the area
between the property line and the shoulder of surfaced roads.
   (B)   The minimum width and length of any area qualifying as landscaping
shall be ten feet with a minimum area of not less than 300 square feet.
(Ord. 5(1982) § 1)
§ 12-7F-13 PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title. No loading area shall be located in any required front
setback area. Parking will be based upon the gross floor area (as defined in §
12-2-2 of this title) of a building for commercial and business type uses. No
drives, parking or loading areas are permitted in the front setback except for
the ingress and egress drive.
(Ord. 5(1982) § 1)
§ 12-7F-14 LOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.
   All permitted and conditional uses shall be operated and conducted entirely
within a building, except for permitted loading areas and such activities as
may be specifically authorized to be unenclosed by a conditional use permit.
For purposes of this section, CONDUCTED ENTIRELY WITHIN A BUILDING means that
all activities related to the permitted use, including contacting potential
customers and clients, must occur completely inside of a building, and not in
an open doorway of the building.
(Ord. 5(1982) § 1; Ord. 11(2019) § 5)
ARTICLE 7G: HEAVY SERVICE (HS) DISTRICT
Section
12-7G-1 Purpose
12-7G-2 Permitted uses
12-7G-3 Conditional uses
12-7G-4 Development standards
12-7G-5 Lot area and site dimensions
12-7G-6 Setbacks
12-7G-7 Height
12-7G-8 Density
12-7G-9 Site coverage
12-7G-10 Landscaping and site development
12-7G-11 Parking and loading
12-7G-12 Location of business activity
12-7G-13 Noise
12-7G-14 Gasoline service station regulations
§ 12-7G-1 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Heavy Service District is intended to provide sites for automotive
oriented uses and for commercial service uses which are not appropriate in
other commercial districts. Because of the nature of the uses permitted and
their operating characteristics, appearance and potential for generating
automotive and truck traffic, all uses in the Heavy Service District, except as
stated in §
12-7G-2 of this article, are subject to the conditional use permit procedure.
   (B)   In granting a conditional use permit, the Planning and Environmental
Commission or the Town Council may prescribe more restrictive development
standards than the standards prescribed for the zone district in order to
protect adjoining uses from adverse influences.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 11.100; Ord. 29(2005) § 24; Ord. 12(2008) § 25)
§ 12-7G-2 PERMITTED USES.
   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 11.200; Ord. 12(2008) § 25)
§ 12-7G-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted, subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this
title:
   (A)   Animal hospitals and dog kennels;
   (B)   Automotive service stations;
   (C)   Building materials stores;
   (D)   Business offices;
   (E)   Commercial laundry and cleaning services;
   (F)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (G)   Corporation yards;
   (H)   Machine shops;
   (I)   Motor vehicle sales and services;
   (J)   Repair garages;
   (K)   Repair shops;
   (L)   Seasonal plant product business;
   (M)   Sexually oriented businesses;
   (N)   Ski lifts and tows, and accessory dwelling unit for service personnel;
   (O)   Tire sales and services, including retreading and recapping;
   (P)   Transportation businesses;
   (Q)   Trucking terminals and truck service stations;
   (R)   Warehouses;
   (S)   Woodworking and cabinet shops;
   (T)   Accessory uses customarily incidental and accessory to the conditional
uses set out in this section and necessary for the operation thereof; and
   (U)   Additional commercial services determined to be similar to the
conditional uses set out in this section in accordance with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 16; Ord. 13(2008) § 2)
§ 12-7G-4 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The development standards set out in §§
12-7G-5 through
12-7G-14 of this article shall be considered minimum, and more restrictive
standards may be prescribed as conditions of a conditional use permit for any
use.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 11.400)
§ 12-7G-5 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 10,000 square feet of buildable area,
and each site shall have a minimum frontage of 50 feet.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 3)
§ 12-7G-6 SETBACKS.
   In the HS District, the minimum front setback shall be 20 feet, the minimum
side setback shall be 20 feet, and the minimum rear setback shall be 20 feet.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 1)
§ 12-7G-7 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 35
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 38 feet.
(Ord. 37(1980) § 2)
§ 12-7G-8 DENSITY.
   Not applicable in the HS District.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 11.405)
§ 12-7G-9 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 75% of the total site area.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 11.407; Ord. 17(1991) § 13)
§ 12-7G-10 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 10% of the total site area shall be landscaped. The minimum width
and length of any area qualifying as landscaping shall be ten feet with a
minimum area not less than 200 square feet.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 11.409; Ord. 19(1976) § 11(B))
§ 12-7G-11 PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title. No parking or loading area shall be located in any required
front setback area.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 11.410)
§ 12-7G-12 LOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.
   All offices, businesses, and services permitted by §
12-7G-3 shall be operated and conducted entirely within a building, except for
permitted unenclosed parking or loading areas and such other activities as may
be specifically authorized to be unenclosed by a conditional use permit. For
purposes of this section, CONDUCTED ENTIRELY WITHIN A BUILDING means that all
activities related to the permitted use, including contacting potential
customers and clients, must occur completely inside of a building, and not in
an open doorway of the building.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 11.411; Ord. 11(2019) § 6)
§ 12-7G-13 NOISE.
   No use shall be permitted or conducted in a manner which creates noise
objectionable by reason of volume, pitch, intermittence or frequency, which is
audible at the boundaries of the site. Specific noise performance standards may
be prescribed by a conditional use permit.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 11.412)
§ 12-7G-14 GASOLINE SERVICE STATION REGULATIONS.
   The regulations in this section shall be applicable to the uses listed in
this article. Gasoline service stations shall be subject to the following
requirements.
   (A)   All fuel storage tanks shall comply with applicable state or EPA
aboveground and/or underground storage tank requirements.
   (B)   All gasoline pumps, lubrication or similar devices, and other service
facilities shall be located at least 20 feet from any street right-of-way line.
   (C)   All servicing of vehicles, except sale of gas and oil services
customarily provided in connection therewith, shall be conducted completely
within a structure.
   (D)   All storage of goods shall be completely within a structure.
   (E)   Installation of aboveground or underground tanks shall be approved by
the Environmental Health Officer.
   (F)   All aboveground fuel or hazardous material containers shall have
secondary containment.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 11.413; Ord. 19(1976) § 11(B); 1997 Code)
ARTICLE 7H: LIONSHEAD MIXED USE 1 (LMU-1) DISTRICT
Section
12-7H-1 Purpose
12-7H-2 Permitted and conditional uses; basement or garden level
12-7H-3 Permitted and conditional uses; first floor or street level
12-7H-4 Permitted and conditional uses; second floor and above
12-7H-5 Conditional uses; generally (on all levels of a building or outside of
a building)
12-7H-6 Accessory uses
12-7H-7 Exterior alterations or modifications
12-7H-8 Compliance burden
12-7H-9 Lot area and site dimensions
12-7H-10 Setbacks
12-7H-11 Height and bulk
12-7H-12 Density (dwelling units per acre)
12-7H-13 Gross residential floor area (GRFA)
12-7H-14 Site coverage
12-7H-15 Landscaping and site development
12-7H-16 Parking and loading
12-7H-17 Location of business activity
12-7H-18 Mitigation of development impacts
12-7H-19 Conversion of existing eating and drinking establishments
§ 12-7H-1 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Lionshead Mixed Use 1 District is intended to provide sites for a
mixture of multiple-family dwellings, lodges, hotels, fractional fee clubs,
timeshares, lodge dwelling units, restaurants, offices, skier services, and
commercial establishments in a clustered, unified development. Lionshead Mixed
Use 1 District, in accordance with the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan, is
intended to ensure adequate light, air, open space and other amenities
appropriate to the permitted types of buildings and uses and to maintain the
desirable qualities of the zone district by establishing appropriate site
development standards. This zone district is meant to encourage and provide
incentives for redevelopment in accordance with the Lionshead Redevelopment
Master Plan.
   (B)   This zone district was specifically developed to provide incentives
for properties to redevelop. The ultimate goal of these incentives is to create
an economically vibrant lodging, housing and commercial core area. The
incentives in this zone district include increases in allowable gross
residential floor area, building height and density over the previously
established zoning in the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan study area. The
primary goal of the incentives is to create economic conditions favorable to
inducing private redevelopment consistent with the Lionshead Redevelopment
Master Plan. Additionally, the incentives are created to help finance public
off site improvements adjacent to redevelopment projects. With any development/
redevelopment proposal taking advantage of the incentives created herein, the
following amenities will be evaluated: streetscape improvements; pedestrian/
bicycle access; public plaza redevelopment; public art; roadway improvements;
and similar improvements.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7H-2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES; BASEMENT OR GARDEN LEVEL.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in basement or
garden levels within a structure:
      (1)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (2)   Child daycare centers;
      (3)   Commercial ski storage/ski club;
      (4)   Eating and drinking establishments;
      (5)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
      (6)   Personal services and repair shops;
      (7)   Professional offices, business offices and studios;
      (8)   Public or private lockers and storage;
      (9)   Recreation facilities;
      (10)   Retail establishments;
      (11)   Skier ticketing, ski school and skier services;
      (12)   Travel and ticket agencies; and
      (13)   Additional uses determined to be similar to permitted uses
described in this subsection (A), in accordance with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in basement or
garden levels within a structure, subject to issuance of a conditional use
permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
      (1)   Accommodation units;
      (2)   Attached accommodation units;
      (3)   Conference facilities and meeting rooms;
      (4)   Liquor stores;
      (5)   Lodges;
      (6)   Major arcades;
      (7)   Multiple-family residential dwelling units, timeshare units,
fractional fee clubs, and lodge dwelling units;
      (8)   Radio, TV stores and repair shops;
      (9)   Religious institutions;
      (10)   Theaters; and
      (11)   Additional uses determined to be similar to conditional uses
described in this subsection (B), in accordance with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title.
(Ord. 39(2007) § 3; Ord. 1(2008) § 16; Ord. 8(2014) § 3; Ord. 2(2016) § 12)
§ 12-7H-3 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES; FIRST FLOOR OR STREET LEVEL.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted on the first
floor or street level within a structure:
      (1)   Banks, with walk-up teller facilities;
      (2)   Child daycare centers;
      (3)   Eating and drinking establishments;
      (4)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
      (5)   Recreation facilities;
      (6)   Retail stores and establishments;
      (7)   Skier ticketing, ski school and skier services;
      (8)   Travel and ticket agencies; and
      (9)   Additional uses determined to be similar to permitted uses
described in this subsection (A), in accordance with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted on the first
floor or street level floor within a structure, subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this
title:
      (1)   Accommodation units;
      (2)   Attached accommodation units;
      (3)   Beauty and barber shops;
      (4)   Conference facilities and meeting rooms;
      (5)   Electronics sales and repair shops;
      (6)   Financial institutions, other than banks;
      (7)   Liquor stores;
      (8)   Lodges;
      (9)   Major arcades;
      (10)   Multiple-family residential dwelling units, timeshare units,
fractional fee clubs and lodge dwelling units;
      (11)   Religious institutions;
      (12)   Temporary business offices;
      (13)   Theaters; and
      (14)   Additional uses determined to be similar to conditional uses
described in this subsection (B), in accordance with the provisions of section
12-3-4 of this title.
(Ord. 6(2012) § 2; Ord. 2(2016) § 13)
§ 12-7H-4 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES; SECOND FLOOR AND ABOVE.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted on those floors
above the first floor within a structure:
      (1)   Accommodation units;
      (2)   Attached accommodation units;
      (3)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
      (4)   Lodges;
      (5)   Multiple-family residential dwelling units, lodge dwelling units;
and
      (6)   Additional uses determined to be similar to permitted uses
described in this subsection (A), in accordance with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted on second
floors and higher above grade, subject to the issuance of a conditional use
permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
      (1)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (2)   Child daycare centers;
      (3)   Conference facilities and meeting rooms;
      (4)   Eating and drinking establishments;
      (5)   Electronics sales and repair shops;
      (6)   Fractional fee clubs;
      (7)   Liquor stores;
      (8)   Personal services and repair shops;
      (9)   Professional offices, business offices and studios;
      (10)   Recreation facilities;
      (11)   Religious institutions;
      (12)   Retail establishments;
      (13)   Skier ticketing, ski school and skier services;
      (14)   Theaters;
      (15)   Timeshare units; and
      (16)   Additional uses determined to be similar to conditional uses
described in this subsection (B), in accordance with the provisions of section
12-3-4 of this title.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 1; Ord. 6(2000) § 2; Ord. 18(2005) § 2; Ord. 24(2005) § 3; Ord.
29(2005) § 24; Ord. 1(2008) § 16; Ord. 2(2016) § 14)
§ 12-7H-5 CONDITIONAL USES; GENERALLY (ON ALL LEVELS OF A BUILDING OR OUTSIDE
OF A BUILDING).
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted, subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this
title:
   (A)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (B)   Brewpubs;
   (C)   Coin operated laundries;
   (D)   Commercial storage;
   (E)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (F)   Private outdoor recreation facilities, as a primary use;
   (G)   Public buildings, grounds, and facilities;
   (H)   Public or private parking lots;
   (I)   Public park and recreation facilities;
   (J)   Public utility and public service uses;
   (K)   Seasonal uses or structures utilized for more than 14 days;
   (L)   Single-family residential dwellings;
   (M)   Ski lifts and tows;
   (N)   Television stations;
   (O)   Two-family residential dwellings; and
   (P)   Additional uses determined to be similar to conditional uses described
in this section, in accordance with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 17)
§ 12-7H-6 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the Lionshead Mixed Use 1
District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Loading and delivery and parking facilities customarily incidental and
accessory to permitted and conditional uses;
   (C)   Minor arcades;
   (D)   Offices, lobbies, laundry and other facilities customarily incidental
and accessory to hotels, lodges and multiple-family uses;
   (E)   Outdoor dining decks and patios;
   (F)   Swimming pools, tennis courts, patios or other recreation facilities
customarily incidental to permitted residential or lodge uses; and
   (G)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7H-7 EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS OR MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Review required.
      (1)   Generally. The construction of a new building or the alteration of
an existing building that is not a major exterior alteration as described in
subsection (B) of this section shall be reviewed by the Design Review Board in
accordance with Chapter 11 of this title.
      (2)   Submittal items required. The submittal items required for a
project that is not a major exterior alteration shall be provided in accordance
with §
12-11-4 of this title.
   (B)   Major exterior alteration. The construction of a new building or the
alteration of an existing building which adds additional dwelling units,
accommodation units, fractional fee club units, timeshare units, any project
which adds more than 1,000 square feet of commercial floor area or common
space, or any project which has substantial off site impacts (as determined by
the Administrator) shall be reviewed by the Planning and Environmental
Commission as a major exterior alteration in accordance with this chapter and §
12-3-6 of this title. Any project which requires a conditional use permit shall
also obtain approval of the Planning and Environmental Commission in accordance
with Chapter 16 of this title. Complete applications for major exterior
alterations shall be submitted in accordance with administrative schedules
developed by the Department of Community Development for Planning and
Environmental Commission and Design Review Board review.
      (1)   Submittal items required, major exterior alteration. The following
submittal items are required.
         (a)   Application. An application shall be made by the owner of the
building or the building owner’s authorized agent or representative on a form
provided by the Administrator. Any application for condominiumized buildings
shall be authorized by the condominium association in conformity with all
pertinent requirements of the condominium association’s declarations.
         (b)   Application; contents. The Administrator shall establish the
submittal requirements for an exterior alteration or modification application.
A complete list of the submittal requirements shall be maintained by the
Administrator and filed in the Department of Community Development. Certain
submittal requirements may be waived and/or modified by the Administrator and/
or the reviewing body if it is demonstrated by the applicant that the
information and materials required are not relevant to the proposed development
or applicable to the planning documents that comprise the Vail Comprehensive
Plan. The Administrator and/or the reviewing body may require the submission of
additional plans, drawings, specifications, samples and other materials if
deemed necessary to properly evaluate the proposal.
   (C)   Work sessions/conceptual review. If requested by either the applicant
or the Administrator, submittals may proceed to a work session with the
Planning and Environmental Commission, a conceptual review with the Design
Review Board, or a work session with the Town Council.
   (D)   Hearing. The public hearing before the Planning and Environmental
Commission shall be held in accordance with §
12-3-6 of this title. The Planning and Environmental Commission may approve the
application as submitted, approve the application with conditions or
modifications, or deny the application. The decision of the Planning and
Environmental Commission may be appealed to the Town Council in accordance with
§
12-3-3 of this title.
   (E)   Lapse of approval. Approval of an exterior alteration as prescribed by
this article shall lapse and become void two years following the date of
approval by the Design Review Board unless, prior to the expiration, a building
permit is issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued to
completion. Administrative extensions shall be allowed for reasonable and
unexpected delays as long as code provisions affecting the proposal have not
changed.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 1; Ord. 8(2001) § 2; Ord. 5(2003) §11; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7H-8 COMPLIANCE BURDEN.
   It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove by a preponderance of the
evidence before the Planning and Environmental Commission and the Design Review
Board that the proposed exterior alteration or new development is in compliance
with the purposes of the Lionshead Mixed Use 1 District, that the proposal is
consistent with applicable elements of the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan
and that the proposal does not otherwise have a significant negative effect on
the character of the neighborhood, and that the proposal substantially complies
with other applicable elements of the Vail Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7H-9 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 10,000 square feet of buildable area.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 1)
§ 12-7H-10 SETBACKS.
   The minimum building setbacks shall be ten feet unless otherwise specified
in the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan as a build to line.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7H-11 HEIGHT AND BULK.
   Buildings shall have a maximum average building height of 71 feet with a
maximum height of 82.5 feet, as further defined by the Lionshead Redevelopment
Master Plan. All development shall comply with the design guidelines and
standards found in the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan. Flexibility with
the standard, as incorporated in the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan, shall
be afforded to redevelopment projects which meet the intent of design
guidelines, as reviewed and approved by the Design Review Board.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7H-12 DENSITY (DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE).
   No limitation on the number of dwelling units per acre permitted.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 1; Ord. 31(2001) § 5; Ord. 18(2005) § 2; Ord. 4(2019) § 1)
§ 12-7H-13 GROSS RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA (GRFA).
   Up to 250 square feet of gross residential floor area shall be allowed for
each 100 square feet of buildable site area, or an increase of 33% over the
existing GRFA found on the property, whichever is greater. Multiple-family
dwelling units in this zone district shall not be entitled to additional gross
residential floor area under §
12-15-5, “Additional Gross Residential Floor Area (250 Ordinance)”, of this
title.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 1)
§ 12-7H-14 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 70% of the total site area, unless otherwise
specified in the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7H-15 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 20% of the total site area shall be landscaped, unless otherwise
specified in the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7H-16 PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title. At least one-half of the required parking shall be located
within the main building or buildings.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 1)
§ 12-7H-17 LOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Limitations; exception. All offices, businesses and services permitted
in the LMU-1 Zone District shall be operated and conducted entirely within a
building, except for permitted unenclosed parking or loading areas, the outdoor
display of goods, or outdoor restaurant seating. For purposes of this section,
CONDUCTED ENTIRELY WITHIN A BUILDING means that all activities related to the
permitted use, including contacting potential customers and clients, must occur
completely inside of a building, and not in an open doorway of the building.
   (B)   Outdoor displays. The area to be used for an outdoor display shall be
located directly in front of the establishment displaying the goods and
entirely upon the establishment’s own property. Sidewalks, building entrances
and exits, driveways and streets shall not be obstructed by outdoor displays.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 1; Ord. 11(2019) § 7)
§ 12-7H-18 MITIGATION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS.
   Property owners/developers shall also be responsible for mitigating direct
impacts of their development on public infrastructure and in all cases
mitigation shall bear a reasonable relation to the development impacts. Impacts
may be determined based on reports prepared by qualified consultants. The
extent of mitigation and public amenity improvements shall be balanced with the
goals of redevelopment and will be determined by the Planning and Environmental
Commission in review of development projects and conditional use permits.
Mitigation of impacts may include, but is not limited to, the following:
employee housing per the town’s current employee housing policy; roadway
improvements; pedestrian walkway improvements; streetscape improvements; stream
tract/bank improvements; public art improvements; and similar improvements. The
intent of this section is to only require mitigation for large scale
redevelopment/ development projects which produce substantial off site impacts.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 24; Ord. 14(2006) § 3)
§ 12-7H-19 CONVERSION OF EXISTING EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to limit the conversion of
existing eating and drinking establishments in the Lionshead Mixed Use 1 (LMU-
1) district to promote the goals of the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan and
Vail Village Master Plan by increasing vibrancy and pedestrian activity in
Lionshead and Vail Village.
   (B)   Definition. For purposes of this Section, eating and drinking
establishment means a premises where the principal use is the retail sale of
food and/or beverages to the public for on-premises consumption within the
principal building or in an outdoor seating area which is part of or adjacent
to the premises, including without limitation a restaurant, coffee shop,
tavern, café, brewery, cidery, distillery and winery.
   (C)   Applicability.
      (1)   This Section shall apply to all eating and drinking establishments
existing in the LMU-1 district on November 1, 2025, whether permitted by right
or conditionally.
      (2)   This Section shall not apply to the conversion of an eating and
drinking establishment that received final approval from the Planning and
Environmental Commission on or before November 1, 2025.
   (D)   Permit required. A conversion of any existing eating and drinking
establishment shall require a conversion permit in accordance with this
Section.
   (E)   Application. An application for a conversion permit shall be submitted
to the Director of Community Development (the Director) on forms provided by
the Town, along with the applicable application fee.
   (F)   Criteria and decision. The Director shall issue a conversion permit
upon a determination that one of the following criteria are met:
      (1)   The conversion will not result in a net loss of total eating and
drinking establishment interior square footage in the LMU-1 district, as
demonstrated by evidence that the applicant has established a new eating and
drinking establishment at a premises within the LMU-1 district with the same or
greater interior square footage as the premises proposed for conversion; or
      (2)   The conversion will occur at a premises with a prior eating and
drinking establishment, and the premises has been vacant for at least eighteen
(18) consecutive months despite diligent efforts to establish a new eating and
drinking establishment on the premises, as demonstrated by evidence that the
applicant has publicly and reasonably advertised the premises, but no viable
tenant exists.
   (G)   Appeals. If the Director denies an application for a conversion
permit, the Director shall send a written notice to the applicant. The
applicant may appeal the Director's decision pursuant to Section
12-3-3 .A.
(Ord. 27(2025) § 3)
ARTICLE 7I: LIONSHEAD MIXED USE 2 (LMU-2) DISTRICT
Section
12-7I-1 Purpose
12-7I-2 Permitted and conditional uses; basement or garden level
12-7I-3 Permitted and conditional uses; first floor or street level
12-7I-4 Permitted and conditional uses; second floor and above
12-7I-5 Conditional uses; generally (on all levels of a building or outside of
a building)
12-7I-6 Accessory uses
12-7I-7 Exterior alterations or modifications
12-7I-8 Compliance burden
12-7I-9 Lot area and site dimensions
12-7I-10 Setbacks
12-7I-11 Height and bulk
12-7I-12 Density (dwelling units per acre)
12-7I-13 Gross residential floor area (GRFA)
12-7I-14 Site coverage
12-7I-15 Landscaping and site development
12-7I-16 Parking and loading
12-7I-17 Location of business activity
12-7I-18 Mitigation of development impacts
12-7I-19 Conversion of existing eating and drinking establishments
§ 12-7I-1 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Lionshead Mixed Use 2 District is intended to provide sites for a
mixture of multiple-family dwellings, lodges, hotels, fractional fee clubs,
timeshares, lodge dwelling units, restaurants, offices, skier services, light
industrial activities and commercial establishments in a clustered, unified
development. Lionshead Mixed Use 2 District, in accordance with the Lionshead
Redevelopment Master Plan, is intended to ensure adequate light, air, open
space and other amenities appropriate to the permitted types of buildings and
uses and to maintain the desirable qualities of the zone district by
establishing appropriate site development standards. This zone district is
meant to encourage and provide incentives for redevelopment in accordance with
the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan.
   (B)   This zone district was specifically developed to provide incentives
for properties to redevelop. The ultimate goal of these incentives is to create
an economically vibrant lodging, housing and commercial core area. The
incentives in this zone district include increases in allowable gross
residential floor area, building height, and density over the previously
established zoning in the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan study area. The
primary goal of the incentives is to create economic conditions favorable to
inducing private redevelopment consistent with the Lionshead Redevelopment
Master Plan. Additionally, the incentives are created to help finance public,
off site, improvements adjacent to redevelopment projects. Public amenities
which will be evaluated with redevelopment proposals taking advantage of the
incentives created herein may include: streetscape improvements; pedestrian/
bicycle access; public plaza redevelopment; public art; roadway improvements;
and similar improvements.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7I-2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES; BASEMENT OR GARDEN LEVEL.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in basement or
garden levels within a structure:
      (1)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (2)   Child daycare centers;
      (3)   Commercial ski storage/ski club;
      (4)   Eating and drinking establishments;
      (5)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
      (6)   Personal services and repair shops;
      (7)   Professional offices, business offices and studios;
      (8)   Public or private lockers and storage;
      (9)   Recreation facilities;
      (10)   Retail establishments;
      (11)   Skier ticketing, ski school and skier services;
      (12)   Travel and ticket agencies; and
      (13)   Additional uses determined to be similar to permitted uses
described in this subsection (A), in accordance with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in basement or
garden levels within a structure, subject to issuance of a conditional use
permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
      (1)   Conference facilities and meeting rooms;
      (2)   Electronics sales and repair shops;
      (3)   Liquor stores;
      (4)   Lodges and accommodation units;
      (5)   Major arcades;
      (6)   Multiple-family residential dwelling units, timeshare units,
fractional fee clubs, and lodge dwelling units;
      (7)   Religious institutions;
      (8)   Theaters; and
      (9)   Additional uses determined to be similar to conditional uses
described in this subsection (B), in accordance with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title.
(Ord. 39(2007) § 4; Ord. 1(2008) § 17; Ord. 8(2014) § 4; Ord. 2(2016) § 15)
§ 12-7I-3 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES; FIRST FLOOR OR STREET LEVEL.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted on the first
floor or street level within a structure:
      (1)   Banks, with walk-up teller facilities;
      (2)   Child daycare centers;
      (3)   Eating and drinking establishments;
      (4)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
      (5)   Recreation facilities;
      (6)   Retail stores and establishments;
      (7)   Skier ticketing, ski school and skier services;
      (8)   Travel and ticket agencies; and
      (9)   Additional uses determined to be similar to permitted uses
described in this subsection (A), in accordance with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted on the first
floor or street level floor within a structure, subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this
title:
      (1)   Beauty and barber shops;
      (2)   Conference facilities and meeting rooms;
      (3)   Electronics sales and repair shops;
      (4)   Financial institutions, other than banks;
      (5)   Liquor stores;
      (6)   Lodges and accommodation units;
      (7)   Multiple-family residential dwelling units, timeshare units,
fractional fee clubs, and lodge dwelling units;
      (8)   Religious institutions; and
      (9)   Additional uses determined to be similar to conditional uses
described in this subsection (B), in accordance with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title.
(Ord. 39(2007) § 4; Ord. 1(2008) § 17; Ord. 2(2016) § 16)
§ 12-7I-4 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES; SECOND FLOOR AND ABOVE.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted on those floors
above the first floor within a structure:
      (1)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
      (2)   Lodges and accommodation units;
      (3)   Multiple-family residential dwelling units, lodge dwelling units;
and
      (4)   Additional uses determined to be similar to permitted uses
described in this subsection (A), in accordance with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted on second
floors and higher above grade, subject to the issuance of a conditional use
permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
      (1)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (2)   Child daycare centers;
      (3)   Conference facilities and meeting rooms;
      (4)   Eating and drinking establishments;
      (5)   Electronics sales and repair shops;
      (6)   Liquor stores;
      (7)   Personal services and repair shops;
      (8)   Professional offices, business offices and studios;
      (9)   Recreation facilities;
      (10)   Religious institutions;
      (11)   Retail establishments;
      (12)   Skier ticketing, ski school and skier services;
      (13)   Theaters;
      (14)   Timeshare units and fractional fee clubs; and
      (15)   Additional uses determined to be similar to conditional uses
described in this subsection (B), in accordance with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 2; Ord. 6(2000) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 24; Ord. 1(2008) § 17;
Ord. 2(2016) § 17)
§ 12-7I-5 CONDITIONAL USES; GENERALLY (ON ALL LEVELS OF A BUILDING OR OUTSIDE
OF A BUILDING).
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted, subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this
title:
   (A)   Automotive service stations;
   (B)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (C)   Brewpubs;
   (D)   Child daycare centers;
   (E)   Commercial storage;
   (F)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (G)   Laundromats;
   (H)   Private outdoor recreation facilities, as a primary use;
   (I)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (J)   Public or private parking lots;
   (K)   Public parks and recreation facilities;
   (L)   Public utility and public service uses;
   (M)   Ski lifts and tows;
   (N)   Television stations;
   (O)   Vehicle maintenance, service, repair, storage and fueling;
   (P)   Warehouses; and
   (Q)   Additional uses determined to be similar to conditional uses described
in this section, in accordance with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 18)
§ 12-7I-6 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the Lionshead Mixed Use 2
District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Loading and delivery and parking facilities customarily incidental and
accessory to permitted and conditional uses;
   (C)   Minor arcades;
   (D)   Offices, lobbies, laundry, and other facilities customarily incidental
and accessory to hotels, lodges and multiple-family uses;
   (E)   Outdoor dining decks and patios;
   (F)   Swimming pools, tennis courts, patios or other recreation facilities
customarily incidental to permitted residential or lodge uses; and
   (G)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 29(2005) § 24; Ord. 3(1999) § 2)
§ 12-7I-7 EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS OR MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Review required. The construction of a new building or the alteration
of an existing building shall be reviewed by the Design Review Board in
accordance with Chapter 11 of this title. However, any project which adds
additional dwelling units, accommodation units, fractional fee club units,
timeshare units, any project which adds more than 1,000 square feet of
commercial floor area or common space, or any project which has substantial off
site impacts (as determined by the Administrator) shall be reviewed by the
Planning and Environmental Commission as a major exterior alteration in
accordance with this chapter and §
12-3-6 of this title. Any project which requires a conditional use permit shall
also obtain approval of the Planning and Environmental Commission in accordance
with Chapter 16 of this title. Complete applications for major exterior
alterations shall be submitted in accordance with administrative schedules
developed by the Department of Community Development for Planning and
Environmental Commission and Design Review Board review.
   (B)   Submittal items required. The following submittal items are required.
      (1)    Application. An application shall be made by the owner of the
building or the building owner’s authorized agent or representative on a form
provided by the Administrator. Any application for condominiumized buildings
shall be authorized by the condominium association in conformity with all
pertinent requirements of the condominium association’s declarations.
      (2)   Application; contents. The Administrator shall establish the
submittal requirements for an exterior alteration or modification application.
A complete list of the submittal requirements shall be maintained by the
Administrator and filed in the Department of Community Development. Certain
submittal requirements may be waived and/or modified by the Administrator and/
or the reviewing body if it is demonstrated by the applicant that the
information and materials required are not relevant to the proposed development
or applicable to the planning documents that comprise the Vail Comprehensive
Plan. The Administrator and/or the reviewing body may require the submission of
additional plans, drawings, specifications, samples and other materials if
deemed necessary to properly evaluate the proposal.
   (C)   Work sessions/conceptual review. If requested by either the applicant
or the Administrator, submittals may proceed to a work session with the
Planning and Environmental Commission, a conceptual review with the Design
Review Board, or a work session with the Town Council.
   (D)   Hearing. The public hearing before the Planning and Environmental
Commission shall be held in accordance with §
12-3-6 of this title. The Planning and Environmental Commission may approve the
application as submitted, approve the application with conditions or
modifications, or deny the application. The decision of the Planning and
Environmental Commission may be appealed to the Town Council in accordance with
§
12-3-3 of this title.
   (E)   Lapse of approval. Approval of an exterior alteration as prescribed by
this article shall lapse and become void two years following the date of
approval by the Design Review Board unless, prior to the expiration, a building
permit is issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued to
completion. Administrative extensions shall be allowed for reasonable and
unexpected delays as long as code provisions affecting the proposal have not
changed.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 2; Ord. 5(2003) § 12; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7I-8 COMPLIANCE BURDEN.
   It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove by a preponderance of the
evidence before the Planning and Environmental Commission and the Design Review
Board that the proposed exterior alteration or new development is in compliance
with the purposes of the Lionshead Mixed Use 2 District, that the proposal is
consistent with applicable elements of the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan
and that the proposal does not otherwise have a significant negative effect on
the character of the neighborhood, and that the proposal substantially complies
with other applicable elements of the Vail Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7I-9 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 10,000 square feet of buildable area.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 2)
§ 12-7I-10 SETBACKS.
   The minimum building setbacks shall be ten feet unless otherwise specified
in the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan as a build-to line.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7I-11 HEIGHT AND BULK.
   Buildings shall have a maximum average building height of 71 feet with a
maximum height of 82.5 feet, as further defined by the Lionshead Redevelopment
Master Plan. All development shall comply with the design guidelines and
standards found in the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan. Flexibility with
the standard, as incorporated in the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan, shall
be afforded to redevelopment projects which meet the intent of design
guidelines, as reviewed and approved by the Design Review Board.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7I-12 DENSITY (DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE).
   (A)   Up to a 33% increase over the existing number of dwelling units on a
property or 35 dwelling units per acre, whichever is greater shall be allowed.
For the purpose of calculating density, employee housing units, accommodation
units, timeshare units and fractional fee club units shall not be counted as
dwelling units. Additionally, a “lodge dwelling unit”, as defined herein, shall
be counted as 25% of a dwelling unit for the purpose of calculating density.
   (B)   A dwelling unit in a multiple-family building may include one attached
accommodation unit no larger than one-third of the total floor area of the
dwelling.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 2; Ord. 31(2001) § 5)
§ 12-7I-13 GROSS RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA (GRFA).
   (A)   Up to 250 square feet of gross residential floor area shall be allowed
for each 100 square feet of buildable site area, or an increase of 33% over the
existing GRFA found on the property, whichever is greater.
   (B)   Multiple-family dwelling units in this zone district shall not be
entitled to additional gross residential floor area under §
12-15-5, “Additional Gross Residential Floor Area (250 Ordinance)”, of this
title.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 2)
§ 12-7I-14 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 70% of the total site area, unless otherwise
specified in the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7I-15 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 20% of the total site area shall be landscaped, unless otherwise
specified in the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7I-16 PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title. At least one-half the required parking shall be located
within the main building or buildings.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 2)
§ 12-7I-17 LOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Limitations; exception. All offices, businesses and services permitted
in the LMU-2 Zone District shall be operated and conducted entirely within a
building, except for permitted unenclosed parking or loading areas, the outdoor
display of goods or outdoor restaurant seating. For purposes of this section,
CONDUCTED ENTIRELY WITHIN A BUILDING means that all activities related to the
permitted use, including contacting potential customers and clients, must occur
completely inside of a building, and not in an open doorway of the building.
   (B)   Outdoor displays. The area to be used for an outdoor display shall be
located directly in front of the establishment displaying the goods and
entirely upon the establishment’s own property. Sidewalks, building entrances
and exits, driveways and streets shall not be obstructed by outdoor displays.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 2; Ord. 11(2019) § 8)
§ 12-7I-18 MITIGATION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS.
   Property owners/developers shall also be responsible for mitigating direct
impacts of their development on public infrastructure and in all cases
mitigation shall bear a reasonable relation to the development impacts. Impacts
may be determined based on reports prepared by qualified consultants. The
extent of mitigation and public amenity improvements shall be balanced with the
goals of redevelopment and will be determined by the Planning and Environmental
Commission in review of development projects and conditional use permits.
Mitigation of impacts may include, but is not limited to, the following:
roadway improvements; pedestrian walkway improvements; streetscape
improvements; stream tract/bank improvements; public art improvements; and
similar improvements. The intent of this section is to only require mitigation
for large scale redevelopment/development projects which produce substantial
off site impacts.
(Ord. 3(1999) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 24)
§ 12-7I-19 CONVERSION OF EXISTING EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to limit the conversion of
existing eating and drinking establishments in the Lionshead Mixed Use 2 (LMU-
2) district to promote the goals of the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan and
Vail Village Master Plan by increasing vibrancy and pedestrian activity in
Lionshead and Vail Village.
   (B)   Definition. For purposes of this Section, eating and drinking
establishment means a premises where the principal use is the retail sale of
food and/or beverages to the public for on-premises consumption within the
principal building or in an outdoor seating area which is part of or adjacent
to the premises, including without limitation a restaurant, coffee shop,
tavern, café, brewery, cidery, distillery and winery.
   (C)   Applicability.
      (1)   This Section shall apply to all eating and drinking establishments
existing in the LMU-2 district on November 1, 2025, whether permitted by right
or conditionally.
      (2)   This Section shall not apply to the conversion of an eating and
drinking establishment that received final approval from the Planning and
Environmental Commission on or before November 1, 2025.
   (D)   Permit required. A conversion of any existing eating and drinking
establishment shall require a conversion permit in accordance with this
Section.
   (E)   Application. An application for a conversion permit shall be submitted
to the Director of Community Development (the Director) on forms provided by
the Town, along with the applicable application fee.
   (F)   Criteria and decision. The Director shall issue a conversion permit
upon a determination that one of the following criteria are met:
      (1)   The conversion will not result in a net loss of total eating and
drinking establishment interior square footage in the LMU-2 district, as
demonstrated by evidence that the applicant has established a new eating and
drinking establishment at a premises within the LMU-2 district with the same or
greater interior square footage as the premises proposed for conversion; or
      (2)   The conversion will occur at a premises with a prior eating and
drinking establishment, and the premises has been vacant for at least eighteen
(18) consecutive months despite diligent efforts to establish a new eating and
drinking establishment on the premises, as demonstrated by evidence that the
applicant has publicly and reasonably advertised the premises, but no viable
tenant exists.
   (G)   Appeals. If the Director denies an application for a conversion
permit, the Director shall send a written notice to the applicant. The
applicant may appeal the Director's decision pursuant to Section
12-3-3 .A.
(Ord. 27(2025) § 4)
ARTICLE 7J: PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION-2 (PA-2) DISTRICT
Section
12-7J-1 Purpose
12-7J-2 Permitted uses
12-7J-3 Conditional uses
12-7J-4 Accessory uses
12-7J-5 Lot area and site dimensions
12-7J-6 Setbacks
12-7J-7 Height
12-7J-8 Density control
12-7J-9 Site coverage
12-7J-10 Landscaping and site development
12-7J-11 Parking and loading
12-7J-12 Exterior alterations or modifications
12-7J-13 Compliance burden
12-7J-14 Mitigation of development impacts
12-7J-15 Location of business activity
§ 12-7J-1 PURPOSE.
   The Pubic Accommodation-2 District is intended to provide sites for lodges,
limited service lodges, and residential accommodations on a short term basis,
for visitors and guests, together with such public and semipublic facilities
and commercial/retail and related visitor oriented uses as may be appropriately
located within the same zone district and compatible with adjacent land uses.
This District is intended to provide for lodging sites located outside the
periphery of the town’s Vail Village and Lionshead Commercial Core Areas. The
Pubic Accommodation-2 District is intended to ensure adequate light, air, open
space, and other amenities commensurate with lodge uses, and to maintain the
desirable resort qualities of the zone district by establishing appropriate
site development standards. Additional nonresidential uses are allowed as
conditional uses which enhance the nature of Vail as a vacation community, and
where permitted uses are intended to function compatibly with the high density
lodging character of the zone district.
(Ord. 2(2006) § 2)
§ 12-7J-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the PA-2 District:
   (A)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
   (B)   Limited service lodge, including accessory eating, drinking, or retail
establishments located within the principal use and not occupying more than 10%
of the total gross residential floor area of the main structure or structures
on the site; additional accessory dining areas may be located on an outdoor
deck, porch or terrace; and
   (C)   Lodges, including accessory eating, drinking or retail establishments
located within the principal use and not occupying more than 10% of the total
gross residential floor area of the main structure or structures on the site;
additional accessory dining areas may be located on an outdoor deck, porch, or
terrace.
(Ord. 2(2006) § 2; Ord. 1(2008) § 23)
§ 12-7J-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the PA-2 District,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
   (A)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (B)   Fractional fee club units, as further regulated by §
12-16-7(A)(8) of this title;
   (C)   Lodges, including accessory eating, drinking, or retail establishments
located within the principal use and occupying between 10% and 15% of the total
gross residential floor area of the buildings, grounds and facilities;
   (D)   Public or commercial parking facilities or structures;
   (E)   Public transportation terminals;
   (F)   Public utility and public service uses;
   (G)   Religious institutions; and
   (H)   Theaters and convention facilities.
(Ord. 2(2006) § 2; Ord. 1(2008) § 23; Ord. 12(2008) § 25; Ord. 2(2016) § 18)
§ 12-7J-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the PA-2 District:
   (A)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (B)   Meeting rooms;
   (C)   Swimming pools, tennis courts, patios, or other recreation facilities
customarily incidental to permitted lodge uses; and
   (D)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 2(2006) § 2)
§ 12-7J-5 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   (A)   The minimum lot or site area shall be 10,000 square feet of buildable
area and each site shall have a minimum frontage of 30 feet.
   (B)   Each site shall be of a size and shape capable of enclosing a square
area, 80 feet on each side, within its boundaries.
(Ord. 2(2006) § 2)
§ 12-7J-6 SETBACKS.
   In the PA-2 District, the minimum front setback shall be 20 feet, the
minimum side setback shall be 20 feet, and the minimum rear setback shall be 20
feet. At the discretion of the Planning and Environmental Commission and/or the
Design Review Board, variations to the setback standards outlined above may be
approved during the review of exterior alterations or modifications (§
12-7J-12 of this article) subject to the applicant demonstrating compliance
with the following criteria:
   (A)   Proposed building setbacks provide necessary separation between
buildings and riparian areas, geologically sensitive areas and other
environmentally sensitive areas;
   (B)   The proposed building setbacks will provide adequate availability of
light, air and open space;
   (C)   Proposed building setbacks will provide a compatible relationship with
buildings and uses on adjacent properties; and
   (D)   Proposed building setbacks will result in creative design solutions or
other public benefits that could not otherwise be achieved by conformance with
prescribed setback standards.
(Ord. 2(2006) § 2)
§ 12-7J-7 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 45
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 48 feet.
(Ord. 2(2006) § 2)
§ 12-7J-8 DENSITY CONTROL.
   (A)   Up to 150 square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA) may be
permitted for each 100 square feet of buildable site area. Final determination
of allowable gross residential floor area shall be made by the Planning and
Environmental Commission in accordance with §
12-7J-12 of this article. Specifically, in determining allowable gross
residential floor area the Planning and Environmental Commission shall make a
finding that proposed gross residential floor area is in conformance with
applicable elements of the Vail Comprehensive Plan. Total density shall not
exceed 25 dwelling units per acre of buildable site area. For the purposes of
calculating density, employee housing units, limited service lodge units,
accommodation units and fractional fee club units shall not be counted towards
density (dwelling units per acre).
   (B)   A dwelling unit in a multiple-family building may include one or more
attached accommodation units.
(Ord. 2(2006) § 2)
§ 12-7J-9 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 65% of the total site area. Final
determination of allowable site coverage shall be made by the Planning and
Environmental Commission and/or the Design Review Board in accordance with §
12-7J-12 of this article. Specifically, in determining allowable site coverage
the Planning and Environmental Commission and/or the Design Review Board shall
make a finding that proposed site coverage is in conformance with applicable
elements of the Vail Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 2(2006) § 2)
§ 12-7J-10 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   At least 30% of the total site area shall be landscaped. The minimum width
and length of any area qualifying as landscaping shall be 15 feet with a
minimum area not less than 300 square feet.
(Ord. 2(2006) § 2)
§ 12-7J-11 PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title. At least 75% of the required parking shall be located within
the main building or buildings and hidden from public view. No at grade or
above grade surface parking or loading area shall be located in any required
front setback area. Below grade underground structured parking and short term
guest loading and drop off shall be permitted in the required front setback
subject to the approval of the Planning and Environmental Commission and/or the
Design Review Board.
(Ord. 2(2006) § 2)
§ 12-7J-12 EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS OR MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Review required. The construction of a new building or the alteration
of an existing building shall be reviewed by the Design Review Board in
accordance with Chapter 11 of this title. However, any project which adds
additional dwelling units, accommodation units, fractional fee club units,
limited service lodge units, any project which adds more than 1,000 square feet
of commercial floor area or common space, or any project which has substantial
off site impacts (as determined by the Administrator) shall be reviewed by the
Planning and Environmental Commission as a major exterior alteration in
accordance with this chapter and §
12-3-6 of this title.
   (B)   Submission. Complete applications for major exterior alterations shall
be submitted in accordance with administrative schedules developed by the
Department of Community Development for Planning and Environmental Commission
and Design Review Board review. The following submittal items are required:
      (1)   Application. An application shall be made by the owner of the
building or the building owner’s authorized agent or representative on a form
provided by the Administrator. Any application for condominiumized buildings
shall be authorized by the condominium association in conformity with all
pertinent requirements of the condominium association’s declarations.
      (2)   Application; contents. The Administrator shall establish the
submittal requirements for an exterior alteration or modification application.
A complete list of the submittal requirements shall be maintained by the
Administrator and filed in the Department of Community Development. Certain
submittal requirements may be waived and/or modified by the Administrator and/
or the reviewing body if it is demonstrated by the applicant that the
information and materials required are not relevant to the proposed development
or applicable to the planning documents that comprise the Vail Comprehensive
Plan. The Administrator and/or the reviewing body may require the submission of
additional plans, drawings, specifications, samples and other materials if
deemed necessary to properly evaluate the proposal.
      (3)   Work sessions/conceptual review. If requested by either the
applicant or the Administrator, submittals may proceed to a work session with
the Planning and Environmental Commission, a conceptual review with the Design
Review Board, or a work session with the Town Council.
      (4)   Hearing. The public hearing before the Planning and Environmental
Commission shall be held in accordance with §
12-3-6 of this title. The Planning and Environmental Commission may approve the
application as submitted, approve the application with conditions or
modifications, or deny the application. The decision of the Planning and
Environmental Commission may be appealed to the Town Council in accordance with
§
12-3-3 of this title.
      (5)   Lapse of approval. Approval of an exterior alteration as prescribed
by this article shall lapse and become void three years following the date of
approval by the Design Review Board unless, prior to the expiration, a building
permit is issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued to
completion. Administrative extensions shall be allowed for reasonable and
unexpected delays as long as code provisions affecting the proposal have not
changed.
(Ord. 2(2006) § 2)
§ 12-7J-13 COMPLIANCE BURDEN.
   It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove by a preponderance of the
evidence before the Planning and Environmental Commission and the Design Review
Board that the proposed exterior alteration or new development is in compliance
with the purposes of the Public Accommodation-2 (PA-2) Zone District, and that
the proposal does not otherwise have a significant negative effect on the
character of the neighborhood, and that the proposal substantially complies
with other applicable elements of the Vail Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 2(2006) § 2)
§ 12-7J-14 MITIGATION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS.
   Property owners/developers shall also be responsible for mitigating direct
impacts of their development on public infrastructure and in all cases
mitigation shall bear a reasonable relation to the development impacts. Impacts
may be determined based on reports prepared by qualified consultants. The
extent of mitigation and public amenity improvements shall be balanced with the
goals of redevelopment and will be determined by the Planning and Environmental
Commission in review of development projects and conditional use permits.
Substantial off site impacts may include, but are not limited to, the
following: deed restricted employee housing; roadway improvements; pedestrian
walkway improvements; streetscape improvements; stream tract/bank restoration;
loading/delivery; public art improvements; and similar improvements. The intent
of this section is to only require mitigation for large scale redevelopment/
development projects which produce substantial off site impacts.
(Ord. 2(2006) § 2)
§ 12-7J-15 LOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Limitations; exception. All permitted and conditional uses shall be
operated and conducted entirely within a building except for permitted parking
and loading areas and such activities as may be specifically authorized to be
unenclosed by a conditional use permit and the outdoor display of goods. For
purposes of this section, CONDUCTED ENTIRELY WITHIN A BUILDING means that all
activities related to the permitted use, including contacting potential
customers and clients, must occur completely inside of a building, and not in
an open doorway of the building.
   (B)   Outdoor displays. The area to be used for an outdoor display shall be
located directly in front of the establishment displaying the goods and
entirely upon the establishment’s own property. Sidewalks, building entrances
and exits, driveways and streets shall not be obstructed by outdoor displays.
(Ord. 11(2019) § 10)
ARTICLE 7K: VAIL VILLAGE INN (VVI) DISTRICT
Section
   
12-7K-1 Intent and purpose
   
12-7K-2 Permitted uses; basement or garden level
   
12-7K-3 Permitted and conditional uses; first floor or street level
   
12-7K-4 Permitted and conditional uses; second floor and above
   
12-7K-5 Conditional uses
   
12-7K-6 Accessory uses
   
12-7K-7 Lot area
   
12-7K-8 Setbacks
   
12-7K-9 Height
   
12-7K-10 Density
   
12-7K-11 Gross residential floor area
   
12-7K-12 Site coverage
   
12-7K-13 Landscaping
   
12-7K-14 Parking and loading
   
12-7K-15 Location of business activity
   
12-7K-16 Major exterior alterations
   
12-7K-17 Minor exterior alterations
   
12-7K-18 Nonconforming uses, structures, and site improvements
§ 12-7K-1 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Vail Village Inn (VVI) zone district is intended to provide sites
for general shopping and commercial facilities serving the Town, together with
multi-family dwelling units and lodge and accommodation uses as may be
appropriate.
   (B)   The purpose of this Article is intended to ensure adequate light, air,
open space and other amenities appropriate to permitted types of buildings and
uses, and to maintain a convenient pedestrian environment for permitted
commercial uses.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
§ 12-7K-2 PERMITTED USES; BASEMENT OR GARDEN LEVEL.
   (A)   The following uses shall be permitted in the basement or garden level
of a building:
      (1)   Accommodation units;
      (2)   Attached accommodation units:
      (3)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (4)   Commercial ski storage/ski clubs;
      (5)   Conference facilities and meeting rooms;
      (6)   Eating and drinking establishments;
      (7)   Employee housing units, subject to Chapter 13 of this Title 12;
      (8)   Fractional fee clubs, timeshare, and fractional units;
      (9)   Liquor stores;
      (10)   Lodge dwelling units;
      (11)   Multi-family residential dwelling units;
      (12)   Personal services and repair shops;
      (13)   Private clubs;
      (14)   Professional offices, business offices and studios;
      (15)   Recreation facilities;
      (16)   Religious institutions;
      (17)   Retail establishments; and
      (18)   Spa facilities.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
12-7K-3 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES; FIRST FLOOR OR STREET LEVEL.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted on the first
floor or street level of a building:
      (1)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (2)   Conference facilities and meeting rooms;
      (3)   Eating and drinking establishments;
      (4)   Liquor stores;
      (5)   Multi-family residential dwelling units and lodge dwelling unit
that do not front upon a retail pedestrian corridor;
      (6)   Personal services and repair shops;
      (7)   Recreation facilities;
      (8)   Religious institutions; and
      (9)   Retail establishments.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted on the first
floor or street level floor of a building, subject to issuance of a conditional
use permit pursuant to Chapter 16 of this Title 12:
      (1)   Accommodation units;
      (2)   Attached accommodation units;
      (3)   Employee housing units, subject to Chapter 13 of this Title 12;
      (4)   Multi-family residential dwelling units
      (5)   Lodge dwelling units;
      (6)   Fractional fee clubs, timeshares, and fractional units;
      (7)   Private clubs; and
      (8)   Professional offices, business offices and studios.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
§ 12-7K-4 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES; SECOND FLOOR AND ABOVE.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted on any floor
above the first floor of a building:
      (1)   Accommodation units;
      (2)   Attached accommodation units;
      (3)   Employee housing units, subject to Chapter 13 of this Title 12;
      (4)   Multiple-family residential dwelling units;
      (5)   Lodge dwelling units;
      (6)   Fractional fee clubs, timeshare, and fractional units; and
      (7)   Religious institutions.
   (B)    Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted on any floor
of a building above the first floor, subject to the issuance of a conditional
use permit pursuant to Chapter 16 of this Title 12:
      (1)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (2)   Conference facilities and meeting rooms;
      (3)   Eating and drinking establishments;
      (4)   Liquor stores;
      (5)   Personal services and repair shops;
      (6)   Private clubs;
      (7)   Professional offices, business offices and studios;
      (8)   Recreation facilities;
      (9)   Retail establishments; and
      (10)   Spa facilities.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
§ 12-7K-5 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   The following conditional uses shall be permitted on any floor of a
building, subject to issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter
16 of this Title 12:
      (1)   Child daycare centers;
      (2)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
      (3)   Public or private parking structures;
      (4)   Public buildings, grounds and facilities;
      (5)   Public park and recreation facilities; and
      (6)   Public utility and public service uses.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
§ 12-7K-6 ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   The following accessory uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit
pursuant to §
12-14-12 ;
      (2)   Swimming pools, tennis courts, patios, and other recreation
facilities customarily incidental to residential or lodge uses; and
      (3)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
§ 12-7K-7 LOT AREA.
   The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
§ 12-7K-8 SETBACKS.
   (A)   The minimum front, side, and rear setbacks shall be ten (10) feet.
   (B)   At the discretion of the PEC or the DRB, variations to the prescribed
setbacks may be approved during the review of a major exterior alteration if
the proposed setbacks:
      (1)   Provide necessary separation between buildings and riparian areas,
geologically sensitive areas and other environmentally sensitive areas;
      (2)   Comply with applicable elements of the Vail Village Urban Design
Guide Plan and Design Considerations;
      (3)   Provide adequate light, air and open space;
      (4)   Are compatible with buildings and uses on adjacent properties; and
      (5)   Will result in creative design solutions or other public benefits
that could not otherwise be achieved by conformance with the prescribed
setbacks.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
§ 12-7K-9 HEIGHTS.
   (A)   For a structure with a flat or mansard roof, the maximum height shall
be forty-five (45) feet.
   (B)   For a structure with a sloping roof, the maximum height shall be
forty-eight (48) feet.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
§ 12-7K-10 DENSITY.
   There shall be no limitation on the number of dwelling units per acre.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
§ 12-7K-11 GROSS RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA.
   Up to one hundred sixty-five (165) square feet of gross residential floor
area (GRFA) is permitted for each one hundred (100) square feet of lot area.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
§ 12-7K-12 SITE COVERAGE.
Site coverage shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the total lot area.
§ 12-7K-13 LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   At least thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area shall be
landscaped.
   (B)   The PEC or the DRB may approve variations to the prescribed landscape
area during the review of a major exterior alteration if the proposed landscape
design:
      (1)   Is consistent with the Vail Village Master Plan;
      (2)   Complies with applicable elements of the Vail Village Urban Design
Guide Plan and Design Considerations; and
      (3)   Will result in creative design solutions or other public benefits
that could not otherwise be achieved by conformance with the prescribed
landscape area.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
§ 12-7K-14 PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 10 of
this Title 12, except that additional on-site parking generated by changes to
commercial uses or expansions of floor area of existing commercial uses may pay
into the Parking Fund established by §
12-10-16 (B) in lieu of providing such parking.
   (B)   No additional loading facilities are required, but there shall be no
reduction of existing loading facilities.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
§ 12-7K-15 LOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.
   (A)   All uses shall be operated and conducted entirely within a building
except for: permitted parking and loading areas; the outdoor display of goods;
and such activities that are specifically authorized to be unenclosed by a
conditional use permit.
   (B)   The area to be used for an outdoor display of goods shall be located
directly in front of the establishment displaying the goods and entirely upon
the establishment's private property. An outdoor display of goods shall not
obstruct sidewalks, building entrances or exits, driveways, or streets.
   (C)   For purposes of this Section, "conducted entirely within a building"
means that all activities related to the use, including contacting potential
customers and clients, must occur completely inside of a building, and not in
an open doorway of the building.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
§ 12-7K-16 MAJOR EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS.
   (A)   Applicability. A major exterior alteration includes: construction of a
new building or the alteration of an existing building which adds additional
dwelling units, accommodation units, fractional fee club units, or timeshare
units; any project adding more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of
commercial floor area or common space; or any project which has substantial off
site impacts, as determined by the Administrator.
   (B)   Application.
      (1)   The application shall be submitted by the owner of the building or
their authorized representative on a form provided by the Town. An application
for a unit within a building with an owners' association shall be authorized by
the association.
      (2)   The Administrator shall maintain a complete list of the application
submittal requirements, and may waive certain submittal requirements if the
applicant demonstrates that the information and materials required are not
relevant to the application. The Administrator may also require the submission
of additional plans, drawings, specifications, samples and other materials if
deemed necessary to properly evaluate the application.
   (C)   Planning and Environmental Commission ("PEC") review.
      (1)   The PEC shall hold a public hearing on the application in
accordance with §
12-3-6 .
      (2)   At the public hearing, the applicant must prove by a preponderance
of the evidence that the proposed exterior alteration complies with this
Article and applicable elements of the Vail Village Master Plan and that the
proposal does not otherwise have a significant negative effect on the character
of the neighborhood.
      (3)   Following the public hearing, the PEC may approve the application
as submitted, approve the application with conditions or modifications, or deny
the application.
   (D)   Design Review Board ("DRB") review. Following PEC approval, the
application shall be reviewed by the DRB pursuant to Chapter 11 of this Title
12.
   (E)    Lapse of approval.
      (1)   Failure to receive DRB approval within two (2) years after the date
of PEC approval shall void the PEC approval.
      (2)   Failure to commence construction under a valid building permit
within two (2) years after the date of DRB approval shall void the DRB
approval.
      (3)   Administrative extensions shall be allowed for reasonable and
unexpected delays if regulations affecting the application have not changed.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
§ 12-7K-17 MINOR EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS.
   The construction of a new building or the alteration of an existing building
that is not a major exterior alteration shall be reviewed by the DRB pursuant
to Chapter 11 of this Title 12.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
§ 12-7K-18 NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND SITE IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Applicability. This Section shall apply to nonconforming uses,
structures and site improvements in the VVI District in lieu of Chapter 18 of
this Title 12.
   (B)   Uses.
      (1)   The use of a site or structure lawfully established prior to the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this Article that does not conform
to the use regulations prescribed by this Article may be continued, subject to
this Section and provided that no such nonconforming use shall be enlarged to
increase the site coverage or GRFA. Any subsequent reduction in site coverage
or GRFA shall be deemed a new limitation, and the use shall not thereafter be
enlarged to increase the site coverage or GRFA.
      (2)   A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming
use.
      (3)   Any nonconforming use that is discontinued for a period of twelve
(12) months, regardless of any intent to resume operation of use, shall not be
resumed, and any future use shall comply with this Article.
   (C)   Structures and site improvements.
      (1)   Structures and site improvements lawfully authorized by permits or
regulations existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this Article that do not conform to the following may continue, subject to this
Section:
         (a)   Height;
         (b)   Setbacks; and
         (c)   Site coverage.
      (2)   If a nonconforming structure or site improvement is destroyed by
fire or disaster, the structure or site improvement may be reconstructed if the
reconstruction is commenced within twelve (12) months and diligently pursued to
completion. All new construction shall comply with all applicable codes
regarding safety and construction in effect at the time of reconstruction.
   (D)   Maintenance. Nonconforming uses, structures and site improvements may
be maintained and repaired as necessary for convenience, safety and efficiency,
provided that the maintenance or repair does not increase the nonconformity.
(Ord. 15(2025) § 3)
CHAPTER 8: OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION DISTRICT
ARTICLE 8A: AGRICULTURAL AND OPEN SPACE (A) DISTRICT
Section
12-8A-1 Purpose
12-8A-2 Permitted uses
12-8A-3 Conditional uses
12-8A-4 Accessory uses
12-8A-5 Lot area and site dimensions
12-8A-6 Setbacks
12-8A-7 Height
12-8A-8 Density
12-8A-9 Site coverage
12-8A-10 Landscaping and site development
12-8A-11 Parking
§ 12-8A-1 PURPOSE.
   The Agricultural and Open Space District is intended to preserve
agricultural, undeveloped or open space lands from intensive development while
permitting agricultural pursuits and low density residential use consistent
with agricultural and open space objectives. Parks, schools and certain types
of private recreational facilities and institutions also are suitable uses in
the Agricultural and Open Space District, provided that the sites of these uses
remain predominantly open. Site development standards are intended to preclude
intensive urban development and to maintain the agricultural and open space
characteristics of the zone district.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 12.100; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8A-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the A District:
   (A)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
   (B)   Plant and tree nurseries and raising of field, row and tree crops;
   (C)   Public parks, passive and active recreation areas, and open spaces;
and
   (D)   Single-family residential dwellings.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 19)
§ 12-8A-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted, subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this
title:
   (A)   Any use within public parks, recreation areas and open spaces which
involves assembly of more than 200 persons together in one building or group of
buildings, or in one recreation area or other public recreational facility;
   (B)   Cemeteries;
   (C)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (D)   Low power subscription radio facilities;
   (E)   Private golf, tennis, swimming and riding clubs, and hunting and
fishing lodges;
   (F)   Public and private schools;
   (G)   Religious institutions;
   (H)   Semipublic and institutional uses, such as convents and religious
retreats;
   (I)   Ski lifts and tows; and
   (J)   Well water treatment facility.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 19)
§ 12-8A-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the A District:
   (A)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to permitted
agricultural uses, including barns, silos, sheds, corrals, pens and similar
uses;
   (B)   Home occupations, subject to issuance of a home occupation permit in
accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title;
   (C)   Private greenhouses, toolsheds, playhouses, garages or carports,
swimming pools, patios, or recreation facilities customarily incidental to
single-family residential uses;
   (D)   Retail sale of plants, trees or other farm or agricultural products
grown, produced or made on the premises; and
   (E)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 12.400; Ord. 16(1976) § 1(a); Ord. 21(1994) § 12)
§ 12-8A-5 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 35 acres with a minimum of one acre of
buildable area.
(Ord. 34(1979) § 1)
§ 12-8A-6 SETBACKS.
   In the A District, the minimum front setback shall be 20 feet, the minimum
side setback shall be 15 feet, and the minimum rear setback shall be 15 feet.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 2)
§ 12-8A-7 HEIGHT.
   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 30
feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 33 feet.
(Ord. 37(1980) § 2)
§ 12-8A-8 DENSITY.
   Not more than one dwelling unit shall be permitted for each 35 acres of site
area, of which one acre must be buildable; provided, however, that one dwelling
shall be allowed on a lot or parcel of less than 35 acres which contains one
acre of buildable area. Such dwelling shall not exceed 2,000 square feet of
gross residential floor area (GRFA).
(Ord. 34(1979) § 1)
§ 12-8A-9 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 5% of the total site area.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 12.507; Ord. 17(1991) § 14)
§ 12-8A-10 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   Not applicable in the A District.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 12.509)
§ 12-8A-11 PARKING.
   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 10 of this
title. No required parking shall be located in any required setback area,
except as may be specifically authorized in accordance with Chapter 17 of this
title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 12.510)
ARTICLE 8B: OUTDOOR RECREATION (OR) DISTRICT
Section
12-8B-1 Purpose
12-8B-2 Permitted uses
12-8B-3 Conditional uses
12-8B-4 Accessory uses
12-8B-5 Lot area and site dimensions
12-8B-6 Setbacks
12-8B-7 Height
12-8B-8 Density
12-8B-9 Site coverage
12-8B-10 Landscaping and site development
12-8B-11 Parking
12-8B-12 Additional development standards
§ 12-8B-1 PURPOSE.
   The Outdoor Recreation District is intended to preserve undeveloped or open
space lands from intensive development while permitting outdoor recreational
activities that provide opportunities for active and passive recreation areas,
facilities and uses.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 9; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8B-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the OR District:
   (A)   Bicycle and pedestrian paths;
   (B)   Golf courses
   (C)   Interpretive nature walks;
   (D)   Nature preserves; and
   (E)   Passive outdoor recreation areas and open spaces.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 9; Ord. 19(1995); Ord. 29(2005) §25)
§ 12-8B-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted, subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this
title:
   (A)   Accessory buildings (permanent and temporary) and uses customarily
incidental and accessory to permitted or conditional outdoor recreational uses,
and necessary for the operation thereof, including restrooms, drinking
fountains, bleachers, concessions, storage buildings, and similar uses;
   (B)   Cemeteries;
   (C)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (D)   Equestrian trails, used only to access national forest system lands;
   (E)   Public parks and active public outdoor recreation areas and uses,
excluding buildings;
   (F)   Public utility and public service uses;
   (G)   Seasonal use or structure;
   (H)   Ski lifts, tows and runs; and
   (I)   Well water treatment facilities.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 20)
§ 12-8B-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the OR District:
accessory uses in the OR District are subject to conditional use permit review
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this title.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 9; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8B-5 LOT AREA AND SITE DIMENSIONS.
   Not applicable in the OR District.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 9)
§ 12-8B-6 SETBACKS.
   In the OR District, the minimum setback shall be 20 feet from all property
lines, except as may be further restricted by the Planning and Environmental
Commission in conjunction with the issuance of a conditional use permit in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this title.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 9; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8B-7 HEIGHT.
   (A)   For a flat roof or mansard roof, the height of buildings shall not
exceed 21 feet. For a sloping roof, the height of buildings shall not exceed 24
feet.
   (B)   For golf course clubhouses, the height of a flat or mansard roof shall
not exceed 30 feet and the height of a sloping roof shall not exceed 33 feet.
(Ord. 21(2012) § 2)
§ 12-8B-8 DENSITY.
   Not applicable in the OR District.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 9)
§ 12-8B-9 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall not exceed 5% of the total site area.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 9)
§ 12-8B-10 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   Landscape requirements shall be determined by the Design Review Board in
accordance with Chapter 11 of this title.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 9; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8B-11 PARKING.
   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 10 of this
title.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 9)
§ 12-8B-12 ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Additional regulations pertaining to site development standards and the
development of land in the Outdoor Recreation District are found in Chapter 14
of this title.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 9; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
ARTICLE 8C: NATURAL AREA PRESERVATION (NAP) DISTRICT
Section
12-8C-1 Purpose
12-8C-2 Permitted uses
12-8C-3 Conditional uses
12-8C-4 Accessory uses
12-8C-5 Development standards
12-8C-6 Parking and loading
12-8C-7 Additional development standards
§ 12-8C-1 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Natural Area Preservation District is designed to provide areas
which, because of their environmentally sensitive nature or natural beauty,
shall be protected from encroachment by any building or other improvement,
other than those listed in §
12-8C-2 of this article. The Natural Area Preservation District is intended to
ensure that designated lands remain in their natural state, including reclaimed
areas, by protecting such areas from development and preserving open space. The
Natural Area Preservation District includes lands having valuable wildlife
habitat, exceptional aesthetic or flood control value, wetlands, riparian areas
and areas with significant environmental constraints. Protecting sensitive
natural areas is important for maintaining water quality and aquatic habitat,
preserving wildlife habitat, flood control, protecting view corridors,
minimizing the risk from hazard areas, and protecting the natural character of
Vail which is so vital to the town’s tourist economy.
   (B)   The intent shall not preclude improvement of the natural environment
by the removal of noxious weeds, deadfall where necessary to protect public
safety or similar compatible improvements.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 10)
§ 12-8C-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following shall be permitted uses in the NAP District: nature preserves.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 10)
§ 12-8C-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the NAP District,
subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
   (A)   Equestrian trails, used only to access national forest system lands;
   (B)   Interpretive nature walks;
   (C)   Parking, when used in conjunction with a permitted or conditional use;
   (D)   Paved and unpaved, nonmotorized, bicycle paths and pedestrian
walkways;
   (E)   Picnic tables and informal seating areas; and
   (F)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses and necessary for the operation thereof, with the exception of
buildings.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 10)
§ 12-8C-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   Not applicable in the NAP District.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 10)
§ 12-8C-5 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Not applicable in the NAP District.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 10)
§ 12-8C-6 PARKING AND LOADING.
   Parking and loading requirements will be determined by the Planning and
Environmental Commission during the review of conditional use requests in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this title.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 10)
§ 12-8C-7 ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Additional regulations pertaining to site development standards and the
development of land in the Natural Area Preservation District are found in
Chapter 14, “Supplemental Regulations”, of this title.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 10)
ARTICLE 8D: SKI BASE/RECREATION (SBR) DISTRICT
Section
12-8D-1 Purpose
12-8D-2 Permitted uses
12-8D-3 Conditional uses
12-8D-4 Accessory uses
12-8D-5 Location of business activity
12-8D-6 Development plan required
12-8D-7 Development plan contents
12-8D-8 Development standards/criteria for evaluation
12-8D-9 Lot area
12-8D-10 Setbacks
12-8D-11 Height
12-8D-12 Density control
12-8D-13 Site coverage
12-8D-14 Landscaping and site development
12-8D-15 Parking plan and program
§ 12-8D-1 PURPOSE.
   The Ski Base/Recreation District is intended to provide for the base
facilities necessary to operate the ski mountain and to allow multi-family
residential dwellings as a secondary use if certain criteria are met. In
addition, summer recreational uses and facilities are encouraged to achieve
multiseasonal use of some of the facilities and provide for efficient use of
the facilities.
(Ord. 24(1995) § 1)
§ 12-8D-2 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Within main lodge. The following uses shall be permitted within the
main base lodge building in the Ski Base/Recreation District:
      (1)   Basket rental;
      (2)   Injury prevention and rehabilitation facilities for owners’ use;
      (3)   Lift ticket sales;
      (4)   Meeting rooms for owner use and community oriented organizations;
      (5)   Restaurant/bar/snack bar/candy sales;
      (6)   Ski lockers/employee locker rooms;
      (7)   Ski repair, rental, sales and accessories;
      (8)   Ski school and ski patrol facilities;
      (9)   Special community events;
      (10)   Summer seasonal recreational, cultural and educational programs
and offices; and
      (11)   Tennis pro shop.
   (B)   Retail and meeting room space limitation.
      (1)   (a)   Retail sales space in the first two floors shall be limited
to a maximum of 15% of the nonresidential gross square footage of the main base
lodge building.
         (b)   Under this section RETAIL shall be defined as tennis pro shop,
candy sales, ski repair/rental sales, accessories and clothing, basket rental,
ski lockers and storage for the public.
      (2)   Meeting rooms shall be limited to a maximum of 10% of the
nonresidential gross square footage of the main building.
   (C)   Dwelling units. Multi-family dwelling units within the main base lodge
building if the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The dwelling units shall be a secondary use within the main base
lodge building if they meet the following criteria:
         (a)   No residential use on ground level;
         (b)   Visual impacts such as surface parking for the dwelling units
shall be minimized by providing at least 40% of the required parking within the
main base lodge building or in an attached parking structure; and
         (c)   The maximum gross residential floor area (GRFA) devoted to
dwelling units shall not exceed 30% of the total gross square footage of the
main base lodge building.
      (2)   Before acting on multi-family dwelling units, the Planning and
Environmental Commission shall consider the following factors in regard
thereto:
         (a)   Relationship and impacts of the use on development objectives of
the town;
         (b)   Effect of the use on light and air, distribution of population,
transportation facilities, utilities, schools, parks, and recreational
facilities, and other public facilities and public facilities needs;
         (c)   Effect upon traffic, with particular reference to congestion,
automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control,
access, maneuverability and removal of snow from the streets and parking area;
and
         (d)   Effect upon the character of the area in which the proposed use
is to be located, including the scale and bulk of the proposed use in relation
to surrounding uses.
      (3)   The Planning and Environmental Commission shall make the findings
set forth in §
12-16-6(B) of this title before permitting multi-family units within the main
base lodge building.
   (D)   Children’s ski school building. Permitted uses within the children’s
ski school building:
      (1)   Children’s ski school services and programs;
      (2)   Community events and programs;
      (3)   Summer recreational, cultural and educational programs; and
      (4)   Year round childcare and children’s ski school and appurtenant
recreational facilities and programs.
   (E)   Outside of lodge. The following uses shall be permitted outside the
main base lodge and children’s ski school buildings as shown on the approved
development plan zoned Ski Base/Recreation District:
      (1)   Bus and skier drop off;
      (2)   Food and beverage service;
      (3)   Indoor and outdoor ski storage;
      (4)   Mountain storage buildings;
      (5)   Private unstructured parking;
      (6)   Public parks, tennis and volleyball courts, and playing fields,
playgrounds;
      (7)   Ski racing facilities;
      (8)   Ski school activities;
      (9)   Ski trails, slopes and lifts;
      (10)   Snowmaking facilities;
      (11)   Special community events; and
      (12)   Water treatment and storage facilities buildings.
   (F)   Employee housing units. Employee housing units, as further regulated
by Chapter 13 of this title.
(Ord. 24(1995) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25; Ord. 2(2007) § 4; Ord. 1(2008) § 23;
Ord. 12(2008) § 21)
§ 12-8D-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the Ski Base/Recreation
District, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
   (A)   Addition or expansion of storage buildings for mountain equipment;
   (B)   Additions or expansions of public or private parking structures or
spaces;
   (C)   Bed and breakfasts, as further regulated by §
12-14-18 of this title;
   (D)   Child daycare center;
   (E)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (F)   Food and beverage cart vending;
   (G)   Public, private or quasi-public clubs;
   (H)   Recreation room/minor arcade;
   (I)   Redevelopment of public parks, playgrounds;
   (J)   Redevelopment of ski lifts and tows;
   (K)   Redevelopment of ski racing facilities;
   (L)   Redevelopment of water storage extraction and treatment facilities;
   (M)   Religious institutions;
   (N)   Seasonal structures to accommodate athletic, cultural, or educational
activities;
   (O)   Summer outdoor storage for mountain equipment; and
   (P)   Summer seasonal community offices and programs.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 21; Ord. 2(2016) § 19)
§ 12-8D-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the Ski Base/Recreation
District:
   (A)   Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted and conditional
uses and necessary for the operation thereof; and
   (B)   Home occupations, subject to the issuance of a home occupation permit
in accordance with the provisions of §
12-14-12 of this title.
(Ord. 24(1995) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8D-5 LOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.
   All offices and retail sales conducted in the Ski Base/Recreation District
shall be operated and conducted entirely within a building except for approved
special events and food and beverage vending.
(Ord. 24(1995) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8D-6 DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIRED.
   (A)   Compatibility with intent. To ensure the unified development, the
protection of the natural environment, the compatibility with the surrounding
area and to assure that development in the Ski Base/Recreation District will
meet the intent of the zone district, a development plan shall be required.
   (B)   Plan process and procedures. The proposed development plan shall be in
accordance with §
12-8D-7 of this article and shall be submitted by the developer to the
Administrator, who shall refer it to the Planning and Environmental Commission,
which shall consider the plan at a regularly scheduled meeting. A report of the
Planning and Environmental Commission stating its findings and recommendations
shall be transmitted to the Town Council for approval in accordance with the
applicable provisions of §
12-16-6 of this title.
   (C)   Plan as guide. The approved development plan shall be used as the
principal guide for all development within the Ski Base/Recreation District.
   (D)   Amendment process. Amendments to the approved development plan will be
considered in accordance with the provisions of §
12-9A-10 of this title.
   (E)   DRB approval required. The development plan and any subsequent
amendments thereto shall require the approval of the Design Review Board in
accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 11 of this title prior to
the commencement of site preparation.
(Ord. 24(1995) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8D-7 DEVELOPMENT PLAN CONTENTS.
   The Administrator shall establish the submittal requirements for a
development plan application. A complete list of the submittal requirements
shall be maintained by the Administrator and filed in the Department of
Community Development. Certain submittal requirements may be waived and/or
modified by the Administrator and/or the reviewing body if it is demonstrated
by the applicant that the information and materials required are not relevant
to the proposed development or applicable to the planning documents that
comprise the Vail Comprehensive Plan. The Administrator and/or the reviewing
body may require the submission of additional plans, drawings, specifications,
samples and other materials if deemed necessary to properly evaluate the
proposal.
(Ord. 24(1995) § 1; Ord. 5(2003) § 13; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8D-8 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS/CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION.
   The following criteria shall be used as the principal means for evaluating a
proposed development plan. It shall be the burden of the applicant to
demonstrate that the proposed development plan complies with all applicable
design criteria:
   (A)   Building design with respect to architecture, character, scale,
massing and orientation is compatible with the site, adjacent properties and
the surrounding neighborhood;
   (B)   Buildings, improvements, uses and activities are designed and located
to produce a functional development plan responsive to the site, the
surrounding neighborhood and uses, and the community as a whole;
   (C)   Open space and landscaping are both functional and aesthetic, are
designed to preserve and enhance the natural features of the site, maximize
opportunities for access and use by the public, provide adequate buffering
between the proposed uses and surrounding properties, and, when possible, are
integrated with existing open space and recreation areas;
   (D)   A pedestrian and vehicular circulation system is designed to provide
safe, efficient and aesthetically pleasing circulation to the site and
throughout the development;
   (E)   Environmental impacts resulting from the proposal have been identified
in the project’s environmental impact report, if not waived, and all necessary
mitigating measures are implemented as a part of the proposed development plan;
and
   (F)   Compliance with the Vail Comprehensive Plan and other applicable
plans.
(Ord. 24(1995) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8D-9 LOT AREA.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 40 acres of site area, at least one
acre of which shall be buildable area.
(Ord. 24(1995) § 1)
§ 12-8D-10 SETBACKS.
   In the Ski Base/Recreation District, front, side, rear and stream setbacks
shall be as indicated on the approved development plan.
(Ord. 24(1995) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8D-11 HEIGHT.
   Up to 60% of the building (building coverage area) may be built to a height
of 35 feet, or less. No more than 40% of the building (building coverage area)
may be higher than 35 feet, but not higher than 40 feet. Towers, spires,
cupolas, chimneys, flagpoles and similar architectural features not usable as
gross residential floor area may extend above the height limit a distance of
not more than 25% of the height limit nor more than 15 feet.
(Ord. 24(1995) § 1)
§ 12-8D-12 DENSITY CONTROL.
   (A)   Total density shall not exceed one dwelling unit per eight acres of
site area.
   (B)   A dwelling unit in a multiple-family building may include one attached
accommodation unit no larger than one-third of the total floor area of the
dwelling.
(Ord. 24(1995) § 1; Ord. 31(2001) § 5)
§ 12-8D-13 SITE COVERAGE.
   Site coverage shall be as shown on the approved development plan.
(Ord. 24(1995) § 1)
§ 12-8D-14 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   Landscaping requirements shall be as shown on the approved development plan.
All areas within the area(s) of disturbance in the landscape plan not occupied
by building, ground level decks or patios, or parking shall be landscaped.
(Ord. 24(1995) § 1)
§ 12-8D-15 PARKING PLAN AND PROGRAM.
   Parking plan and management program shall be as shown on and described in
the approved development plan.
(Ord. 24(1995) § 1)
ARTICLE 8E: SKI BASE/RECREATION 2 (SBR2) DISTRICT
Section
12-8E-1 Purpose
12-8E-2 Permitted uses
12-8E-3 Conditional uses
12-8E-4 Accessory uses
12-8E-5 Location of business activity
12-8E-6 Development plan
12-8E-7 Development review procedures
12-8E-8 Submittal requirements; information and materials required
12-8E-9 Design criteria
12-8E-10 Lot area
12-8E-11 Setbacks
12-8E-12 Height
12-8E-13 Density control (dwelling units per acre/GRFA)
12-8E-14 Site coverage
12-8E-15 Landscaping and site development
12-8E-16 Parking/loading plan and program
12-8E-17 Mitigation of development impacts
12-8E-18 Amendment procedures
12-8E-19 Time requirements
§ 12-8E-1 PURPOSE.
   The Ski Base/Recreation 2 District is intended to provide sites for
facilities, activities and uses necessary for and appurtenant to the operation
of a ski mountain. A variety of other facilities, uses and activities,
including, but not limited to, residential, public and semipublic uses and
special community events typically associated with a vibrant resort community
are also permitted within the zone district. The Ski Base/Recreation 2 District
is intended to ensure adequate light, air, open space and other amenities
appropriate to permitted and conditional uses throughout the zone district. In
order to achieve this objective and to ensure compatibility with adjacent land
uses, all permitted uses, development and activity within the zone district
shall be subject to approval of a Comprehensive Development Plan in accordance
with the provisions of this article. Furthermore, due to the likelihood of this
district being located at the base of Vail Mountain, and upon some of the most
critical and important lands to the future success and resort character of the
town, development within this district shall be evaluated based upon its
ability to meet the specific purposes of this title and to provide “compelling
public benefits which further the public interests” that go beyond any economic
benefits to the landowner.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8E-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted within the Ski Base/Recreation 2
District:
   (A)   Eating and drinking establishments including the following:
      (1)   Bakeries and delicatessens with food service, restricted to
preparation of products specifically for sale on the premises;
      (2)   Cocktail lounges and bars;
      (3)   Coffee shops;
      (4)   Fountains and sandwich shops; and
      (5)   Restaurants.
   (B)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title;
   (C)   Lodges;
   (D)   Private or public off-street loading facilities;
   (E)   Private or public off-street vehicle parking structures;
   (F)   Public parks and outdoor recreation facilities;
   (G)   Residential uses including the following:
      (1)   Accommodation units;
      (2)   Multi-family residential dwelling units;
      (3)   Single-family residential dwelling units; and
      (4)   Two-family residential dwelling units.
   (H)   Ski base oriented uses including the following:
      (1)   Commercial ski storage/ski club on the basement or garden level of
a building;
      (2)   Retail stores and establishments;
      (3)   Ski lifts and tows;
      (4)   Ski patrol facilities;
      (5)   Ski racing facilities;
      (6)   Ski school facilities;
      (7)   Ski trails;
      (8)   Skier and guest services including, but not limited to, uses such
as basket rental, lockers, ski repair, ski rental, lift ticket sales, public
restrooms, information/activity desk;
      (9)   Snowmaking facilities; and
      (10)   Special community events, including, but not limited to, ski
races, festivals, concerts, and recreational, cultural and educational programs
and associated improvements/facilities, subject to the issuance of a special
events license.
(Ord. 8(2014) § 5)
§ 12-8E-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the Ski Base/Recreation
2 District, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
   (A)   Brewpubs;
   (B)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (C)   Fractional fee units;
   (D)   Outdoor dining decks and patios;
   (E)   Private and public clubs;
   (F)   Public utility and public service uses;
   (G)   Religious institutions; and
   (H)   Additional uses determined to be similar to conditional or permitted
uses described in this chapter, in accordance with the provisions of §
12-3-4 of this title.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 22; Ord. 2(2016) § 20)
§ 12-8E-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the Ski Base/Recreation 2
District:
   (A)   Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted and conditional
uses and necessary for the operation thereof;
   (B)   Ski patrol offices;
   (C)   Ski school offices, sales, and activities;
   (D)   Skier and guest service employee offices, locker rooms, and meeting
rooms; and
   (E)   Swimming pools, patios or other recreation facilities customarily
incidental to permitted uses.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8E-5 LOCATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Limitations; exception. All offices, retail sales, and commercial ski
storage conducted in the Ski Base/Recreation 2 (SBR2) District shall be
operated and conducted entirely within a building, except for approved special
community events, outdoor display of goods, and outdoor restaurant seating.
   (B)   Outdoor displays. The area to be used for outdoor display must be
located directly in front of the establishment displaying the goods and
entirely upon the establishment’s own property. Sidewalks, building entrances
and exits, driveways and streets shall not be obstructed by outdoor display.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8E-6 DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Development plan required. Prior to site preparation, building
construction or other improvements to land within the Ski Base/Recreation 2
District, there shall be an approved development plan for said district or
portion thereof. An approved development plan shall be the principal document
in guiding the development, uses and activities of land within the zone
district. A development plan shall be approved by the Planning and
Environmental Commission. Development standards including setbacks, site
coverage, landscaping, density (GRFA) and parking shall be determined by the
Planning and Environmental Commission as part of the approved development plan.
This determination is to be made based on the proposed development plan’s
compliance with the design criteria outlined in §
12-8E-9 of this article.
   (B)   Application. An application for approval of a development plan may be
filed by any owner of property within the Ski Base/Recreation 2 District or his
or her agent or authorized representative. The application shall be made on a
form provided by the Department of Community Development and shall include a
legal description of the property, a list of names and mailing addresses of all
adjacent property owners and written consent of owners of all property to be
included in the development plan, or their agents or authorized
representatives. The application shall be accompanied by submittal requirements
outlined in §
12-8E-8 of this article and a development plan as outlined in subsection (C) of
this section.
   (C)   Contents. The development plan shall be comprised of materials
submitted in accordance with §
12-8E-8 of this article. The development plan shall contain all relevant
material and information necessary to establish the parameters within which
land in the district may be developed. The development plan may consist of, but
not be limited to, the approved site plan, floor plans, building sections and
elevations, vicinity plan, off-street parking/loading plan, off site
improvements plan, preliminary open space/landscape plan, densities and
permitted, conditional and accessory uses.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8E-7 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Preapplication conference. Prior to submittal of a formal application
for a development plan, the applicant shall hold a preapplication conference
with the Department of Community Development. The purpose of this meeting shall
be to discuss the goals of the proposed development plan, the relationship of
the proposal to applicable elements of the Vail Comprehensive Plan, and the
review procedure that will be followed for the application.
   (B)   PEC conducts final review. The final review of a proposed development
plan shall be by the Planning and Environmental Commission at either a
regularly scheduled meeting or a special meeting. Prior to this meeting, and at
the discretion of the Administrator, a work session may be held with the
applicant, staff and the Planning and Environmental Commission to discuss the
development plan. A report of the Department of Community Development staff’s
findings and recommendations shall be presented at a public hearing before the
Planning and Environmental Commission. The Planning and Environmental
Commission shall review the development plan in accordance with the provisions
of §
12-8E-9 of this article.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8E-8 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS; INFORMATION AND MATERIALS REQUIRED.
   The Administrator shall establish the submittal requirements for an approved
development plan application. Certain submittal requirements may be waived or
modified by the Administrator or the Planning and Environmental Commission if
it is demonstrated by the applicant that the information and materials required
are not relevant to the proposed development or applicable to the Vail
Comprehensive Plan. A complete list of the submittal requirements shall be
maintained by the Administrator and filed in the Department of Community
Development.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8E-9 DESIGN CRITERIA.
   The following design criteria shall be used as the principal criteria in
evaluating the merits of a proposed development plan. It shall be the burden of
the applicant to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the submittal
material and the proposed development plan comply with each of the following
standards, or demonstrate that one or more of them is not applicable, or that a
practical solution consistent with the public interest has been achieved:
   (A)   Compatibility. Design compatibility and sensitivity to the immediate
environment, neighborhood and adjacent properties relative to architectural
design, scale, bulk, building height, buffer zones, identity, character, visual
integrity and orientation;
   (B)   Relationship. Uses, activity and density which provide a compatible,
efficient and workable relationship with surrounding uses and activity;
   (C)   Parking and loading. Compliance with parking and loading requirements
as outlined in Chapter 10 of this title;
   (D)   Comprehensive plan. Conformity with the Vail Comprehensive Plan, town
policies and urban design plans.
   (E)   Natural and/or geologic hazard. Identification and mitigation of
natural and/or geologic hazards that affect the property on which the
development plan is proposed;
   (F)   Design features. Site plan, building design and location and open
space provisions designed to produce a functional development responsive and
sensitive to natural features, vegetation and overall aesthetic quality of the
community;
   (G)   Traffic. A circulation system designed for both vehicles and
pedestrians addressing on and off site traffic circulation;
   (H)   Landscaping. Functional and aesthetic landscaping and open space in
order to optimize and preserve natural features, recreation, views and
function;
   (I)   Workable plan. Phasing plan or subdivision plan that will maintain a
workable, functional and efficient relationship throughout the development of
the development plan; and
   (J)   Annexed lands. Conformity with the terms of an annexation agreement
and demonstration of a compelling public benefit which furthers the public
interest.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8E-10 LOT AREA.
   The minimum lot or site area shall be 10,000 square feet of buildable site
area.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1)
§ 12-8E-11 SETBACKS.
   In the Ski Base/Recreation 2 District, front, side and rear setbacks shall
be as indicated on the approved development plan.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8E-12 HEIGHT.
   In the Ski Base/Recreation 2 District buildings shall range in height from
zero feet to 43 feet and be indicated on the approved development plan. All
development shall comply with the building height guidelines found in the Vail
Village Master Plan conceptual building height plan. In no instance, however,
shall the maximum building height exceed 43 feet.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8E-13 DENSITY CONTROL (DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE/GRFA).
   Total density shall not exceed eight dwelling units per acre of buildable
site area. The total allowable gross residential floor area (GRFA) shall be as
indicated on the approved development plan.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1)
§ 12-8E-14 SITE COVERAGE.
   In the Ski Base/Recreation 2 District, site coverage shall be as indicated
on the approved development plan.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1)
§ 12-8E-15 LANDSCAPING AND SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   In the Ski Base/Recreation 2 District, landscaping requirements shall be as
indicated on the approved development plan.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1)
§ 12-8E-16 PARKING/LOADING PLAN AND PROGRAM.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title. At least 95% of the required parking shall be located within
the main building or buildings, and as approved by the Planning and
Environmental Commission in review of the development plan. The off-street
parking and loading plan shall be indicated on and described in the approved
development plan.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1)
§ 12-8E-17 MITIGATION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS.
   Property owners/developers shall also be responsible for mitigating direct
impacts of their development on public infrastructure and in all cases
mitigation shall bear a reasonable relation to the development impacts. Impacts
may be determined based on reports prepared by qualified consultants. The
extent of mitigation and public amenity improvements shall be balanced with the
goals of redevelopment and will be determined by the Planning and Environmental
Commission in review of development projects and conditional use permits.
Substantial off site impacts may include, but are not limited to, the
following: deed restricted employee housing; roadway improvements; pedestrian
walkway improvements; loading/delivery; streetscape improvements; stream tract/
bank improvements; public art improvements; parking; and similar improvements.
The intent of this section is to only require mitigation for large scale
redevelopment/ development projects which produce substantial off site impacts.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1)
§ 12-8E-18 AMENDMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Minor amendments.
      (1)   MINOR AMENDMENTS are modifications to building plans, site or
landscape plans that do not alter the basic intent and character of the
approved development plan, and are consistent with the design criteria of this
article. Minor amendments may include, but not be limited to, variations of not
more than five feet to approved setbacks and/or building footprints; changes to
landscape or site plans that do not adversely impact pedestrian or vehicular
circulation throughout the development site; or changes to gross floor area of
not more than 5% of the approved square footage of residential floor area or
retail, office, common areas and other nonresidential floor area.
      (2)   Minor amendments consistent with the design criteria outlined in §
12-8E-9 of this article may be approved by the Department of Community
Development. All minor amendments shall be indicated on a completely revised
development plan. Approved changes shall be noted, signed, dated and filed by
the Department of Community Development.
      (3)   Notification of a proposed minor amendment, and a report of staff
action of said request, shall be provided to all property owners within or
adjacent to the zone district that may be affected by the amendment. Affected
properties shall be as determined by the Department of Community Development.
Notifications shall be postmarked no later than five days following staff
action on the amendment request and shall include a brief statement describing
the amendment and the time and date of when the Planning and Environmental
Commission will be informed of the administrative action. In all cases the
report to the Planning and Environmental Commission shall be made within 20
days from the date of the staff’s decision on the requested amendment.
      (4)   Appeals of staff decisions may be filed by adjacent property
owners, owners of property within the zone district, the applicant, Planning
and Environmental Commission members or members of the Town Council as outlined
in section
12-3-3 of this title.
   (B)   Major amendments.
      (1)   MAJOR AMENDMENTS are any proposal to change uses; increases to
residential floor area greater than 5% of the approved square footage;
increases to retail, office or common floor area greater than 5% of the
approved square footage; increases or decreases to the number of dwelling,
accommodation or fractional fee club units; any request to modify, enlarge or
expand the boundary of an approved development plan and any amendment to the
approved development plan that is not a minor amendment as determined by the
Administrator and defined in this article.
      (2)   Requests for major amendments to an approved development plan shall
be evaluated based upon the degree of deviation of the amendment from the basic
intent and character of the approved development plan and reviewed in
accordance with the procedures described in §
12-8E-7 of this article. All major amendments shall be indicated on a
completely revised development plan. Approved changes shall be noted, signed,
dated and filed by the Department of Community Development.
      (3)   Owners of all property requesting the amendment, or their agents or
authorized representatives, shall sign the application. Notification of the
proposed amendment shall be made to owners of all property adjacent to the
property requesting the proposed amendment, owners of all property adjacent to
the zone district, and owners of all property within the zone district that may
be affected by the proposed amendment (as determined by the Department of
Community Development). Notification procedures shall be as outlined in §
12-3-6(C) of this title.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
§ 12-8E-19 TIME REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Start of construction; completion. The developer must begin initial
construction of the development plan within three years from the time of its
final approval, and continue diligently toward the completion of the project.
If the development plan is to be developed in phases, the developer must begin
construction of subsequent phases within one year of the completion of the
previous phase.
   (B)   Approval voided. If the developer does not begin and diligently work
toward the completion of the development plan or any stage of the development
plan within the time limits imposed by the preceding subsection (A), the
approval of said development plan shall be void. The Planning and Environmental
Commission shall review the development plan upon submittal of an application
to reestablish the development plan following the procedures outlined in §
12-8E-7 of this article.
(Ord. 4(2003) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 25)
CHAPTER 9: SPECIAL AND MISCELLANEOUS DISTRICTS
ARTICLE 9A: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT (SDD) DISTRICT
Section
12-9A-1 Purpose and applicability
12-9A-2 Definitions
12-9A-3 Application
12-9A-4 Development review procedures
12-9A-5 Submittal requirements
12-9A-6 Development plan
12-9A-7 Uses
12-9A-8 Design criteria and necessary findings
12-9A-9 Development standards
12-9A-10 Amendment procedures
12-9A-11 Recreation amenities tax
12-9A-12 Time requirements
12-9A-13 Fees
12-9A-14 Existing Special Development Districts
§ 12-9A-1 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Special Development District is to
encourage flexibility and creativity in the development of land in order to
promote its most appropriate use; to improve the design character and quality
of the new development with the town; to facilitate the adequate and economical
provision of streets and utilities; to preserve the natural and scenic features
of open space areas; and to further the overall goals of the community as
stated in the Vail Comprehensive Plan. An approved development plan for a
Special Development District, in conjunction with the property’s underlying
zone district, shall establish the requirements for guiding development and
uses of property included in the Special Development District.
   (B)   Applicability. Special Development Districts do not apply to and are
not available in the following zone districts: hillside residential; single-
family residential; two-family residential; and two-family primary/secondary
residential.
(Ord. 21(1988) § 1; Ord. 9(1994) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 26)
§ 12-9A-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AFFECTED PROPERTY. Property within a Special Development District that, by
virtue of its proximity or relationship to a proposed amendment request to an
approved development plan, may be affected by redesign, density increase,
change in uses or other modifications changing the impacts, or character of the
approved Special Development District.
   AGENT or AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. Any individual or association authorized
or empowered in writing by the property owner to act on his or her stead. If
any of the property to be included in the Special Development District is a
condominiumized development, the pertinent condominium association may be
considered the agent or authorized representative for the individual unit
owners if authorized in conformity with all pertinent requirements of the
condominium association’s declarations and all other requirements of the
condominium declarations are met.
   MAJOR AMENDMENT (PEC AND/OR COUNCIL REVIEW). Any proposal to change uses;
increase gross residential floor area; change the number of dwelling or
accommodation units; modify, enlarge or expand any approved Special Development
District (other than “minor amendments” as defined in this section), except as
provided under §§
12-15-4, “Interior Conversions”, or
12-15-5, “Additional Gross Residential Floor Area (250 Ordinance)”, of this
title.
   MINOR AMENDMENT (STAFF REVIEW). Modifications to building plans, site or
landscape plans that do not alter the basic intent and character of the
approved Special Development District, and are consistent with the design
criteria of this article. Minor amendments may include, but not be limited to,
variations of not more than five feet to approved setbacks and/or building
footprints; changes to landscape or site plans that do not adversely impact
pedestrian or vehicular circulation throughout the Special Development
District; or changes to gross floor area (excluding residential uses) of not
more than 5% of the approved square footage of retail, office, common areas and
other nonresidential floor area, except as provided under §§
12-15-4, “Interior Conversions”, or
12-15-5, “Additional Gross Residential Floor Area (250 Ordinance)”, of this
title.
   UNDERLYING ZONE DISTRICT. The zone district existing on the property, or
imposed on the property at the time the Special Development District is
approved. The following zone districts are prohibited from Special Development
Districts being used: hillside residential; single-family residential; two-
family residential; and two-family primary/ secondary residential.
(Ord. 21(1988) § 1; Ord. 9(1994) § 2; Ord. 13(1997) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 26)
§ 12-9A-3 APPLICATION.
   An application for approval of a Special Development District may be filed
by any owner of property to be included in the Special Development District or
his or her agent or authorized representative. The application shall be made on
a form provided by the Department of Community Development and shall include: a
legal description of the property; a list of names and mailing addresses of all
adjacent property owners; and written consent of owners of all property to be
included in the Special Development District, or their agents or authorized
representatives. The application shall be accompanied by submittal requirements
in §
12-9A-5 of this article and a development plan as in §
12-9A-6 of this article.
(Ord. 21(1988) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 26)
§ 12-9A-4 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Approval of plan required. Prior to site preparation, building
construction, or other improvements to land within a Special Development
District, there shall be an approved development plan for said district. The
approved development plan shall establish requirements regulating development,
uses and activity within a Special Development District.
   (B)   Preapplication conference. Prior to submittal of a formal application
for a Special Development District, the applicant shall hold a preapplication
conference with the Department of Community Development. The purpose of this
meeting shall be to discuss the goals of the proposed Special Development
District, the relationship of the proposal to applicable elements of the town’s
Comprehensive Plan, and the review procedure that will be followed for the
application.
   (C)   PEC conducts initial review. The initial review of a proposed Special
Development District shall be held by the Planning and Environmental Commission
at a regularly scheduled meeting. Prior to this meeting, and at the discretion
of the Administrator, a work session may be held with the applicant, staff and
the Planning and Environmental Commission to discuss the Special Development
District. A report of the Department of Community Development staff’s findings
and recommendations shall be made at the initial formal hearing before the
Planning and Environmental Commission. Within 20 days of the closing of a
public hearing on a proposed amendment, the Planning and Environmental
Commission shall act on the petition or proposal. The Commission may recommend
approval of the petition or proposal as initiated, may recommend approval with
such modifications as it deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this
title, or may recommend denial of the petition or rejection of the proposal.
The Commission shall transmit its recommendation, together with a report on the
public hearing and its deliberations and findings, to the Town Council.
   (D)   Town Council review. A report of the Planning and Environmental
Commission stating its findings and recommendations, and the staff report shall
then be transmitted to the Town Council. Upon receipt of the report and
recommendation of the Planning and Environmental Commission, the Town Council
shall set a date for hearing within the following 30 days. Within 20 days of
the closing of a public hearing on a proposed SDD, the Town Council shall act
on the petition or proposal. The Town Council shall consider but shall not be
bound by the recommendation of the Planning and Environmental Commission. The
Town Council may cause an ordinance to be introduced to create or amend a
Special Development District, either in accordance with the recommendation of
the Planning and Environmental Commission or in modified form, or the Council
may deny the petition. If the Council elects to proceed with an ordinance
adopting an SDD, the ordinance shall be considered as prescribed by the Vail
Town Charter.
(Ord. 21(1988) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 26)
§ 12-9A-5 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The Administrator shall establish the submittal requirements for a Special
Development District application. A complete list of the submittal requirements
shall be maintained by the Administrator and filed in the Department of
Community Development. Certain submittal requirements may be waived and/or
modified by the Administrator and/or the reviewing body if it is demonstrated
by the applicant that the information and materials required are not relevant
to the proposed development or applicable to the planning documents that
comprise the Vail Comprehensive Plan. The Administrator and/or the reviewing
body may require the submission of additional plans, drawings, specifications,
samples and other materials if deemed necessary to properly evaluate the
proposal.
(Ord. 21(1988) § 1; Ord. 5(2003) § 14; Ord. 29(2005) § 26)
§ 12-9A-6 DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   An approved development plan is the principal document in guiding the
development, uses and activities of Special Development Districts. A
development plan shall be approved by ordinance by the Town Council in
conjunction with the review and approval of any Special Development District.
The development plan shall be comprised of materials submitted in accordance
with §
12-9A-5 of this article. The development plan shall contain all relevant
material and information necessary to establish the parameters with which the
Special Development District shall develop. The development plan may consist
of, but not be limited to, the approved site plan, floor plans, building
sections and elevations, vicinity plan, parking plan, preliminary open space/
landscape plan, densities and permitted, conditional and accessory uses.
(Ord. 21(1988) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 26)
§ 12-9A-7 USES.
   Determination of permitted, conditional and accessory uses shall be made by
the Planning and Environmental Commission and Town Council as a part of the
formal review of the proposed development plan. Unless further restricted
through the review of the proposed Special Development District, permitted,
conditional and accessory uses shall be limited to those permitted, conditional
and accessory uses in a property’s underlying zone district. Under certain
conditions, commercial uses may be permitted in residential Special Development
Districts if, in the opinion of the Town Council, such uses are primarily for
the service and convenience of the residents of the development and the
immediate neighborhood. Such uses, if any, shall not change or destroy the
predominantly residential character of the Special Development District. The
amount of area and type of such uses, if any, to be allowed in a residential
Special Development District shall be established by the Town Council as a part
of the approved development plan.
(Ord. 21(1988) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 26)
§ 12-9A-8 DESIGN CRITERIA AND NECESSARY FINDINGS.
   (A)   Criteria. The following design criteria shall be used as the principal
criteria in evaluating the merits of the proposed Special Development District.
It shall be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate that submittal material
and the proposed development plan comply with each of the following standards,
or demonstrate that one or more of them is not applicable, or that a practical
solution consistent with the public interest has been achieved:
      (1)   Compatibility. Design compatibility and sensitivity to the
immediate environment, neighborhood and adjacent properties relative to
architectural design, scale, bulk, building height, buffer zones, identity,
character, visual integrity and orientation;
      (2)   Relationship. Uses, activity and density which provide a
compatible, efficient and workable relationship with surrounding uses and
activity;
      (3)   Parking and loading. Compliance with parking and loading
requirements as outlined in Chapter 10 of this title;
      (4)   Comprehensive Plan. Conformity with applicable elements of the Vail
Comprehensive Plan, town policies and urban design plans;
      (5)   Natural and/or geologic hazard. Identification and mitigation of
natural and/or geologic hazards that affect the property on which the Special
Development District is proposed;
      (6)   Design features. Site plan, building design and location and open
space provisions designed to produce a functional development responsive and
sensitive to natural features, vegetation and overall aesthetic quality of the
community;
      (7)   Traffic. A circulation system designed for both vehicles and
pedestrians addressing on and off site traffic circulation;
      (8)   Landscaping. Functional and aesthetic landscaping and open space in
order to optimize and preserve natural features, recreation, views and
function; and
      (9)   Workable plan. Phasing plan or subdivision plan that will maintain
a workable, functional and efficient relationship throughout the development of
the Special Development District.
   (B)   Necessary findings. Before recommending and/or granting an approval of
an application for a Special Development District, the Planning and
Environmental Commission and the Town Council shall make the following findings
with respect to the proposed SDD:
      (1)   That the SDD complies with the standards listed in subsection (A)
of this section, unless the applicant can demonstrate that one or more of the
standards is not applicable, or that a practical solution consistent with the
public interest has been achieved;
      (2)   That the SDD is consistent with the adopted goals, objectives and
policies outlined in the Vail Comprehensive Plan and compatible with the
development objectives of the town;
      (3)   That the SDD is compatible with and suitable to adjacent uses and
appropriate for the surrounding areas; and
      (4)   That the SDD promotes the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the town and promotes the coordinated and harmonious development of
the town in a manner that conserves and enhances its natural environment and
its established character as a resort and residential community of the highest
quality.
(Ord. 21(1988) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 26)
§ 12-9A-9 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Development standards including lot area, site dimensions, setbacks, height,
density control, site coverage, landscaping and parking shall be determined by
the Town Council as part of the approved development plan with consideration of
the recommendations of the Planning and Environmental Commission. Before the
Town Council approves development standards that deviate from the underlying
zone district, it should be determined that such deviation provides benefits to
the town that outweigh the adverse effects of such deviation. This
determination is to be made based on evaluation of the proposed Special
Development District’s compliance with the design criteria outlined in §
12-9A-8 of this article.
(Ord. 21(1988) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 26)
§ 12-9A-10 AMENDMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Minor amendments.
      (1)   Minor modifications consistent with the definition of “minor
amendment” in §
12-9A-2 of this article, may be approved by the Department of Community
Development. All minor modifications shall be indicated on a completely revised
development plan. Approved changes shall be noted, signed, dated and filed by
the Department of Community Development.
      (2)   Notification of a proposed minor amendment, and a report of staff
action of said request, shall be provided to all property owners within and
adjacent to the Special Development District that may be affected by the
amendment. Affected properties shall be as determined by the Department of
Community Development. Notifications shall be postmarked no later than five
days following staff action on the amendment request and shall include a brief
statement describing the amendment and the time and date of when the Planning
and Environmental Commission will be informed of the administrative action. In
all cases the report to the Planning and Environmental Commission shall be made
within 20 days from the date of the staff’s decision on the requested
amendment.
      (3)   Appeals of staff decisions may be filed by adjacent property
owners, owners of property within the Special Development District, the
applicant, Planning and Environmental Commission members or members of the Town
Council as outlined in §
12-3-3 of this title.
   (B)   Major amendments.
      (1)   Requests for major amendments to an approved Special Development
District shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures described in §
12-9A-4 of this article.
      (2)   Owners of all property requesting the amendment, or their agents or
authorized representatives, shall sign the application. Notification of the
proposed amendment shall be made to owners of all property adjacent to the
property requesting the proposed amendment, owners of all property adjacent to
the Special Development District, and owners of all property within the Special
Development District that may be affected by the proposed amendment (as
determined by the Department of Community Development). Notification procedures
shall be as outlined in §
12-3-6(C) of this title.
(Ord. 21(1988) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 26)
§ 12-9A-11 RECREATION AMENITIES TAX.
   A recreation amenities tax shall be assessed on all Special Development
Districts in accordance with Title 2, Chapter 5 of this code at a rate to be
determined by the Town Council. This rate shall be based on the rate of the
underlying zone district or the rate which most closely resembles the density
plan for the zone district, whichever is greater.
(Ord. 21(1988) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 26)
§ 12-9A-12 TIME REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Start of construction; completion. The developer must begin initial
construction of the Special Development District within three years from the
time of its final approval, and continue diligently toward the completion of
the project. If the Special Development District is to be developed in phases,
the developer must begin construction of subsequent phases within one year of
the completion of the previous phase.
   (B)   Approval voided. If the applicant does not begin and diligently work
toward the completion of the Special Development District or any stage of the
Special Development District within the time limits imposed by the preceding
subsection (A), the approval of said Special Development District shall be
void. The Planning and Environmental Commission and Town Council shall review
the Special Development District upon submittal of an application to
reestablish the Special Development District following the procedures outlined
in §
12-9A-4 of this article.
(Ord. 21(1988) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 26)
§ 12-9A-13 FEES.
   The filing fee for Special Development District applications and for major
and minor amendments to Special Development Districts shall be set by the Town
Council by resolution. Applications deemed by the Department of Community
Development to have significant design, land use or other issues which may have
a significant impact on the community may require review by consultants other
than town staff. Should a determination be made by the town staff that an
outside consultant is needed to review any Special Development District
application, said outside consultant shall be commissioned by the Department of
Community Development. The Department of Community Development shall estimate
the amount of money necessary to pay the outside consultant, and this amount
shall be forwarded to the town by the applicant at the time the Special
Development District application is submitted to the Department of Community
Development. Upon completion of the review of the application by the
consultant, any of the funds forwarded by the applicant for payment of the
consultant which have not been paid to the consultant, shall be returned to the
applicant. Expenses incurred by the town in excess of the amount forwarded by
the applicant shall be paid to the town by the applicant within 30 days of
notification by the town.
(Ord. 21(1988) § 1; Ord. 5(1991) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 26)
§ 12-9A-14 EXISTING SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit, replace or diminish the
requirements, responsibilities and specifications of Special Development
Districts 2 through 21. The Town Council specifically finds that said Special
Development Districts 2 through 21 shall remain in full force and effect, and
the terms, conditions and agreements contained therein shall continue to be
binding upon the applicants thereof and the town. These SDDs, if not commenced
at the present time, shall comply with §
12-9A-12 of this article.
(Ord. 21(1988) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 26)
ARTICLE 9B: PARKING (P) DISTRICT
Section
12-9B-1 Purpose
12-9B-2 Permitted uses
12-9B-3 Conditional uses
12-9B-4 Accessory uses
12-9B-5 Development standards
§ 12-9B-1 PURPOSE.
   The Parking District is intended to provide sites for private or public
unstructured off-street vehicle parking and conditionally to provide for
private or public off-street vehicle parking structures and private or public
parks and recreational facilities. The Parking District is intended to allow
such uses while ensuring adequate light, air, privacy and open space for each
valid use in adjacent areas.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 24.100; Ord. 2(1976) § 3; Ord. 4(1992) § 1)
§ 12-9B-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the P District:
   (A)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title; and
   (B)   Private or public unstructured off-street vehicle parking.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 23)
§ 12-9B-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of this
title:
   (A)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (B)   Major arcades;
   (C)   Parks and recreational facilities;
   (D)   Private or public off-street vehicle parking structures;
   (E)   Public uses, private office and commercial uses that are
transportation, tourist or town related and that are accessory to a parking
structure; and
   (F)   Temporary construction staging sites. For the purposes of this
section, a TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION STAGING SITE shall mean a site on which, for
a temporary period of time, construction materials, heavy construction
equipment, vehicles and construction trailers may be stored.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 23)
§ 12-9B-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   Minor arcade.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 24.400; Ord. 2(1976) § 3; Ord. 6(1982) § 2(b); Ord. 4(1992) §
1)
§ 12-9B-5 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Development standards in each of the following categories shall be as
prescribed by the Planning and Environmental Commission:
   (A)   Lot area and site dimensions;
   (B)   Setbacks;
   (C)   Building height;
   (D)   Density control;
   (E)   Site coverage;
   (F)   Landscaping and site development; and
   (G)   Parking and loading.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 23)
ARTICLE 9C: GENERAL USE (GU) DISTRICT
Section
12-9C-1 Purpose
12-9C-2 Permitted uses
12-9C-3 Conditional uses
12-9C-4 Accessory uses
12-9C-5 Development standards
12-9C-6 Additional development standards
§ 12-9C-1 PURPOSE.
   The General Use District is intended to provide sites for public and quasi-
public uses which, because of their special characteristics, cannot be
appropriately regulated by the development standards prescribed for other
zoning districts, and for which development standards especially prescribed for
each particular development proposal or project are necessary to achieve the
purposes prescribed in §
12-1-2 of this title and to provide for the public welfare. The General Use
District is intended to ensure that public buildings and grounds and certain
types of quasi-public uses permitted in the district are appropriately located
and designed to meet the needs of residents and visitors to Vail, to harmonize
with surrounding uses, and, in the case of buildings and other structures, to
ensure adequate light, air, open spaces, and other amenities appropriate to the
permitted types of uses.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 10; Ord. 29(2005) § 28)
§ 12-9C-2 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the GU District:
   (A)   Bicycle and pedestrian paths;
   (B)   Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment;
   (C)   Employee housing units, as further regulated by Chapter 13 of this
title; and
   (D)   Passive outdoor recreation areas, and open space.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 24)
§ 12-9C-3 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Generally. The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the GU
District, subject to issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 16 of this title:
      (1)   Child daycare centers;
      (2)   Equestrian trails;
      (3)   Golf courses;
      (4)   Healthcare facilities;
      (5)   Helipad for emergency and/or community use;
      (6)   Major arcades;
      (7)   Plant and tree nurseries, and associated structures, excluding the
sale of trees or other nursery products, grown, produced or made on the
premises;
      (8)   Public and private parks and active outdoor recreation areas,
facilities and uses;
      (9)   Public and private schools;
      (10)   Public and quasi-public indoor community facilities:
      (11)   Public buildings and grounds:
      (12)   Public parking structure:
      (13)   Public theaters, meeting rooms and convention facilities:
      (14)   Public tourist/guest service related facilities:
      (15)   Public transportation terminals:
      (16)   Public unstructured parking:
      (17)   Public utility and public service uses:
      (18)   Religious institutions:
      (19)   Seasonal structures or uses to accommodate educational,
recreational or cultural activities:
      (20)   Ski lifts, tows and runs; and
      (21)   Water and sewage treatment plants.
   (B)   Proximity to parking required. The following conditional uses shall be
permitted in accordance with the issuance of a conditional use permit, provided
such use is accessory to a parking structure:
      (1)   Offices;
      (2)   Restaurants:
      (3)   Ski and bike storage facilities:
      (4)   Sundries shops:
      (5)   Tourist/guest service related facilities; and
      (6)   Transit/shuttle services.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 10; Ord. 6(2000) § 2; Ord. 17(2001) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 28;
Ord. 1(2008) § 22; Ord. 12(2008) § 24)
§ 12-9C-4 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the GU District:
   (A)   Minor arcades; and
   (B)   Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted or
conditional uses, and necessary for the operation thereof, with the exception
of buildings.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 10; Ord. 29(2005) § 28)
§ 12-9C-5 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Prescribed by Planning And Environmental Commission. In the General
Use District, development standards in each of the following categories shall
be as prescribed by the Planning and Environmental Commission:
      (1)   Lot area and site dimensions:
      (2)   Setbacks:
      (3)   Building height:
      (4)   Density control:
      (5)   Site coverage:
      (6)   Landscaping and site development; and
      (7)   Parking and loading.
   (B)   Reviewed by Planning And Environmental Commission. Development
standards shall be proposed by the applicant as a part of a conditional use
permit application. Site specific development standards shall then be
determined by the Planning and Environmental Commission during the review of
the conditional use request in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 of
this title.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 10; Ord. 29(2005) § 28)
§ 12-9C-6 ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Additional regulations pertaining to site development standards and the
development of land in the General Use District are found in Chapter 14 of this
title.
(Ord. 21(1994) § 10; Ord. 29(2005) § 28)
CHAPTER 10: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Section
12-10-1 Purpose
12-10-2 Applicability
12-10-3 Existing facilities
12-10-4 Additions or changes
12-10-5 Construction and maintenance
12-10-6 Parking; off site and joint facilities
12-10-7 Standards; authority to adjust
12-10-8 Parking standards (Rep. by Ord. 22(1999) § 4)
12-10-9 Loading standards
12-10-10 Parking requirements schedules
12-10-11 Parking schedule applicability
12-10-12 Credit for multiple use parking facilities
12-10-13 Loading requirements schedule
12-10-14 Loading schedule applicability
12-10-15 Credit for multiple use loading facilities
12-10-16 Exempt areas; Parking Fund established
12-10-17 Leasing of parking spaces
12-10-18 Variances
12-10-19 Core areas identified
12-10-20 Special review provisions
12-10-21 Parking pay in lieu zones established
§ 12-10-1 PURPOSE.
   In order to alleviate progressively or to prevent traffic congestion and
shortage of on street parking areas, off-street parking and loading facilities
shall be provided incidental to new structures, enlargements of existing
structures or a conversion to a new use which requires additional parking under
this chapter. The number of parking spaces and loading berths prescribed in
this chapter shall be in proportion to the need for such facilities created by
the particular type of use. Off-street parking and loading areas are to be
designed, maintained and operated in a manner that will ensure their
usefulness, protect the public safety, and, where appropriate, insulate
surrounding land uses from their impact. In certain districts, all or a portion
of the parking spaces prescribed by this chapter are required to be within the
main building in order to avoid or to minimize the adverse visual impact of
large concentrations or exposed parking and of separate garage or carport
structures.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 14.100; Ord. 19(1976) § 12; Ord. 26(1982) § 1)
§ 12-10-2 APPLICABILITY.
   Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided for any new building,
for any addition or enlargement of an existing building or for any conversion
of uses which requires additional parking under this chapter.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 14.200; Ord. 19(1976) § 12; Ord. 26(1982) § 2)
§ 12-10-3 EXISTING FACILITIES.
   Off-street parking and loading facilities used for off-street parking and
loading on the effective date hereof shall not be reduced in capacity to less
than the number of spaces prescribed in this chapter, or reduced in area or
number to less than the minimum standards prescribed in this chapter.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 14.201; Ord. 19(1976) § 12; Ord. 26(1982) § 3)
§ 12-10-4 ADDITIONS OR CHANGES.
   For additions or enlargements of any existing building or change of use that
would increase the total number of parking spaces required, the additional
parking shall be required only for such addition, enlargement or change and not
for the entire building or use.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 14.202; Ord. 19(1976) § 12)
§ 12-10-5 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   All off-street parking and loading facilities required by this chapter shall
be constructed and maintained in accordance with the minimum standards for such
facilities prescribed by this chapter, and shall be maintained free of
accumulated snow or other materials preventing full use and occupancy of the
facilities in accordance with the intent of this chapter, except for temporary
periods of short duration in event of heavy or unusual snowfall.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 14.300)
§ 12-10-6 PARKING; OFF SITE AND JOINT FACILITIES.
   All parking and loading facilities required by this chapter shall be located
on the same site as the use for which they are required, provided that the Town
Council may permit off site or jointly used parking facilities if located
within 300 feet of the use served. Authority to permit off site or joint
parking facilities shall not extend to parking spaces required by this title to
be located within the main building on a site, but may extend to parking spaces
permitted to be unenclosed. Prior to permitting off site or joint parking
facilities, the Council shall determine that the proposed location of the
parking facilities and the prospective operation and maintenance of the
facilities will fulfill the purposes of this chapter, will be as usable and
convenient as parking facilities located on the site of the use, and will not
cause traffic congestion or an unsightly concentration of parked cars. The
Council may require such legal instruments as it deems necessary to ensure
unified operation and control of joint parking facilities or to ensure the
continuation of such facilities, including evidence of ownership, long term
lease or easement.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 14.400; Ord. 29(2005) § 29)
§ 12-10-7 STANDARDS; AUTHORITY TO ADJUST.
   Parking standards shall be those provided in Title 14 of this code. The
standards set out in Title 14 of this code shall govern the design and
construction of all off-street parking and loading facilities, whether required
by this chapter or provided in addition to the requirements of this chapter.
Minor adjustments of the dimensions prescribed in this chapter may be
authorized by the Administrator if consistent with generally recognized design
standards for off-street parking and loading facilities.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 14.500; Ord. 22(1999) § 3; Ord. 29(2005) § 29)
§ 12-10-8 PARKING STANDARDS.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed by Ord. 22(1999) § 4.
§ 12-10-9 LOADING STANDARDS.
   Standards for off-street loading shall be as follows.
   (A)   Location. All off-street loading berths shall be located on the same
lot as the use served, but not in the required front setback. Off-street
loading berths shall be provided in addition to required off-street parking and
shall not be located within accessways.
   (B)   Size. Each required loading berth shall be not less than 12 feet wide,
35 feet long, and if enclosed and/or covered, 14 feet high. Adequate turning
and maneuvering space shall be provided within the lot lines. At the Planning
and Environmental Commission’s discretion, variations to
the minimum loading berth dimension standards outlined above may be approved or
required, subject to the Planning and Environmental Commission finding that
such variation is necessary to prevent negative impacts to the public right-of-
way.
   (C)   Access. Accessways not less than ten feet or more than 20 feet in
width shall connect all loading berths to a street or alley. Such accessways
may coincide with accessways to parking facilities.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 14.502; Ord. 26(1982) § 5; Ord. 11(2003) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) §
29)
§ 12-10-10 PARKING REQUIREMENTS SCHEDULES.
   Off-street parking requirements shall be determined in accordance with the
following schedules.
   (A)   Schedule A applies to properties within Vail’s “Commercial Core Areas”
(as defined on the Town of Vail Core Area parking maps I and II, incorporated
by reference and available for inspection in the office of the Town Clerk):
Use Parking Requirements
Use                                     Parking Requirements
                                        0.7 space per accommodation unit.
                                        Hotels with conference facilities or
                                        meeting rooms 0.7 space per
Accommodation unit                      accommodation unit, plus 1.0 space per
                                        330 square feet of seating floor area
                                        devoted to conference facilities or
                                        meeting rooms
Banks and financial institutions        3.7 spaces per 1,000 square feet of net
                                        floor area
Dwelling unit                           1.4 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling unit with 1 attached           1.4 spaces per dwelling unit
accommodation unit
Dwelling unit with more than 1 attached 1.4 spaces per dwelling unit plus 0.7
accommodation unit                      space for each additional attached
                                        accommodation unit
Eating and drinking establishments      1.0 space per 250 square feet of
                                        seating floor area; minimum of 2 spaces
                                        0.7 space per fractional fee club unit.
                                        Hotels with conference facilities or
                                        meeting rooms 0.7 space per fractional
Fractional fee club unit                fee club unit, plus 1.0 space per 330
                                        square feet of seating floor area
                                        devoted to conference facilities or
                                        meeting rooms
Medical and dental offices              2.7 spaces per 1,000 square feet of net
                                        floor area
Other professional and business offices 2.7 spaces per 1,000 square feet of net
                                        floor area
Recreational facilities, public or      Parking requirements to be determined
private                                 by the Planning and Environmental
                                        Commission
Retail stores, personal services and    2.3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of net
repair shops                            floor area
Theaters, meeting rooms, conference     1.0 space per 165 square feet of
facilities                              seating floor area
                                        0.7 space per timeshare unit. Hotels
                                        with conference facilities or meeting
Timeshare units                         rooms 0.7 space per timeshare unit,
                                        plus 1.0 space per 330 square feet of
                                        seating floor area devoted to
                                        conference facilities or meeting rooms
                                        Parking requirements to be determined
Any use not listed                      by the Planning and Environmental
                                        Commission
 
   (B)   Schedule B applies to all properties outside Vail’s “Commercial Core
Areas” (as defined on the Town of Vail Core Area parking maps I and II,
incorporated by reference and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Clerk):
Use Parking Requirements
Use                                                                                 Parking
                                                                                    Requirements
                                                                                    0.4 space per
                                                                                    accommodation
                                                                                    unit, plus
                                                                                    0.1 space per
                                                                                    each 100
                                                                                    square feet
Accommodation unit                                                                  of gross
                                                                                    residential
                                                                                    floor area,
                                                                                    with a
                                                                                    maximum of
                                                                                    1.0 space per
                                                                                    unit
                                                                                    1 space per
Banks and financial institutions                                                    200 square
                                                                                    feet of net
                                                                                    floor area
                                                                                    1 space per
                                                                                    120 square
Eating and drinking establishments                                                  feet of
                                                                                    seating floor
                                                                                    area
                                                                                    0.7 space per
                                                                                    fractional
                                                                                    fee club
                                                                                    unit. Hotels
                                                                                    with
                                                                                    conference
                                                                                    facilities or
                                                                                    meeting rooms
                                                                                    0.7 space per
Fractional fee club unit                                                            fractional
                                                                                    fee club
                                                                                    unit, plus
                                                                                    1.0 space per
                                                                                    330 square
                                                                                    feet of
                                                                                    seating floor
                                                                                    area devoted
                                                                                    to conference
                                                                                    facilities or
                                                                                    meeting rooms
                                                                                    1 space per
                                                                                    patient bed,
                                                                                    plus 1.0
Hospitals                                                                           space per 150
                                                                                    square feet
                                                                                    of net floor
                                                                                    area
                                                                                    0.7 space per
Limited service lodge unit                                                          limited
                                                                                    service lodge
                                                                                    unit
                                                                                    1 space per
Medical and dental offices                                                          200 square
                                                                                    feet of net
                                                                                    floor area
Multiple-family dwellings
   If a dwelling unit’s gross residential floor area is 500 square feet or less1.5 spaces
   If a dwelling unit’s gross residential floor area is more than 500 square fe2 spaces
but less than 2,000 square feet
   If a dwelling unit’s gross residential floor area is 2,000 square feet or mo2.5 spaces
                                                                                    1 space per
Other professional and business offices                                             250 square
                                                                                    feet of net
                                                                                    floor area
                                                                                    1.0 space per
                                                                                    each 200
                                                                                    square feet
                                                                                    of net floor
                                                                                    area for the
                                                                                    first 1,000
                                                                                    square feet
Quick service food/convenience stores                                               of net floor
                                                                                    area: 1.0
                                                                                    space per 300
                                                                                    square feet
                                                                                    for net floor
                                                                                    area above
                                                                                    1,000 square
                                                                                    feet
                                                                                    Parking
                                                                                    requirements
                                                                                    to be
Recreational facilities, public or private                                          determined by
                                                                                    the Planning
                                                                                    and
                                                                                    Environmental
                                                                                    Commission
                                                                                    1 space per
                                                                                    each 300
Retail stores, personal services and repair shops                                   square feet
                                                                                    of net floor
                                                                                    area
Single-family and two-family dwellings
   If a dwelling unit’s gross residential floor area is less than 2,000 square 2 spaces
   If a dwelling unit’s gross residential floor area is 2,000 square feet or mo3 spaces
but less than 4,000 square feet
   If a dwelling unit’s gross residential floor area is 4,000 square feet or mo4 spaces
but less than 5,500 square feet
   If a dwelling unit’s gross residential floor area is 5,500 square feet or mo5 spaces
                                                                                    1 space per
                                                                                    120 square
Theaters, meeting rooms, convention facilities                                      feet of
                                                                                    seating floor
                                                                                    area
                                                                                    0.7 space per
                                                                                    timeshare
                                                                                    unit. Hotels
                                                                                    with
                                                                                    conference
                                                                                    facilities or
                                                                                    meeting rooms
                                                                                    0.7 space per
Timeshare units                                                                     timeshare
                                                                                    unit, plus
                                                                                    1.0 space per
                                                                                    330 square
                                                                                    feet of
                                                                                    seating floor
                                                                                    area devoted
                                                                                    to conference
                                                                                    facilities or
                                                                                    meeting rooms
                                                                                    Parking
                                                                                    requirements
                                                                                    to be
Any use not listed                                                                  determined by
                                                                                    the Planning
                                                                                    and
                                                                                    Environmental
                                                                                    Commission
 
(Ord. 8(1973) § 14.601; Ord. 26(1982) § 6; Ord. 9(2000) § 2; Ord. 14(2004) §
10; Ord. 18(2005) § 2; Ord. 24(2005) § 3; Ord. 2(2006) § 2; Ord. 2(2007) § 3)
§ 12-10-11 PARKING SCHEDULE APPLICABILITY.
   Where fractional requirements result from application of the schedule, the
fraction shall be raised to the next whole number.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 10)
§ 12-10-12 CREDIT FOR MULTIPLE USE PARKING FACILITIES.
   Where a single parking facility serves more than one use, the total parking
requirement for all uses may be reduced in accordance with the following
schedule:
Total Requirement Determined per §  Permitted Reduction to Determine Multiple
12-10-10                             Use Parking Requirement
Total Requirement Determined per §  Permitted Reduction to Determine Multiple
12-10-10                             Use Parking Requirement
1 to 100 spaces                      No reduction
101 to 200 spaces                    2.5%
201 to 300 spaces                    5.0%
301 to 400 spaces                    7.5%
401 to 500 spaces                    10.0%
501 to 600 spaces                    12.5%
601 to 700 spaces                    15.0%
701 to 800 spaces                    17.5%
801 to 900 spaces                    20.0%
901 to 1,000 spaces                  22.5%
Over 1,000 spaces                    25.0%
 
(Ord. 8(1973) § 14.603)
§ 12-10-13 LOADING REQUIREMENTS SCHEDULE.
   Off-street loading requirements shall be determined in accordance with the
following schedule:
 
Use                                     Loading Requirement
                                        1 loading berth for uses up to 75,000
Lodges with over 10,000 square feet     square feet total floor area, plus 1
total floor area, including accessory   additional berth for each 25,000 square
uses within the lodge                   feet total floor area in excess of
                                        75,000 square feet
                                        1 loading berth for uses up to 100,000
Multiple-family dwellings with over     square feet gross residential floor
20,000 square feet gross residential    area, plus 1 additional berth for each
floor area                              50,000 square feet gross residential
                                        floor area in excess of 100,000 square
                                        feet
Professional and business offices,
banks and financial institutions with   1 loading berth
over 10,000 square feet total floor
area
Retail stores, personal services,       1 loading berth for uses up to 10,000
repair shops, eating and drinking       square feet total floor area, plus 1
establishments and all other commercial additional berth for each 5,000 square
or service uses with over 2,000 square  feet total floor area in excess of
feet total floor area                   10,000 square feet
                                        Loading facilities requirement to be
                                        determined by the Planning and
Any use listed as a conditional use     Environmental Commission as a condition
                                        of the conditional use permit, but not
                                        less than the comparable requirement
                                        prescribed above
Any use not listed, if such use         1 loading berth, plus additional berths
required the recurring receipt or       prescribed by the Town Council upon
distribution of goods or equipment by   determination of need
truck
 
(Ord. 8(1973) § 14.701; Ord. 29(2005) § 29)
§ 12-10-14 LOADING SCHEDULE APPLICABILITY.
   Where fractional requirements result from application of the schedule, the
fraction shall be raised to the next whole number.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 10)
§ 12-10-15 CREDIT FOR MULTIPLE USE LOADING FACILITIES.
   Where a single off-street loading facility serves more than one use, the
number of off-street loading berths may be reduced in accordance with the
following schedule:
Total Requirement Determined per
§                               Reduced Requirement with Multiple Use
12-10-13
Total Requirement Determined per
§                               Reduced Requirement with Multiple Use
12-10-13
1 berth                          1 berth
2 berths                         1 berth
3 berths                         2 berths
4 berths                         2 berths
5 berths                         3 berths
6 berths                         3 berths
7 berths                         4 berths
8 berths                         4 berths
9 or more berths                 5 berths
 
(Ord. 8(1973) § 14.703)
§ 12-10-16 EXEMPT AREAS; PARKING FUND ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Criteria. The Town Council by resolution may exempt certain areas from
the off-street parking and loading requirements of this chapter if alternative
means will meet the off-street parking and loading needs of all uses in the
area. Prior to exempting any area from the off-street parking and loading
requirements, the Council shall determine the following:
      (1)   That the exemption is in the interests of the area to be exempted
and in the interests of the town at large;
      (2)   That the exemption will not confer any special privilege or benefit
upon properties or improvements in the area to be exempted, which privilege or
benefit is not conferred on similarly situated properties elsewhere in the
town;
      (3)   That the exemption will not be detrimental to adjacent properties
or improvements in the vicinity of the area to be exempted; and
      (4)   That suitable and adequate means will exist for provision of
public, community, group or common parking facilities; for provision of
adequate loading facilities and for a system for distribution and pick up of
goods; and for financing, operating and maintaining such facilities; and that
such parking, loading and distribution facilities shall be fully adequate to
meet the existing and projected needs generated by all uses in the area to be
exempted.
   (B)   Parking Fund. For projects located within the town’s “parking pay-in-
lieu” zones (as identified on the town’s official “parking pay-in-lieu zone”
maps, incorporated by reference) property owners or applicants shall be
required to contribute to the Town Parking Fund, hereby established for the
purpose of meeting the demand and requirements for vehicle parking to the
extent outlined in applicable master plan documents and the zoning regulations.
At such time as any property owner or other applicant proposes to develop or
redevelop a parcel of property within an exempt area which would require
parking and/or loading areas, the owner or applicant shall pay to the town the
parking fee hereinafter required:
      (1)   The Parking Fund established in this section shall receive and
disburse funds for the purpose of conducting parking studies or evaluations,
construction of parking facilities, the maintenance of parking facilities, the
payment of bonds or other indebtedness for parking facilities, and
administrative services relating to parking;
      (2)   The parking fee to be paid by any owner or applicant shall be
determined by the Town Council;
      (3)   If any parking funds have been paid in accordance with this section
and if subsequent thereto a special or general improvement district is formed
and assessments levied for the purpose of paying for parking improvements, the
payer shall be credited against the assessment with the amount previously paid;
      (4)   The parking fee to be paid by any owner or applicant is hereby
determined to be $18,597.80 per space for residential uses (including, but not
limited to, accommodation units, timeshares and fractional fee units). There is
no pay in lieu fee for commercial uses. This fee shall be automatically
adjusted annually by the percentage the consumer price index of the City of
Denver has increased or decreased over each successive year;
      (5)   For additions or enlargements of any existing building or change of
use that would increase the total number of parking spaces required, an
additional parking fee will be required only for such addition, enlargement or
change and not for the entire building or use. No refunds will be paid by the
town to the applicant or owner;
      (6)   (a)   The owner or applicant has the option of paying the total
parking fee at the time of building permit or paying over a five-year period.
If the latter course is taken, the first payment shall be paid on or before the
date the building permit is issued. Four more annual payments will be due to
the town on the anniversary of the building permit. Interest of 10% per annum
shall be paid by the applicant on the unpaid balance.
         (b)   If the owner or applicant does choose to pay the fee over a
period of time, he or she shall be required to sign a promissory note which
describes the total fee due, the schedule of payments, and the interest due.
Promissory note forms are available at the offices of the Department of
Community Development.
      (7)   When a fractional number of spaces results from the application of
the requirements schedule (§
12-10-10 of this chapter) the parking fee will be calculated using that
fraction. This applies only to the calculation of the parking fee and not for
on site requirements.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 14.800; Ord. 47(1979) § 1; Ord. 30(1982) § 1; Ord. 6(1991) § 1;
Ord. 10(1994) § 1; Ord. 3(1999) § 11; Ord. 4(2001) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 29)
§ 12-10-17 LEASING OF PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   General. Except as expressly provided in this section, no person shall
lease, rent, convey or restrict the use of any parking space to any person
other than a tenant, occupant or user of the building for which the space is
required.
   (B)   Eligibility. A parking space may be leased in accordance with the
following:
      (1)   Zone Districts. Any person who owns or manages private parking
spaces located in the following zone districts may lease parking spaces in
accordance with this section: Commercial Core 1; Commercial Core 2; Commercial
Core 3; High Density Multiple-Family; Vail Village Townhouse; Public
Accommodation; Public Accommodation 2; General Use; Commercial Service Center;
Arterial Business; Ski Base Recreation; Ski Base Recreation 2; Lionshead Mixed
Use 1; Lionshead Mixed Use 2; Parking; any Special Development District in
which one of the foregoing zone districts is the underlying zone district; and
Special Development District with no underlying zone district, in compliance
with any parking restrictions otherwise imposed by the Special Development
District;
      (2)   Prohibited areas. The leasing of parking spaces is prohibited in
any area where vehicle access to said parking spaces is over or through an
established pedestrian mall;
      (3)   Common areas. The leasing of parking spaces on commonly owned
property, including without limitation common areas within a common interest
community, requires the written approval of the applicable homeowners’ or
condominium association, a copy of which shall be provided to the town prior to
leasing any parking spaces;
      (4)   Duration. Leasing is permitted for short term parking only, and
long-term storage of vehicles is prohibited; and
      (5)   Rental agencies. Vehicle rental agencies may lease parking spaces
only in the Commercial Core 3 Zone District, with a maximum of one lease and a
maximum of 15 parking spaces per site.
   (C)   Required parking. Parking required by this title for any use may not
be satisfied by the leasing of parking spaces under this section.
   (D)   Signage. Any person leasing parking spaces under this section shall
post adequate signage on the premises to ensure that the leased parking spaces
are used and occupied in accordance with the applicable lease agreement. At
least one on site sign shall include the name and telephone number of the
person to contact concerning parking disputes.
   (E)   Contact information. Any person who accepts electronic reservations
for the leasing of parking spaces pursuant to this section shall include on the
reservation page a contact name and telephone number in case of any problems
with the leased parking spaces.
(Ord. 15(2018) § 1)
§ 12-10-18 VARIANCES.
   Variances from the provisions of this chapter shall follow the procedures
set forth in Chapter 17 of this title.
(Ord. 50(1978) § 11; Ord. 9(2000) § 3)
§ 12-10-19 CORE AREAS IDENTIFIED.
   Tables 1 and 2 (core area parking maps I and II, respectively, attached to
the ordinance codified herein, and available for inspection in the office of
the Town Clerk) shall be used to identify properties within Vail’s commercial
core areas for parking purposes.
(Ord. 9(2000) § 4; Ord. 15(2000) § 1)
§ 12-10-20 SPECIAL REVIEW PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
12-10-18 of this chapter, the Planning and Environmental Commission may approve
a reduction to the number of required spaces specified in §
12-10-10 of this chapter, provided a report documenting the presence of unique
parking characteristics is provided by a qualified consultant and the following
findings are made by the Planning and Environmental Commission:
      (1)   The parking demand will be less than the requirements identified in
§
12-10-10 of this chapter;
      (2)   The probable long term use of the building or structure, based on
its design, will not generate additional parking demand;
      (3)   The use or activity is part of a demonstrated permanent program
(including, but not limited to, “rideshare” programs, shuttle service or
staggered work shifts) intended to reduce parking demand that has been
incorporated into the project’s final approved development plan; and
      (4)   Proximity or availability of alternative modes of transportation
(including, but not limited to, public transit or shuttle services) is
significant and integral to the nature of the use or business activity.
   (B)   In reaching a decision, the Planning and Environmental Commission
shall consider survey data submitted by a qualified transportation planning or
engineering consultant. Projects under “special review” are subject to
additional scrutiny by the Planning and Environmental Commission after
development plan approval if it is deemed necessary to verify continued
compliance with the above listed criteria. The maximum allowable reduction in
the number of required spaces shall not exceed 25% of the total number required
under §
12-10-10 of this chapter.
(Ord. 9(2000) § 5; Ord. 29(2005) § 29)
§ 12-10-21 PARKING PAY IN LIEU ZONES ESTABLISHED.
   The “parking pay in lieu zone” maps (attached to the ordinance codified
herein, and available for inspection in the office of the Town Clerk) shall be
used to identify properties within the parking pay in lieu zones referenced in
§
12-10-16 of this chapter. Properties will be required to comply with the
amended program upon demolition/rebuild. Properties not included in the pay in
lieu zones may apply to the Planning and Environmental Commission for review if
the provision of on site parking on the property would circumvent relevant
objectives of applicable comprehensive plan documents including, but not
limited to, parking, pedestrianization, and vehicle penetration elements.
(Ord. 4(2001) § 3; Ord. 29(2005) § 29)
CHAPTER 11: DESIGN REVIEW
Section
12-11-1 Purpose
12-11-2 Definitions and rules of construction
12-11-3 Design approval
12-11-4 Material to be submitted; procedure
12-11-5 Design guidelines
12-11-6 Park design guidelines
12-11-7 Design review fee
12-11-8 Performance bond
12-11-9 Administrative policies (Rep. by Ord. 2(2003) §1)
12-11-10 Appeal to Town Council (Rep. by Ord. 2(2003) §1)
12-11-11 Enforcement; inspection
12-11-12 Lapse of design review approval
§ 12-11-1 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Attractive attributes recognized. Vail is a town with a unique natural
setting, internationally known for its natural beauty, alpine environment and
the compatibility of human-made structures with the environment. These
characteristics have caused a significant number of visitors to come to Vail
with many visitors eventually becoming permanent residents participating in
community life.
   (B)   Area character protection. These factors constitute an important
economic base for the town, both for those who earn their living here and for
those who view the town as a precious physical possession. The Town Council
finds that new development and redevelopment can have a substantial impact on
the character of an area in which it is located. Some harmful effects of one
land use upon another can be prevented through zoning, subdivision controls and
building codes. Other aspects of development are more subtle and less amenable
to exact rules put into operation without regard to specific development
proposals. Among these are the general form of the land before and after
development, the spatial relationships of structures and open spaces to land
uses within the vicinity and the town, and the appearance of buildings and open
spaces as they contribute to the area as it is being developed and redeveloped.
In order to provide for the timely exercise of judgment in the public interest
in the evaluation of the design of new development and redevelopment, the Town
Council has created a Design Review Board (DRB) and design criteria.
   (C)   Design review. Therefore, in order to preserve the natural beauty of
the town and its setting, to protect the welfare of the community, to maintain
the values created in the community, to protect and enhance land and property,
for the promotion of health, safety and general welfare in the community, and
to attain the objectives set out in this section; the improvement or alteration
of open space, exterior design of all new development, and all modifications to
existing development shall be subject to design review as specified in this
chapter.
   (D)   Guidelines. It is the intent of these guidelines to leave as much
design freedom as possible to the individual designer while at the same time
maintaining the remarkable natural beauty of the area by creating structures
which are designed to complement both their individual sites and surroundings.
The objectives of design review shall be as follows:
      (1)   Recognize the interdependence of the public welfare and aesthetics,
and to provide a method by which this interdependence may continue to benefit
its citizens and visitors;
      (2)   Allow for the development of public and private property which is
in harmony with the desired character of the town as defined by the guidelines
herein provided;
      (3)   Prevent the unnecessary destruction or blighting of the natural
landscape;
      (4)   Ensure that the architectural design, location, configuration
materials, colors and overall treatment of built up and open spaces have been
designed so that they relate harmoniously to the natural landforms and native
vegetation, the town’s overall appearance, with surrounding development and
with officially approved plans or guidelines, if any, for the areas in which
the structures are proposed to be located; and
      (5)   Protect neighboring property owners and users by making sure that
reasonable provision has been made for such matters as pedestrian and vehicular
traffic, surface water drainage, sound and sight buffers, the preservation of
light and air, and those aspects of design not adequately covered by other
regulations which may have substantial effects on neighboring land uses;
      (6)   Balance the design and aesthetic desires of the community and the
economy of Vail as an international resort destination with the need to protect
the community from the risk of wildland fire.
(Ord. 39(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 30; Ord. 19(2019) § 3)
§ 12-11-2 DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Basis for meanings. Any words, terms or phrases used in this design
review guide shall be defined and interpreted in accordance with the
definitions contained in §
12-2-2 of this title, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning
was intended. If the context is unclear, the matter will be referred to the
Design Review Board for final determination.
   (B)   Mandatory, discretionary distinction. The distinction made between
those items contained within this chapter that are mandatory and those that are
discretionary is that statements which are mandatory are prefaced by the word
“shall”, and the statements or guidelines which are discretionary (or merely
suggestions) are prefaced by the words “should” or “may”. In all instances, any
particular or specific controls over the general.
(Ord. 39(1983) § 1)
§ 12-11-3 DESIGN APPROVAL.
   (A)   Scope. No person shall commence removal of vegetation, site
preparation, building construction or demolition, dumping of material upon a
site, sign erection, exterior alteration or enlargement of an existing
structure, paving, fencing or other improvements of open space within the
corporate limits of the town unless design approval has been granted as
prescribed in this chapter. The addition of plant materials to existing
landscaping, gardening and landscape maintenance shall be exempt from this
provision, but should still comply with the Vail Fire and Emergency Services
Fire-Resistant Landscaping guidelines.
   (B)   Violation. It shall be a violation of this chapter and the building
permit for any person to commence, continue or complete work that has not
received design approval as prescribed in this chapter and/or is not in
conformity with the plans approved and authorized by the Administrator and/or
the Design Review Board and the Building Official.
   (C)   Nonconforming sites and structures; effect of design guidelines.
      (1)   Buildings and sites which are not in conformance with the design
guidelines, due to annexations or changes in code provisions (i.e., legal
nonconformities), shall be required to conform with the design guidelines when
allowable gross residential floor area (GRFA) (the GRFA that is permitted by
the density control section of various zone districts), gross floor area,
commercial floor area or garage area credit is added to any existing structure
or site. Nothing in this code shall be deemed to retroactively require
conformance with design guidelines for existing buildings or sites unless
specifically required by this code.
      (2)   From the effective date of July 21, 1998, there shall be permitted
a one-time exclusion from this provision for an expansion to single-family,
two-family and primary/secondary residential dwelling units. This one-time
exclusion shall be allowed for a single expansion of 500 square feet or less of
allowable GRFA or garage area credit per dwelling unit. In which case,
structures may be expanded without requiring upgrades to entire structures and
sites to conform to the design guidelines. The addition itself, however, shall
conform to the design guidelines. An expansion which is greater than 500 square
feet, or any subsequent expansion to a structure, regardless of size, shall
require full compliance of the dwelling unit with the design guidelines.
      (3)   General maintenance and upkeep of a property shall continue to be
required regardless of the amount of floor area added to a structure. The one-
time exclusion noted above shall not preclude the Design Review Board, pursuant
to the design guidelines, from requiring landscaping and other improvements
necessary to buffer or mitigate development impacts associated with the
expansion/remodel.
      (4)   Expansions made pursuant to §
12-15-5 of this title shall require full compliance of the entire dwelling unit
with the design guidelines. Interior conversion additions pursuant to §
12-15-4 of this title shall not trigger the requirement for upgrading sites and
structures to fully comply with the design guidelines, unless it can be
classified as a “demo/rebuild”, pursuant to §
12-2-2 of this title.
(Ord. 39(1983) § 1; Ord. 10(1998) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 30; Ord. 19(2019) § 4,
Attachment B; Ord. 7(2022) § 1)
§ 12-11-4 MATERIAL TO BE SUBMITTED; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Preapplication conference. Prior to the formal filing of an
application for design approval, the applicant should confer with the
Department of Community Development to obtain information and guidance. The
purpose of such a conference is to permit the applicant and the staff to review
informally the proposal before substantial commitments of time and money are
made. The Department of Community Development shall indicate on the application
form appropriate staff with which the applicant shall confer. Topics of
discussion shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Characteristics of the site and surrounding areas, including its
location, significant natural and human-made features with particular attention
to natural hazard areas, the size and accessibility of the site, surrounding
development and land use, and existing zoning;
      (2)   The nature of the development proposed, including land use types
and their densities; the placement and design of proposed buildings and other
improvements of the site, the location, type, and treatment of open space
areas, the preservation of natural features, proposed parking areas and
internal circulation system, the total ground coverage of paved areas, and
structures;
      (3)   Community policy considerations including the review process and
likely conformity of the proposed development with the policies and regulations
of the town;
      (4)   Applicable regulations, review procedures and submission
requirements; and
      (5)   For certain low impact applications, such as, but not limited to,
minor remodels, the staff shall assist the applicant in determining applicable
regulations and shall specify submission requirements which may be waived.
   (B)   Conceptual design review.
      (1)   Submittal requirements. The owner or authorized agent of any
project requiring design approval may submit plans for conceptual review by the
Design Review Board to the Department of Community Development. The purpose of
a conceptual review is to give the applicant a basic understanding with respect
to the design concept and the compatibility of a proposal with the design
guidelines contained within this chapter. This procedure is recommended mainly
for those applications of a higher impact than single-family and two-family
residences although projects of that nature shall not be excluded the
opportunity to request a conceptual design review. The following information
shall be submitted for a conceptual review ten days prior to a scheduled Design
Review Board meeting:
         (a)   A conceptual site and landscape plan at a minimum scale of one
inch equals 20 feet;
         (b)   Conceptual elevations and exterior materials, and a description
of the character of the proposed structure or structures;
         (c)   Sufficient information to show that the proposal complies with
the development standards of the zone district in which the project is to be
located (i.e., square footage total, site coverage calculations, number of
parking spaces and the like);
         (d)   Application form. If the property is owned in common
(condominium association) or located within a development lot, the written
approval of the other property owner, owners or applicable owners’ association
is required. This can be either in the form of a letter of approval or
signature on the application. Such approval shall not be necessary if the
application is solely for installation of a renewable energy generation device
as allowed by C.R.S. § 38-30-168, as amended; and
         (e)   Planning and Environmental Commission and/or Town Council
approval if required.
      (2)   Staff; Board procedure.
         (a)   Upon receipt of an application for conceptual design review the
Department of Community Development shall review the submitted materials for
general compliance with the appropriate requirements of the zoning regulations.
If the proposal is in basic compliance with the zoning regulations the project
shall be forwarded to the Design Review Board for conceptual review. If the
application is not generally in compliance with the zoning regulations the
application and submittal materials shall be returned to the applicant with a
written explanation of the Department of Community Development’s findings.
         (b)   The Design Review Board shall review the application and
supporting material that has been submitted for a conceptual review in order to
determine whether or not the project generally complies with the design
guidelines, and forward comments concerning the design to the applicant. No
vote of the Design Review Board will be required unless requested by the
applicant. The property owner or his or her representative shall be present at
the Design Review Board hearing.
   (C)   Preliminary and final design review.
      (1)   Material submitted to Administrator. The owner or authorized agent
of any project requiring design approval as prescribed by this chapter shall
submit for final design approval all of the following material to the
Administrator, unless the Administrator determines within five days of a
written request for such determination that some of the following material may
be excluded:
         (a)   Survey. A topographic survey representative of existing
conditions stamped by a surveyor licensed within the state at a scale of one
inch equals 20 feet or larger of the site with contour intervals of not more
than two feet. Existing trees or groups of trees having trunks with diameters
of four inches or more at one foot above natural grade, rock outcroppings and
other significant natural features such as avalanche areas, 100-year floodplain
and slopes of 40% or more shall be shown, if applicable. The survey shall
include ties to an existing bench mark (either a USGS landmark or sewer
invert), property lines showing distances and basis of bearing, and all
easements;
         (b)   Title report. A preliminary title report;
         (c)   Drainage plan. A drainage plan shall be prepared. For all
developments this study shall include a contour map showing all existing and
proposed watercourses, including the seasonal course limits of points of
departure from the development. An indication of the limits of the 100-year
floodplain shall be plotted on the contour map as well as any revised
floodplains. The drainage plan shall also indicate the location and types of
structures that will be necessary to handle the quantities of water evidenced
on the site;
         (d)   Site plan. A site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 20
feet or larger, showing existing and finished grades, the existing and proposed
layout of buildings and other structures including decks, patios, canopies,
fences and walls. The site plan shall show the locations of landscaped areas,
service areas, storage areas, pedestrian walks, driveways with percent slope
and spot elevations, off- street parking and loading areas, all retaining walls
with spot elevations, and the proposed elevations of the top of roof ridges.
The site plan shall indicate the locations of ingress and egress and the
directions of traffic flow into and out of as well as within parking and
loading areas, the location of each parking space and loading berth, and areas
for turning and maneuvering vehicles. The site plan shall show exact locations
of all utilities including existing sources and proposed service lines from
sources to the structures. The site plan shall designate proposed limits of
construction activity;
         (e)   Utility verification form. A utility verification form signed by
each utility verifying location of service and availability;
         (f)   Landscape plan. A landscape plan drawn at a scale of one inch
equals 20 feet or larger. The landscape plan shall show locations of existing
trees or groups of trees having trunks with diameters of four inches or more at
one foot above natural grade that are proposed to be removed. Shrubs and other
native plants proposed to be removed shall be indicated. The landscape plan
shall show trees and other native plants proposed to be retained and methods to
be utilized for the purpose of protecting existing vegetation, the location and
design of proposed landscaped areas, irrigation systems, the varieties and
sizes of plant materials to be planted therein, and the location and design of
swimming pool areas, patios, play areas, recreation facilities and other usable
open space. The landscape plan shall show the mature canopy of trees and shrubs
after 15 years of growth. The landscape plan shall be accompanied by a
landscape materials list specifying size and quantity of plant materials and a
report of the condition of the existing vegetation upon the site. The landscape
plan shall include sufficient detail to provide a reliable basis for estimating
the amount of a performance bond guaranteeing installation and maintenance of
the improvement if required by the town;
         (g)   Architectural plans. Preliminary architectural plans drawn at a
scale of one-eighth inch equals one foot or larger, including floor plans
labeled and drawn in sufficient detail to permit determination of whether all
requirements of this title based on floor area will be met. Architectural plans
shall include all elevations of proposed structures as they will appear on
completion. All elevations shall indicate both existing and finished grades.
One or more perspective sketches, a scale model, photographic overlays or other
similar techniques shall be submitted, as necessary, to illustrate the overall
appearance of the building and site development features in relation to
adjacent properties in the neighborhood. All exterior surfacing materials and
colors shall be specified, and samples of each, with proposed finish shall be
submitted;
         (h)   Sign regulations compliance. Scale drawings, plans renderings,
photographs or other information required by the sign ordinance codified in
Title 11 of this code, showing in detail design, materials, and colors and
specifying the method of illumination. Locations of proposed signs shall be
indicated by a numbering system or other clearly comprehensible system of
reference to the site plan prescribed in subsection (C)(1)(d) of this section.
Upon request of the Administrator, samples of sign materials shall be
submitted;
         (i)   Erosion and revegetation plan. Erosion control and revegetation
landscaping plans.
            1.   Plan required. In all developments involving two or more
acres, an erosion control plan will be required. For developments involving
less than two acres, an erosion control plan may be required by the Department
of Community Development, based upon conditions of slope and soil stability.
            2.   Control measures. The erosion control plan shall contain
control measures sufficient to prevent the loss by erosion of no more than
three tons of soil per acre per year. These standards may be met through the
use of physical measures as detention ponds, grassed waterways and filtration
galleries, or by nonstructural means.
            3.   Review of plan. The Department of Community Development shall
review and approve all erosion control plans and shall maintain a list of
erosion control practices, both structural and nonstructural.
            4.   Revegetation. Revegetation shall be an integral part of the
erosion control plan. Topsoil shall be saved during construction and used for
revegetation of disturbed areas.
            5.   Revegetation landscaping. Such plan shall be required of any
applicant proposing to remove or disturb existing vegetation. Potential damage
to existing landscaping/vegetation shall be adequate reason for requiring a
revegetation plan. At a minimum, plans submitted under this subsection (C)
shall include revegetation of land disturbed by development and construction
activity. The Department of Community Development shall establish and maintain
a list of revegetation best management practices.
            6.   Additional requirements. In addition to the above
requirements, the Department of Community Development may require any or all of
the following:
               a.   Timing of disturbance;
               b.   Disturbed area controls;
               c.   Stabilization during disturbance;
               d.   Monitoring during disturbance;
               e.   Postdisturbance monitoring;
               f.   Water quality impact report; and
               g.   Drainage study.
         (j)   Stormwater quality permits. Refer to Title 14, Chapter 6,
“Grading Standards”, of this code;
         (k)   Phasing plan. If a project is to be built in phases the
applicant shall submit a site plan of the proposed project indicating the
location and timing of each phase of the project, areas to be utilized as
construction staging areas for each phase, and the limits of construction
activity for each phase;
         (l)   Application form. If the property is owned in common
(condominium association) or located within a development lot, the written
approval of the other property owner, owners or applicable owners’ association
is required. This can be either in the form of a letter of approval or
signature on the application. Such approval shall not be necessary if the
application is solely for installation of a renewable energy generation device
as allowed by C.R.S. § 38-30-168, as amended; and
         (m)   Lighting plan. An outdoor lighting plan shall be submitted
separately from the site plan or landscape plan, and shall show the location,
the height above grade, the type of illumination (such as incandescent,
halogen, high pressure sodium and the like), the source lumens and the luminous
area for each light source which is proposed. The applicant shall provide
documentation that the lights meet the standards set forth in §
12-11-5 of this chapter. In addition to locating this information graphically
on a plan, the applicant shall provide the information on the application form
provided by the Department of Community Development.
      (2)   Staff or Design Review Board procedure. The Department of Community
Development shall check all material submitted for design review for compliance
with the applicable provisions of the zoning regulations, subdivision
regulations and with this subsection (C) (the submittal requirements of this
section as outlined above). If the application is found to be in compliance
with the applicable provisions of the zoning regulations, subdivision
regulations and this subsection (C), the project shall either be placed upon
the agenda of the next appropriately scheduled Design Review Board meeting in
accordance with the required application submittal deadlines on file in the
Department of Community Development, or be reviewed by the Administrator in
accordance with subsection (C)(3), “Staff Approval”, of this section. If the
application is found not to be in compliance with the applicable provisions of
the zoning regulations and this subsection (C), the application and materials
shall be returned to the applicant with an explanation of the Administrator’s
findings. The Administrator may require any additional items from the applicant
as may be necessary for complete and proper design review.
         (a)   The Administrator or the Design Review Board shall review the
application and supporting material, and if the design of the project is found
to comply with the objectives and design guidelines of this chapter, the
Administrator or the Design Review Board shall approve the design of the
project, documenting such approval in writing and noting any conditions of
approval. If additional items are needed, as specified herein, to determine
whether the project will comply with the purpose statement and design
guidelines of this chapter, the Design Review Board may give preliminary
approval or table the project until the next regularly scheduled meeting. If
the project is tabled or if preliminary approval is given, the Board shall
specify the conditions and additional and/or modified materials which must be
submitted by the applicant to the Design Review Board or to the Administrator,
including any changes in the design of the project. The applicant may also
table the application to a future meeting for any reason.
         (b)   If the project is found to conflict with the design guidelines,
the Administrator or the Design Review Board shall disapprove the design of the
project. Any disapproval shall be in writing and shall specifically describe
the design guidelines with which the design of the project does not comply and
the manner of noncompliance.
         (c)   Following the final review of an application by the Design
Review Board at a public meeting, the Design Review Board shall have 30 days to
consider and approve or deny an application. The time for action may be
extended at the request of the applicant.
         (d)   If changes in the design of the project are requested, the
Design Review Board shall approve, disapprove or request further changes within
30 days of the meeting at which the Design Review Board receives the changes
unless an extension is agreed to by the applicant.
         (e)   The applicant or his or her authorized representative shall be
present at the Design Review Board meeting.
      (3)   Staff approval.
         (a)   The Administrator may approve any of the following applications:
            1.   Any application to modify an existing building that does not
significantly change the existing planes of the building and is generally
consistent with the architectural design, including, but not limited to,
exterior building finish materials (e.g., stonework, siding, roof materials,
paint or stain), exterior lighting, canopies or awnings, fences, antennas,
satellite dishes, windows, skylights, minor commercial facade improvements, and
other similar modifications;
            2.   Any application for an addition to an existing building that
is consistent with the architectural design, materials and colors of the
building, and approval has been received by an authorized member of a
condominium association, if applicable;
            3.   Any application to remove or modify the existing vegetation or
landscaping upon a site; and
            4.   Any application for site improvements or modifications
including, but not limited to, driveway modifications, site grading, site
walls, installation of accessory structures or recreational facilities.
         (b)   In the above specified cases, the Administrator may review and
approve the application, approve the application with certain modifications,
deny the application, or refer the application to the Design Review Board for
decision. All other applications shall be referred to the Design Review Board.
(Ord. 39(1983) § 1; Ord. 12(1988) § 1; Ord. 9(1993) § 6; Ord. 9(1996) § 6; Ord.
24(2000) § 2; Ord. 3(2005) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 30; Ord. 27(2016) § 2; Ord. 19
(2019) § 5; Ord. 2(2023) § 1)
§ 12-11-5 DESIGN GUIDELINES.
   The design guidelines for all development are contained in Title 14 of this
code.
(Ord. 22(1999) § 5; Ord. 29(2005) § 30)
§ 12-11-6 PARK DESIGN GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Purpose. These guidelines shall be used by the Design Review Board in
reviewing any proposals for the development of town park land. The guidelines
shall be used in conjunction with the general design review guidelines found in
Title 14 of this code. It is the intent of these guidelines to leave as much
design freedom as possible to the individual designer while at the same time
encouraging park development that will complement the natural beauty of our
park land. The purpose of the guidelines is to provide continuity in the
character of the parks which will be developed over many years. The guidelines
will provide consistent design criteria to maintain the quality of town parks
through all phases of development.
   (B)   Building materials and design.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Natural materials are strongly encouraged in park construction.
Materials and detailing must complement the park’s environment as well as be
functional and attractive.
         (b)   Materials and designs should be chosen that are economical to
maintain.
      (2)   Stone. Natural rock should be used for architectural features such
as exposed building walls and small retaining walls. Sandy gray and brown
colors are encouraged, as they blend in with the natural environment.
Construction should minimize exposed mortar, and detailing should reflect
concern for local climatic conditions.
      (3)   Pedestrian walks; plazas. Impervious surfacing may be used to
emphasize important features or pedestrian areas. Natural materials and colors
are encouraged, as they blend in well with wood, stone and plant materials.
Asphalt is discouraged except when necessary for bike paths and parking areas.
      (4)   Children’s play areas. Children’s play areas are to be designed
with challenge and safety in mind. Multilevel play structures, tunnels and
other climbing apparatus are to be designed to excite and to encourage free
expression. Native landscaping materials shall be incorporated into the play
areas to soften and blend into the environment. Plant materials shall be
provided for the enclosure of the play areas and for summer shading. Play areas
shall be oriented to take advantage of warm winter exposure and to utilize
natural buffers from the wind.
      (5)   Visual impact.
         (a)   Structures, shelters or other site buildings shall be designed
in a low profile or be set into slope areas to reduce their vertical dominance
upon the site.
         (b)   Major architectural structures shall be designed and accented to
attract visitors without becoming a distracting visual element to other
visitors of the park or to adjacent developments.
   (C)   Landscaping; site planning.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Plantings should be used to soften the edge between developed
and natural park areas and to heavily screen conflicting adjacent uses. Such
plantings unify developed and natural areas as well as provide a protective
buffer where the adjacent land uses conflict with recreational activities. As
an example, gently sloping lawns are desirable for picnic areas and open field
play. Irrigated and manicured lawn areas can transition into natural areas
through the use of native grasses and shrubs. Fences shall be discouraged
between active and passive areas.
         (b)   Noise generating and active play areas should be integrated
together and placed away from passive or natural areas. Needed service
facilities, such as restrooms, drinking fountains and the like, should be
located in or adjacent to activities with a high user demand.
      (2)   Views. Plantings and site work should be used to direct views by
framing interesting and attractive features such as distant mountain ranges,
ponds or Gore Creek. Visual screens of plant materials may be used to close off
undesired views such as the interstate, frontage roads or neighboring
development.
      (3)   Accent plantings and materials. In areas of special interest or
activity, and in pedestrian areas, plantings should be used to provide color,
texture, form and scent to highlight and emphasize the special character of
these places. Horizontal ground plane textures such as native shrubs, ground
covers, colored pavers and smooth boulders may also be used to complement the
environment.
      (4)   Lighting. If site lighting is deemed appropriate, the lighting
should provide for clear visibility while at the same time eliminating any
glare within the park or on adjacent properties. Lighting fixtures shall be as
subtle as possible so that they blend in with the natural park setting. A
lighting plan designating location and appropriate styles of lighting shall be
designed for each park that requires site lighting.
      (5)   Signage. Any signs within the park shall conform to a unified park
signage program. Private signs are prohibited from the park.
   (D)   Access and parking.
      (1)   Pedestrian walks and bike paths.
         (a)   Pedestrian walks and bike paths shall be provided in the areas
of developed facilities and circulation routes. Walks and bike paths shall be
accessible to the physically handicapped and should be constructed of a hard
material.
         (b)   Pathways through natural areas shall be placed where little
grade change is required. Surface materials which provide a hard surface and
have a natural appearance should be encouraged.
      (2)   Parking.
         (a)   Parking areas shall be sensitively planned to provide needed
parking without impacting the natural or recreational use areas. Parking shall
be visually screened to as great a degree as feasible.
         (b)   Landscaping should be provided along public perimeter roads and
between parking areas to provide screening of noise and visual pollution.
   (E)   Site preservation and maintenance.
      (1)   Site preservation. Open meadows of native grasses and flowers, and
permanent stands of evergreens should be maintained in undeveloped areas of the
parks.
      (2)   Site revegetation. Natural areas that are disturbed during
construction shall be vegetated to encourage plant associations that develop
naturally on the site. Revegetation should match preexisting conditions as
closely as possible.
      (3)   Erosion control.
         (a)   Temporary erosion control measures during construction, and
permanent control measures after construction shall be established to prevent
sediment pollution of the creek and to stabilize disturbed areas. Straw bales
shall be used for temporary control measures and jute netting should be used to
permanently stabilize slopes. Any park projects shall be required to include a
site preservation program during construction phases.
         (b)   Limits of site disturbance shall be clearly and physically
defined as well as enforced in order to minimize disturbance to other areas in
the park.
(Ord. 4(1986) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 30)
§ 12-11-7 DESIGN REVIEW FEE.
   The Town Council shall set a design review fee schedule sufficient to cover
the cost of town staff time, consultant fees and incidental expense.
(Ord. 39(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 30)
§ 12-11-8 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   The Building Official shall not issue a final certificate of occupancy for
structures which have obtained design review approval until upon inspection it
is determined that the project is constructed in accordance with the approved
design review application and plans, and all improvements, amenities and
landscaping have been installed. The Building Official may issue a temporary
certificate of occupancy not to exceed 210 days upon the applicant posting with
the Department of Community Development a performance bond or other security
acceptable to the Town Council in the sum of 125% of the bona fide estimate of
the cost of installing landscaping and paving and other accessory improvements
provided for in the approved design review application and plans. If said
landscaping, paving and other accessory improvements are not installed by the
applicant within the period allowed, the temporary certificate of occupancy may
be revoked until the same are installed by the applicant or by the town
pursuant to the terms of the performance bond or other accepted security that
has been approved by the town.
(Ord. 39(1983) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 5(2003) § 15; Ord. 29(2005) § 30)
§ 12-11-9 ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed by Ord. 2(2003) § 1.
§ 12-11-10 APPEAL TO TOWN COUNCIL.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed by Ord. 2(2003) § 1.
§ 12-11-11 ENFORCEMENT; INSPECTION.
   Before occupying or using any structure included in a design review
application, the applicant must obtain an occupancy certificate after
inspection by the Department of Community Development. The Department of
Community Development shall inspect the site to ensure that the work has been
completed in accordance with the application and plans approved by the Design
Review Board. It shall be the duty of the property owner or his or her
authorized agent to notify the Department of Community Development that such
work is ready for inspection in order to ascertain compliance with approved
plans. If the project is found upon inspection to be fully completed and in
compliance with the approved design review application and plans, the
Department of Community Development shall issue a final certificate of
occupancy. If the project is found to be completed in such a manner that a
temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued as specified by the adopted
Building Code, the applicant shall post a bond as set forth in § 
12-11-8 of this chapter. Upon forfeiture of said bond or surety, the town shall
proceed to install the improvements for which bond or surety was posted. In the
event that the cost of installing the improvements exceeds the amount of the
bond, the owner of said property shall be individually liable to the town for
the additional costs thereof. Furthermore, the amount that the cost of
installing said improvements exceeds the amount of the performance bond shall
automatically become a lien upon any and all property included within the
design review application.
(Ord. 39(1983) § 1; Ord. 31(2001) § 10; Ord. 29(2005) § 30)
§ 12-11-12 LAPSE OF DESIGN REVIEW APPROVAL.
   Approval of the design of a project as prescribed by this chapter shall
lapse and shall become void one year following the date of final approval of
the project unless prior to the expiration of one year, a building permit is
issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion.
However, if there have been no zoning revisions or revisions or amendments to
these guidelines which would alter the conditions under which the approval was
given, the community development staff may extend the period of approval.
(Ord. 39(1983) § 1)
CHAPTER 12: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT
Section
12-12-1 Purpose
12-12-2 Applicability
12-12-3 Exempt projects
12-12-4 Studies and data required
12-12-5 Report contents
12-12-6 Report; additional material
12-12-7 Time schedule
12-12-8 Fee
12-12-9 Submission of report to officials
12-12-10 Time limit; supplementary information
12-12-11 Action by Commission
12-12-12 Permit issuance
§ 12-12-1 PURPOSE.
   Submission and review of an environmental impact report on any private
development proposal or public project which may affect to any significant
degree the quality of the environment in the town or in surrounding areas is
required to achieve the following objectives:
   (A)   Availability of information. To ensure that complete information on
the environmental effects of the proposed project is available to the Town
Council, the Planning and Environmental Commission and the general public;
   (B)   Environmental protection a criterion. To ensure that long term
protection of the environment is a guiding criterion in project planning, and
that land use and development decisions, both public and private, take into
account the relative merits of possible alternative actions;
   (C)   Review and evaluation procedure. To provide procedures for local
review and evaluation of the environmental effects of proposed projects prior
to granting of permits or other authorizations for commencement of development;
   (D)   Avoid geologic hazard areas. To ensure that buildings are not
constructed in geologic hazard areas, by way of illustration, floodplains,
avalanche paths, rockfall areas, where such hazard cannot practically be
mitigated to the satisfaction of the Planning and Environmental Commission and
the Town Council; and
   (E)   Protect water quality. To ensure that the quality of surface water and
ground water within the town will be protected from adverse impacts and/or
degradation due to construction activities.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 16.100; Ord. 19(1976) § 14; Ord. 37(1980) § 10; Ord. 29(2005) §
31)
§ 12-12-2 APPLICABILITY.
   An environmental impact report shall be submitted to the Administrator for
any project for which such a report is required by federal or state law, or for
any project which the Administrator determines may significantly change the
environment, either during construction or on a continuing basis, in one or
more of the following respects:
   (A)   Alters an ecological unit or land form, such as a ridgeline, saddle,
draw, ravine, hillside, cliff, slope, creek, marsh, watercourse or other
natural landform feature;
   (B)   Directly or indirectly affects a wildlife habitat, feeding or nesting
ground;
   (C)   Alters or removes native grasses, trees, shrubs or other vegetative
cover;
   (D)   Affects the appearance or character of a significant scenic area or
resource, or involves buildings or other structures that are of a size, bulk or
scale that would be in marked contrast to natural or existing urban features;
   (E)   Potentially results in avalanche, landslide, siltation, settlement,
flood or other land form change or hazard to health and safety;
   (F)   Discharges toxic or thermally abnormal substances, or involves use of
herbicides or pesticides, or emits smoke, gas, steam, dust or other particulate
matter;
   (G)   Involves any process which results in odor that may be objectionable
or damaging;
   (H)   Requires any waste treatment, cooling or settlement pond, or requires
transportation of solid or liquid wastes to a treatment or disposal site;
   (I)   Discharges significant volumes of solid or liquid wastes;
   (J)   Has the potential to strain the capacity of existing or planned sewage
disposal, storm drainage, or other utility systems;
   (K)   Involves any process which generates noise that may be offensive or
damaging;
   (L)   Either displaces significant numbers of people or results in a
significant increase in population;
   (M)   Preempts a site with potential recreational or open space value;
   (N)   Alters local traffic patterns or causes a significant increase in
traffic volume or transit service needs; and
   (O)   Is a part of a larger project which, at any future stage, may involve
any of the impacts listed in this section.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 16.200; Ord. 29(2005) § 31)
§ 12-12-3 EXEMPT PROJECTS.
   An environmental impact report shall not be required for the following
projects:
   (A)   Alteration, repair and maintenance of existing structures and site
improvements;
   (B)   A phase of a project for which an environmental impact report
previously was submitted and reviewed covering the entire project, provided
that the project was approved and not subsequently altered; and
   (C)   A project which, on the basis of a preliminary environmental
assessment covering each of the factors prescribed in §
12-12-2 of this chapter is found to have an insignificant impact on the
environment. The preliminary environmental assessment and the finding on
environmental impact shall be made by the Administrator.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 16.300; Ord. 29(2005) § 31)
§ 12-12-4 STUDIES AND DATA REQUIRED.
   (A)   Range of studies. The environmental impact report shall be based on
systematic studies conducted by the town staff or by professional consultants,
as determined by the Administrator. The environmental impact report on a public
project may be prepared by the responsible public agency or by professional
consultants it engages. The range of studies needed to develop the technical
data for an environmental impact report includes the following natural systems
and other studies:
      (1)   Hydrologic conditions, such as surface drainage and watershed
characteristics, ground water and soil permeability characteristics, natural
water features and characteristics, and any potential changes or impacts;
      (2)   Atmospheric conditions, such as airshed characteristics, potential
emissions and any potential changes or impacts;
      (3)   Geologic conditions, such as landforms, slope, soil
characteristics, potential hazards and any potential changes or impacts;
      (4)   Biotic conditions, such as vegetative characteristics, wildlife
habitats and any potential changes or impacts;
      (5)   Other environmental conditions, such as noise levels and odor
characteristics, and any potential changes or impacts;
      (6)   Visual conditions, such as views and scenic values, and any
potential changes, impacts or marked contrasts;
      (7)   Land use conditions, such as characteristics of uses, compatibility
with officially approved land use and open space policies and objectives, and
potential changes or impacts;
      (8)   Circulation and transportation conditions, such as volumes and
traffic flow patterns, transit service needs, alternative transit systems and
potential changes or impacts; and
      (9)   Population characteristics, such as residential densities,
neighborhood patterns, potential displacement of residents or businesses, and
potential changes or impacts.
   (B)   Summarization. The environmental impact report shall summarize the
findings and recommendations of the technical and other supporting studies in
terms that can be assessed and evaluated by town officials and the general
public. Technical data shall be submitted as supporting documentation.
Technical data prepared as a part of any other procedure or requirement of this
chapter, or of any other ordinance or federal, state or town regulation, also
may be used to support an environmental impact report.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 16.401; Ord. 29(2005) § 31)
§ 12-12-5 REPORT CONTENTS.
   (A)   Information and analysis. The environmental impact report shall
contain information and analysis, in sufficient detail and adequately supported
by technical studies, to enable the Town Council to judge the environmental
impact of the project and to judge measures proposed to reduce or negate any
harmful impacts.
   (B)   General statement; descriptive materials. The environmental impact
report shall include a general statement, describing the proposed project and
its purpose, identifying the owner and/or sponsors, and, if a public project,
identifying the funding source and time schedule. Descriptive materials, maps
and plans shall be submitted showing the following information:
      (1)   Project boundaries and boundaries of the area within which
environmental impact is likely to be significant;
      (2)   Present and proposed uses of the site;
      (3)   Present and proposed zoning of the site;
      (4)   Quantitative information relative to the project, such as site
area, numbers of residential units, proposed height and bulk of buildings,
building floor area in square feet, and such other data as will contribute to a
clear understanding of the scale of the project;
      (5)   A list of regulatory or review agencies and the specific
regulations to which the project will be subject;
      (6)   Copies of subdivision maps, development plans or other pertinent
documents illustrating the proposed project;
      (7)   Proximity to water bodies, the distance from the centerline of live
creeks or streams to any proposed structural development within the project;
and
      (8)   Soil types based upon the National Cooperative Soil Survey, USDA,
Soil Conservation Service and interpretations of soil types, vegetation shall
be described and three masses shown.
   (C)   Environmental inventory. The environmental impact report shall include
an environmental inventory, providing complete information on the environmental
setting existing prior to the proposed project and containing sufficient
information to permit independent evaluation by reviewers of factors that could
be affected by the proposed project. The environmental inventory shall include
maps, photographs or other appropriate illustrative material.
   (D)   Categorized by impact type. Areas categorized according to type of
possible impact shall be identified. The environmental inventory shall describe
both the physical and biological natural setting, and the human-made setting of
the site and its surroundings.
   (E)   Analysis. The environmental impact report shall include a
comprehensive, qualitative and quantitative analysis of any significant impact
that the proposed project will have on the environment. The analysis shall
describe temporary effects that will prevail during construction, and long term
effects that will prevail after completion. The analysis shall describe both
beneficial effects and detrimental effects. The analysis shall consider primary
effects and secondary effects which will result from the project. The analysis
portion of the environmental impact report shall fully assess the following
items:
      (1)   Adverse effects which cannot be avoided if the proposal is
implemented;
      (2)   Mitigation measures proposed to minimize the impact, including
water quality, erosion control and revegetation measures;
      (3)   Possible alternatives to the proposed action;
      (4)   Relationships between short term and long term uses of the
environment;
      (5)   Irreversible environmental changes resulting from implementation of
the proposal; and
      (6)   Growth inducing impacts of the project.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 16.402; Ord. 37(1980) § 10; Ord. 29(2005) § 31)
§ 12-12-6 REPORT; ADDITIONAL MATERIAL.
   The Administrator may further prescribe the form and content of an
environmental impact report, setting forth in greater detail the factors to be
considered and the manner in which the report shall be prepared, and may
require submission of information in addition to that required by §
12-12-5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 16.403; Ord. 29(2005) § 31)
§ 12-12-7 TIME SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The environmental impact report required under this chapter shall be
prepared within 30 days of the date that plans are submitted for design review
as prescribed in §§
12-12-4 through
12-12-6 of this chapter, subject to extension of the time period to a maximum
of 90 days by the Planning and Environmental Commission.
   (B)   The time period may be extended to a maximum of 180 days if seasonal
conditions prevent a comprehensive analysis.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 16.404; Ord. 16(1978) § 2(a); Ord. 29(2005) § 31)
§ 12-12-8 FEE.
   In the event that the town engages professional consultants to prepare an
environmental impact report, the cost shall be paid by the sponsor of the
project. The sponsor may be required to deposit a fixed sum in advance to cover
the cost of the report, with the unexpended balance returnable to the sponsor.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 16.405; Ord. 29(2005) § 31)
§ 12-12-9 SUBMISSION OF REPORT TO OFFICIALS.
   The environmental impact report shall be submitted to the Administrator. The
Administrator shall prescribe the number of copies to be submitted. The
Administrator shall notify the Town Council, the Planning and Environmental
Commission, and the Design Review Board of receipt of an environmental impact
report, and shall transmit copies of the report upon request. Environmental
impact reports shall be available for public review in the offices of the town.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 16.501; Ord. 29(2005) § 31)
§ 12-12-10 TIME LIMIT; SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION.
   (A)   Time limit. The Planning and Environmental Commission shall review the
report within 30 days of submission subject to an extension of the time period
30 additional days in order to obtain additional information from the town
staff, from the sponsor of the project, or the author of any portion of the
report.
   (B)   Supplementary data. The Commission may receive additional statements
or supporting materials from the sponsor of a project, from the town staff,
from professional consultants or from others. Such additional materials may be
considered as supplementary or amendatory to the environmental impact report.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 16.502; Ord. 16(1978) § 2(b); Ord. 29(2005) § 31)
§ 12-12-11 ACTION BY COMMISSION.
   (A)   Criteria for decision. Following review of the environmental impact
report, the Planning and Environmental Commission shall approve, disapprove or
request changes in the project in writing. The Planning and Environmental
Commission shall approve the project unless it finds that either the project
will have significant long term adverse effects on the environment with respect
to the natural systems or other factors studied as prescribed in §
12-12-4 of this chapter or the project will have short term adverse effects on
the environment so detrimental that public health, safety or welfare
considerations preclude approval of the project. In the case of either finding,
if changes in the project are feasible which ameliorate or avoid the adverse
effects on the environment sufficiently to permit approval of the project, the
Planning and Environmental Commission, in writing, shall describe those changes
and request those changes be made. If the Planning and Environmental Commission
determines that the changes are not feasible, it shall disapprove the project
in writing, describing the adverse effects on the environment, the significance
of the effects either to the natural systems or other factors studied as
prescribed in §
12-12-4 of this chapter or to the public health, safety or welfare and the
Planning and Environmental Commission’s reasons for concluding that no changes
in the project are feasible to ameliorate or avoid those effects.
   (B)   Design changes require resubmission to Design Review Board. If the
Planning and Environmental Commission requests any changes in the project which
would alter the design of the project previously approved by the Design Review
Board, and the sponsor of the project makes those changes, the revised design
shall be resubmitted to the Design Review Board for its approval unless the
Planning and Environmental Commission waives this requirement.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 16.503; Ord. 16(1978) § 2(b); Ord. 29(2005) § 31)
§ 12-12-12 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Conformance to environmental impact report. Upon approval of the
project, applicable permits may be issued and the project may proceed, subject
to such additional requirements, permits, or authorizations as may be required
by this title and by other applicable ordinances or regulations of the town. No
permits shall be issued and no authorizations shall be granted which would
allow a project to proceed in the event that the Planning and Environmental
Commission does not grant approval of the environmental impact report after
review. No permits shall be issued and no authorizations shall be granted for
any project which does not conform substantially to the description of the
project contained in the environmental impact report.
   (B)   Exception. This section shall not apply to a project for which an
environmental impact report is not required, as prescribed in §
12-12-3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 16.504; Ord. 16(1978) § 2(b); Ord. 29(2005) § 31)
CHAPTER 13: EMPLOYEE HOUSING
Section
12-13-1 Purpose
12-13-2 Applicability
12-13-3 General requirements
12-13-4 Requirements by employee housing unit (EHU) type
12-13-5 Employee housing unit deed restriction exchange program
§ 12-13-1 PURPOSE.
   The town’s economy is largely tourist based and the health of this economy
is premised on exemplary service for Vail’s guests. Vail’s ability to provide
such service is dependent upon a strong, high quality and consistently
available work force. To achieve such a work force, the community must work to
provide quality living and working conditions. Availability and affordability
of housing plays a critical role in creating quality living and working
conditions for the community’s work force. The town recognizes a permanent,
year round population plays an important role in sustaining a healthy, viable
community. Further, the town recognizes its role in conjunction with the
private sector in ensuring housing is available.
(Ord. 9(2007) § 1)
§ 12-13-2 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to the
requirements set forth in each zone district where employee housing units
(EHUs) are permitted or required, subject to subsection (C) of this section.
   (B)   Where the provisions of this chapter conflict with the provisions of
any other chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control, subject to
subsection (C) of this section.
   (C)   This chapter shall not apply to any EHU constructed on or after May 1,
2007, in any zone district that is subject to the requirements of Chapter 23 or
24 of this title.
(Ord. 9(2007) § 1)
§ 12-13-3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Deed restriction, occupancy limitations and reporting requirements -
Types I, II, III and V.
      (1)   No EHU shall be subdivided or divided into any form of timeshare,
interval ownerships or fractional fee.
      (2)   For EHUs which are required to be leased, they shall only be leased
to and occupied by tenants who are full-time employees who work in Eagle
County. An EHU shall not be leased for a period less than 30 consecutive days.
An EHU shall be continuously rented and shall not remain vacant for a period to
exceed three consecutive months.
      (3)   Thirty days prior to the transfer of a deed for an EHU, the
prospective purchaser shall submit an application to the Administrator
documenting that the prospective purchaser meets the criteria set forth herein
and shall include an affidavit affirming that he or she meets these criteria.
      (4)   No later than February 1 of each year, the owner of an EHU shall
submit a sworn affidavit on a form provided by the town to the Community
Development Department containing the following information:
         (a)   Evidence to establish that the EHU has been occupied throughout
the year by an employee;
         (b)   The rental rate;
         (c)   The employer; and
         (d)   Evidence to demonstrate that at least one tenant residing in the
EHU is an employee.
      (5)   The deed restriction setting forth the provisions of this
subsection (A) shall be provided by the town. Said deed restriction shall run
with the land and shall not be amended or terminated without the written
approval of the Vail Town Council. Said restriction shall be recorded by the
town at the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder’s office prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
   (B)   Development standards.
      (1)   No structure containing an EHU shall exceed the maximum GRFA
permitted in this title except as specifically provided herein.
      (2)   All trash facilities shall be enclosed.
      (3)   All surface parking shall comply with Chapter 11 of this title.
      (4)   Each EHU shall have its own entrance. There shall be no interior
access from any EHU to any dwelling unit it may be attached to.
      (5)   An EHU may be located in, or attached to, an existing garage
(existing on or before April 18, 2000, and whether located in a required
setback or not), provided that no existing parking required by this code is
reduced or eliminated. A Type I EHU of 500 square feet or less of GRFA may be
considered for physical separation from the primary unit, if it is constructed
in conjunction with a two car garage and is otherwise compatible with the
surrounding properties, does not have an adverse impact on vegetation and does
not dominate the street. The Design Review Board shall review such requests for
separation.
      (6)   All EHUs must contain a kitchen or kitchenette and a bathroom.
      (7)   Occupancy of an EHU shall be limited to the maximum of two persons
per bedroom.
   (C)   Application requirements.
      (1)   Applicants for a conditional use permit for the purpose of
constructing EHUs shall not be required to pay a conditional use permit
application fee or design review application fee.
      (2)   A development review application for a conditional use permit for
the purpose of constructing EHUs is subject to review and approval by the
Planning and Environmental Commission as provided in Chapter 16 of this title.
      (3)   EHU applications which do not require a conditional use permit
shall be reviewed by the Department of Community Development subject to a
design review application.
      (4)   A development review application for a Type II EHU shall include
the signatures of all owners of the property (i.e., both sides of a duplex) or
there shall be a letter accompanying the application from all owners agreeing
to the addition of an EHU. Applications will not be accepted unless this
provision is met.
      (5)   Any existing legal nonconforming dwelling unit in the town may be
converted to an EHU administratively by the town without obtaining a
conditional use permit. Dwelling units and lock off units which exist as of the
date hereof but which are nonconforming with respect to density and GRFA may be
converted to a conforming EHU administratively by the town, as long as they
otherwise comply with the development standards and parking requirements found
herein and comply with the town’s Building Code requirements. Upon being
converted to an EHU per this section, such dwelling unit shall be considered a
legally conforming EHU and shall be governed by all requirements of this
chapter.
   (D)   Enforcement. All EHUs governed by this chapter shall be operated and
maintained in accordance with this title. Failure to do so may result in
enforcement proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction and in accordance
with Chapter 3 of this title.
(Ord. 9(2007) § 1; Ord. 6(2024) § 6)
§ 12-13-4 REQUIREMENTS BY EMPLOYEE HOUSING UNIT (EHU) TYPE.
                                      Additional
    Zoning                            Site       Garage              Minimum/
EHU Districts Ownership/   Additional Coverage/  Credit/     Parking Maximum  Density
    Permitted Transference GRFA       Reduced    Storage             GRFA of
    By Right                          Landscape  Requirement         an EHU
                                      Area
                                                                  Additional
                                                                  Site       Garage
EHU           Zoning Districts Permitted Ownership/   Additional  Coverage/  Credit/     Parking                                                                 Minimum/                                           Density
              By Right                   Transference GRFA        Reduced    Storage                                                                             Maximum GRFA of an EHU
                                                                  Landscape  Requirement
                                                                  Area
                                                                             Allowed 300
                                                                             sq. ft. of
                                                                             garage area
                                                                  Site       per
                                                                  coverage:  enclosed
                                                                  The site   vehicle
                                                                  is         space at a
                                                                  entitled   maximum of
                                                                  to an      2 parking
                                                                  additional spaces (600
                                                                  5% of site sq. ft.)
                                                                  coverage    
              Primary/                                The EHU is  for the    All units
              secondary                               entitled to EHU        not                                                                                                                                    The EHU is
              residential,               The EHU may  an                    constructed                                                                                                                            allowed as
Type I        Two-family residential     be sold or   additional  Landscape  with a      Per Chapter 10 of this title as a dwelling unit                         N/A                                                a second
                                        transferred  550 sq. ft. area: The  garage                                                                                                                                 unit on the
              (Only on lots less than    separately   GRFA        site is    shall be                                                                                                                               property
              14,000 sq. ft. in size)                 deduction   entitled   required a
                                                                  to a       minimum 75
                                                                  reduction  sq. ft. of
                                                                  of         storage
                                                                  landscape  area in
                                                                  area by 5% addition to
                                                                  (reduced   normal
                                                                  to 55% of  closet
                                                                  site area) space. This
                                                                  for the    75 sq. ft.
                                                                  EHU        shall be a
                                                                             credit for
                                                                             storage
                                                                             only
                                                                             Allowed 300
                                                                             sq. ft. of
                                                                             additional
                                                                             garage area
                                                                             for the EHU
                                                                              
                                                                             All units
                                                                             not
                                         The EHU                             constructed
                                         shall not be The EHU is             with a
              Single-family residential, sold or      entitled to            garage                                                                                                                                 The EHU is
              Two-family residential,    transferred  an                     shall be                                                                                                                               allowed as
Type II       Primary/                   separately   additional  N/A        required a  Per Chapter 10 of this title as a dwelling unit                         300 sq. ft. minimum and 1,200 sq. ft. maximum      a third
              secondary residential      from the     550 sq. ft.            minimum 75                                                                                                                             unit on
                                        unit it is   GRFA                   sq. ft. of                                                                                                                             property
              Agriculture and open space associated   deduction              storage
                                         with                                area in
                                                                             addition to
                                                                             normal
                                                                             closet
                                                                             space. This
                                                                             75 sq. ft.
                                                                             shall be a
                                                                             credit for
                                                                             storage
                                                                             only
              Residential
              cluster
              Low density
              multiple-family
              Medium density
              multiple-family
              High density
              multiple-family
              Vail village
              townhouse
              Public
              accommodation
              Commercial core 1
              Commercial core 2
              Commercial core 3                       The EHU is                                                                                                 A. Dwelling unit: 300 sq. ft. minimum and 1,200    The EHU is
              Commercial                 The EHU may  excluded                                                                                                   sq. ft. maximum                                    excluded
Type III      service center             be sold or   from the    N/A        N/A         Per Chapter 10 of this title as a dwelling unit                                                                           from the
              Arterial business          transferred  calculation                                                                                                B. Dormitory unit: 200 sq. ft. minimum for each    calculation
              Heavy service              separately   of GRFA                                                                                                    person occupying the EHU                           of density
              Lionshead Mixed
              Use 1
              Lionshead Mixed
              Use 2
              Public
              accommodation 2
              Ski base/recreation
              Ski base/recreation
              2
              Special
              development
              district
              Parking district
              General use
              Vail village inn   (VVI)
              Any dwelling unit may be   The EHU may
              designated and deed        be sold or                                                                                                                                                                 The EHU is
Type IV       restricted as a Type IV    transferred  N/A         N/A        N/A         Per Chapter 10 of this title as a dwelling unit                         N/A                                                calculated
              EHU, unless already        separately                                                                                                                                                                 as density
              designated as an EHU
                                         The EHU may
                                         be sold or
                                         transferred
                                         separately;
Type IV-CL    Any dwelling unit may be   the EHU
(commercial   designated and deed        shall be                                                                                                                                                                   The EHU is
linkage       restricted as a Type IV-CL linked to a  N/A         N/A        N/A         Per Chapter 10 of this title as a dwelling unit                         Per Chapter 23, “Commercial Linkage”, of this  calculated
mitigation    EHU, unless already        specific                                                                                                                title                                              as density
unit)         designated as an EHU       commercial
                                         linkage
                                         employee
                                         housing
                                         mitigation
                                         requirement
                                         The EHU may
                                         be sold or
                                         transferred
                                         separately;
Type IV-IZ    Any dwelling unit may be   the EHU
(inclusionary designated and deed        shall be                                                                                                                                                                   The EHU is
zoning        restricted as a Type IV-IZ linked to a  N/A         N/A        N/A         Per Chapter 10 of this title as a dwelling unit                         Per Chapter 24, “Inclusionary Zoning”, of this calculated
mitigation    EHU, unless already        specific                                                                                                                title                                              as density
unit)         designated as an EHU       inclusionary
                                         zoning
                                         employee
                                         housing
                                         mitigation
                                         requirement
                                         The EHU
                                         shall not be
                                         sold or                                                                                                                                                                    The EHU is
                                         transferred                                                                                                                                                                allowed as
Type V        Hillside residential       separately   N/A         N/A        N/A         Per Chapter 10 of this title as a dwelling unit                         1,200 sq. ft. maximum                              a second
                                         from the                                                                                                                                                                   unit on the
                                         unit it is                                                                                                                                                                 property
                                         associated
                                         with
                                         Shall not be
                                         subdivided
                                         or divided
              Community Housing-1,       into any
Type VI       Community Housing-2,       form of      N/A         N/A        N/A         As permitted by the zone district                                       N/A                                                N/A
              Community Housing-3        timeshare,
                                         interval
                                         ownership or
                                         fractional
                                         fee unit
              High density
              multiple-family
              Community Housing-1,
              Community Housing-2,
              Community Housing-3
              Public
              accommodation
              Commercial core 1          The EHU may
              Commercial core 2          be sold or
              Commercial core 3          transferred
              Commercial                 separately.
Type VII-CL   service center             The EHU      The EHU is                                                                                                                                                    The EHU is
(commercial   Arterial business          shall be     excluded                                                                                                                                                      excluded
linkage       Lionshead mixed            linked to a  from the    N/A        N/A         Per Chapter 10 of this title as a dwelling unit or a parking management Per Chapter 23, “Commercial Linkage”, of this  from the
mitigation    use 1                      specific     calculation                        plan per Chapter 23, “Commercial Linkage”, of this title            title                                              calculation
unit)         Lionshead mixed            commercial   of GRFA                                                                                                                                                       of density
              use 2                      linkage
              Public                     employee
              accommodation 2            housing
              Ski base/recreation        mitigation
              Ski base/recreation        requirement
              2
              Special
              development
              districts
              Parking district
              General use
              Vail village inn   (VVI)
              High density
              multiple-family
              Community Housing-1,
              Community Housing-2,
              Community Housing-3
              Vail Village
              townhouse
              Public
              accommodation              The EHU may
              Commercial core 1          be sold or
              Commercial core 2          transferred
              Commercial core 3          separately
Type VII-IZ   Commercial                 The EHU      The EHU is                                                                                                                                                    The EHU is
(inclusionary service center             shall be     excluded                                                                                                                                                      excluded
zoning        Arterial business          linked to a  from the    N/A        N/A         Per Chapter 10 of this title as a dwelling unit or a parking management Per chapter 24, “Inclusionary Zoning”, of this from the
mitigation    Lionshead mixed            specific     calculation                        plan Per Chapter 24, “Inclusionary Zoning”, of this title           title                                              calculation
unit)         use 1                      inclusionary of GRFA                                                                                                                                                       of density
              Lionshead mixed            zoning
              use 2                      employee
              Public                     housing
              accommodation 2            mitigation
              Ski base/recreation        requirement
              Ski base/recreation
              2
              Special
              development
              districts
              Parking district
              General use
              Vail village inn   (VVI)
 
(Ord. 12(2008) § 25; Ord. 2(2012) § 6; Ord. 19(2023) § 2; Ord. 6(2024) § 7;
Ord. 15(2025) § 2)
§ 12-13-5 EMPLOYEE HOUSING UNIT DEED RESTRICTION EXCHANGE PROGRAM.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide occupied livable,
affordable employee housing units within the Town of Vail through the
establishment of an employee housing unit deed restriction exchange program.
The exchange program allows the Town Council to release a deed restriction from
an existing employee housing unit in exchange for the placement of an employee
housing deed restriction on another dwelling unit and/or a fee in lieu payment
made to the Town of Vail.
   (B)   Applicability. The program established under this section applies to
existing employee housing units. This shall not apply to any existing employee
housing unit that is already price appreciation capped or any employee housing
unit established to meet the on site employee mitigation requirements of
Chapter 23, “Commercial Linkage”, or Chapter 24, “Inclusionary Zoning”, of this
title or as part of an approved development plan.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section:
      COMMERCIAL JOB CORE. Those areas located south of Interstate 70, east of
the intersection of Forest Road and South Frontage Road, north of Vail
Mountain, and west of the Town of Vail soccer fields on Vail Valley Road, as
further defined by exhibit A of this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9705f9f5a609f564c22e87000bf13fb3850d87c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-27.png]
 
      EXCHANGE EHU. The existing nonprice appreciation capped employee housing
unit or other unit with an employee housing deed restriction that is being
proposed to have the deed restriction released as part of this program.
      PROPOSED EHU. The existing, non-deed restricted dwelling unit that is
being proposed to receive an employee housing deed restriction as part of this
program.
   (D)   General requirements. The Town Council may approve the removal of an
employee housing deed restriction from an existing employee housing unit in
exchange for the placement of an employee housing deed restriction, and/or the
payment of a fee in lieu, as described in subsection (D)(5) of this section.
      (1)   Exchange EHU requirements.
         (a)   The exchange EHU shall not be part of any employee housing
project developed or deed restricted (in part or in whole) by the Town of Vail.
         (b)   The exchange EHU shall not be part of any on site employee
housing mitigation required by inclusionary zoning, commercial linkage or as
part of an approved development plan.
         (c)   The property that includes the exchange EHU shall comply with
the prescribed development standards (density controls including GRFA and
number of units, site coverage, landscaping and parking requirements and the
like), as outlined in the applicable zone district section of this title, upon
exchange of the deed restrictions.
      (2)   Proposed EHU requirements.
         (a)   The proposed EHU(s) shall be located within the Town of Vail.
         (b)   The proposed EHU(s) shall be within a homeowners’ association
that does not preclude deed restricted units, does not have a right of first
refusal, does not have right to approve the sale or the sale contract, or have
any other requirements deemed to be similarly restrictive by the Administrator.
         (c)   The proposed EHU shall comply with the minimum size requirements
shown in Table 13-2 of this section.
 
Table 13-2
Minimum Size of Proposed EHUs
Type Of Unit Minimum Size (GRFA)
Studio       438 square feet
1 bedroom    613 square feet
2 bedroom    788 square feet
3+ bedrooms  1,225 square feet
 
         (d)   The proposed EHU shall contain a kitchen facility or kitchenette
and a bathroom.
         (e)   The property on which the proposed EHU is located shall comply
with Chapter 10, “Off-Street Parking And Loading”, of this title.
         (f)   The proposed EHU shall have its own entrance. There shall be no
interior access from the proposed EHU to any dwelling unit to which it may be
attached.
      (3)   Exchange rate for proposed EHUs.
         (a)   If the exchange EHU(s) is within the commercial job core and the
proposed EHU(s) is also within the commercial job core, the gross residential
floor area (GRFA) of the proposed EHU(s) shall be a minimum of two times the
gross residential floor area (GRFA) of the exchange EHU.
         (b)   If the exchange EHU is within the commercial job core and the
proposed EHU(s) is outside of the commercial job core, the gross residential
floor area (GRFA) of the proposed EHU(s) shall be a minimum of three times the
gross residential floor area (GRFA) of the exchange EHU.
         (c)   If the exchange EHU is outside of the commercial job core and
the proposed EHU(s) is inside of the commercial job core, the gross residential
floor area (GRFA) of the proposed EHU(s) shall be a minimum of one and one-half
times the gross residential floor area (GRFA) of the exchange EHU.
         (d)   If the exchange EHU is outside of the commercial job core and
the proposed EHU(s) is outside of the commercial job core, the gross
residential floor area (GRFA) of the proposed EHU(s) shall be a minimum of two
times the gross residential floor area (GRFA) of the exchange EHU.
      (4)   No credit given. If the gross residential floor area (GRFA) of the
proposed EHU(s) is in excess of the minimum required gross residential floor
area (GRFA) as set forth in subsection (D)(3) of this section, the additional
gross residential floor area (GRFA) shall not be eligible for use as any form
of future credit or for the commercial linkage or inclusionary zoning employee
housing mitigation banks established by §§
12-23-7 and
12-24-7 of this title.
      (5)   Fee in lieu. The applicant may provide a fee in lieu payment to the
Town of Vail for any fractional portion of the required square footage less
than 438 square feet not provided by a proposed EHU, if the proposed EHU does
not fulfill the required amount of calculated square footage.
         (a)   The Town Council may accept a fee in lieu for an exchange EHU
upon a finding that the exchange EHU achieves Town's employee housing goals and
objectives.
         (b)   The fee in lieu amount shall be based on a market evaluation
prepared by the applicant that analyzes the value of the exchange EHU and the
costs to acquire additional EHUs that help fulfill the Town's employee housing
goals.
         (c)   All fees in lieu shall be due and payable seven (7) days prior
to the execution of the release of a deed restriction as approved by Town
Council, and the proceeds of all fees in lieu shall be used by the Town for
employee housing.
 
Existing EHU square feet x inclusionary zoning fee = fee in lieu payment
 
   (E)   Fees. The Town Council shall set an application fee schedule
sufficient to cover the cost of town staff time and other expenses incidental
to the review of the application. The fee shall be paid at the time of the
application, and shall not be refundable.
   (F)   Review process.
      (1)   Submittal requirements. The Administrator shall establish the
submittal requirements for an employee housing deed restriction exchange
application. A complete list of the submittal requirements shall be maintained
by the Administrator and filed in the Community Development Department. Certain
submittal requirements may be waived and/or modified by the Administrator and/
or the reviewing body if it is demonstrated by the applicant that the
information and materials required are not relevant to the proposed exchange.
The Administrator and/or the reviewing body may require the submission of
additional materials if deemed necessary to properly evaluate the application.
      (2)   Review procedures.
         (a)   Administrator review. The Administrator shall review the
application for completeness and compliance with this section, and shall make a
determination of completeness and compliance with this section within 14 days
of application submittal. Should the Administrator deem that the application is
incomplete or not in compliance with this section, the Administrator shall deny
the application. Should the Administrator deem the application is both complete
and in compliance with this section, the Administrator shall forward the
application for review by the Vail Local Housing Authority.
         (b)   Vail Local Housing Authority review. The review of a proposed
employee housing deed restriction exchange application shall be held by the
Vail Local Housing Authority at a regularly scheduled meeting. A report of the
Community Development Department staff’s findings and recommendations shall be
made at the formal hearing before the Vail Local Housing Authority. Within 20
days of the closing of a public hearing on a proposed amendment, the Vail Local
Housing Authority shall act on the application. The Vail Local Housing
Authority may recommend approval of the application as initiated, may recommend
approval with such modifications as it deems necessary to accomplish the
purposes of this title, or may recommend denial of the application. The Vail
Local Housing Authority shall transmit its recommendation, together with a
report on the public hearing and its deliberations and findings, to the Town
Council.
         (c)   Town Council review. Upon receipt of the report and
recommendation of the Vail Local Housing Authority, the Town Council shall set
a date for hearing within the following 30 days. Within 20 days of the closing
of a public hearing on the application, the Town Council shall act on the
application. The Town Council shall consider but shall not be bound by the
recommendation of the Vail Local Housing Authority. The Town Council may
approve, either in accordance with the recommendation of the Vail Local Housing
Authority or in modified form, or the Town Council may deny the application.
         (d)   Appeal. Administrator and Town Council decisions may be appealed
in accordance with the provisions in §
12-3-3, “Appeals”, of this title.
      (3)   Criteria and findings.
         (a)   Criteria. Before acting on an employee housing deed restriction
exchange application, the Vail Local Housing Authority and Vail Town Council
shall consider the following criteria with respect to the application:
            1.   The proximity and accessibility of the proposed EHU(s) to the
commercial job core and public transportation;
            2.   The size of the proposed EHU(s) in relation to the minimum
employee housing unit sizes established for commercial linkage mitigation in §
12-23-3 of this title;
            3.   The effect of any homeowners’ association dues or maintenance
fees imposed upon the proposed EHU(s) on the affordability of the proposed unit
for an employee;
            4.   The correlation between any homeowners’ association fees
imposed upon the proposed EHU(s) and the services and amenities provided by the
homeowners’ association;
            5.   The extent to which the exchange is consistent with the
applicable elements of the adopted goals, objectives and policies outlined in
the Vail Comprehensive Plan and is compatible with the development objectives
of the town;
            6.   The extent to which the exchange presents a harmonious,
convenient, workable relationship among land uses consistent with municipal
development objectives; and
            7.   The extent to which the exchange provides for the growth of an
orderly viable community and serves the best interests of the community as a
whole.
         (b)   Necessary findings. Before recommending and/or granting an
approval of an employee housing deed restriction exchange application, the Vail
Local Housing Authority and the Vail Town Council shall make the following
findings with respect to the application:
            1.   The application meets the general requirements of subsection
(D) of this section;
            2.   The application is consistent with the applicable elements of
the adopted goals, objectives and policies outlined in the Vail Comprehensive
Plan and is compatible with the development objectives of the town;
            3.   The application furthers the general and specific purposes of
the zoning regulations, §
12-1-2 of this title, and the employee housing regulations, §
12-13-1 of this chapter; and
            4.   The application promotes the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the town and promotes the coordinated and harmonious
development of the town in a manner that conserves and enhances its natural
environment and its established character as a resort and residential community
of the highest quality.
(Ord. 31(2008) § 1; Ord. 10(2011) §§ 1, 2, 3, 4; Ord. 23(2016) § 1; Ord. 20
(2025) § 1)
CHAPTER 14: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
Section
12-14-1 Applicability
12-14-2 Fences, hedges, walls and screening (Rep. by Ord. 22(1999) §6)
12-14-3 Permitted exceptions to development standards (Rep. by Ord. 22(1999)
§6)
12-14-4 Architectural projections (Rep. by Ord. 22(1999) §6)
12-14-5 Porches, steps and decks (Rep. by Ord. 22(1999) §6)
12-14-6 Balconies, decks and stairways aboveground (Rep. by Ord. 22(1999) §6)
12-14-7 Fire escapes (Rep. by Ord. 22(1999) §6)
12-14-8 Bay windows (Rep. by Ord. 22(1999) §6)
12-14-9 Architectural projections above height limit (Rep. by Ord. 22(1999) §6)
12-14-10 Application and interpretation of height limits
12-14-11 Application and interpretation of lot lines
12-14-12 Home occupations
12-14-13 Regulations applicable to particular uses
12-14-14 Restaurants, bars or similar uses
12-14-15 Sign regulations
12-14-16 Property owner maintenance responsibility
12-14-17 Setback from watercourse
12-14-18 Bed and breakfast operations
12-14-19 Satellite dish antennas
12-14-20 Commercial core construction
12-14-21 Outdoor display of goods
§ 12-14-1 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be effective in all zone districts or,
where specified, in particular zone districts, and shall be in addition to the
regulations prescribed for each zone district.
(Ord. 8(1973) Art. 17; Ord. 29(2005) § 33)
§ 12-14-2 FENCES, HEDGES, WALLS AND SCREENING.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed by Ord. 22(1999) § 6.
§ 12-14-3 PERMITTED EXCEPTIONS TO DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed by Ord. 22(1999) § 6.
§ 12-14-4 ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTIONS.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed by Ord. 22(1999) § 6.
§ 12-14-5 PORCHES, STEPS AND DECKS.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed by Ord. 22(1999) § 6.
§ 12-14-6 BALCONIES, DECKS AND STAIRWAYS ABOVEGROUND.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed by Ord. 22(1999) § 6.
§ 12-14-7 FIRE ESCAPES.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed by Ord. 22(1999) § 6.
§ 12-14-8 BAY WINDOWS.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed by Ord. 22(1999) § 6.
§ 12-14-9 ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTIONS ABOVE HEIGHT LIMIT.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed by Ord. 22(1999) § 6.
§ 12-14-10 APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION OF HEIGHT LIMITS.
   Where a building is designed to have the appearance of separate,
identifiable structures joined only by lower portions of the same structure, or
adjoining for less than 25% of the perimeter of the portion of the structure to
another portion of the structure, each separate or identifiable portion may be
considered a separate structure for the purpose of determining height limits.
Determination of portions of a structure having the appearance of separate,
identifiable structures shall be made by the Administrator.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 17.208; Ord. 29(2005) § 33)
§ 12-14-11 APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION OF LOT LINES.
   Where a lot or site does not have frontage on a street, or where access is
by means of an easement or other right over adjoining properties, by means of
an extension of a portion of the site, or by means of a private driveway, road
or street, the line where principal access to the lot is attained shall be
deemed the front lot line, and setback areas shall be determined from said
front lot line. A portion of a lot or site less than 20 feet in width providing
access from a street to the principal portion of the site shall not be used in
calculating permitted gross residential floor area on the site.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 17.209; Ord. 29(2005) § 33)
§ 12-14-12 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Permit required. The conduct of a home occupation, where permitted as
an accessory use by the provisions of this title, shall be subject to issuance
of a home occupation permit by the Administrator. Application shall be made on
a form prescribed by the Administrator, and shall be accompanied by a statement
fully describing the nature of the home occupation, including hours of
operation, equipment or machinery to be used, anticipated number of customers,
clients or students, and other features of the home occupation. The application
shall describe in detail the manner in which the home occupation will conform
to the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Application contents. An application for a home occupation permit
shall be made upon a form provided by the Administrator. The application shall
be supported by documents, maps, plans and other material as requested by the
Administrator to evaluate the proposal. Application materials may include, but
not be limited to, floor plans, site plans, parking and traffic circulation
plans, verification of liability insurance and title reports.
   (C)   Permit issuance and findings. After review of the application, the
Administrator may issue a home occupation permit if he or she finds that the
proposed use will conform to the requirements of this chapter. The permit may
be subject to such conditions as the Administrator deems necessary to guarantee
operation of the home occupation in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and compatibly with other uses in the vicinity. The Administrator shall
deny the application if he or she finds that the proposed use will not conform
to the provisions of this chapter, or would be injurious or detrimental to
other properties in the vicinity.
   (D)   Permit time limit; renewal. Home occupation permits, when issued,
shall be for a limited time period not exceeding one year. Permits shall be
renewable upon application, subject to such regulations as shall be in effect
at the time of application for renewal. The Administrator shall make the same
findings with respect to an application for renewal as for the original
issuance of a home occupation permit.
   (E)   Requirements for permit. Where permitted, home occupations shall be
subject to the following limitations.
      (1)   The use shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried
on principally by the inhabitants thereof. A home child daycare facility shall
be exempt from this requirement to allow outdoor play areas.
      (2)   Employees, other than inhabitants of the dwelling, shall not exceed
one person at any time.
      (3)   The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes and shall not change the residential character
of the property and neighborhood.
      (4)   The total floor area used for the home occupation shall not exceed
one-fourth of the gross residential floor area of the dwelling, nor exceed 500
square feet. Home child daycare facilities shall not exceed one-half of the
gross residential floor area of the dwelling, nor 1,250 square feet.
      (5)   There shall be no advertising, display or other indication of the
home occupation on the premises.
      (6)   Selling stocks, supplies or products on the premises shall not be
permitted, provided that incidental retail sales may be made in connection with
other permitted home occupations.
      (7)   There shall be no exterior storage on the premises of material used
in the home occupation.
      (8)   There shall be no noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat or
glare noticeable at or beyond the property line, as a result of the home
occupation. A home child daycare facility shall be exempt from this requirement
to allow outdoor play areas.
      (9)   A home occupation shall not generate significant vehicular traffic
in excess of that typically generated by residential dwellings and shall not
interfere with parking, access or other normal activities on adjacent
properties, or with other units in a multi-family residential development.
      (10)   No parking or storage of commercial vehicles in association with a
home occupation permit shall be permitted on the site.
   (F)   Interpretation.
      (1)   For purposes of this chapter, provided that all requirements
prescribed in this chapter are met, the following examples shall be considered
home occupations:
         (a)   Activities conducted principally by telephone or mail order;
         (b)   Studios and activities producing light handcrafts or objects of
art;
         (c)   Teaching and tutoring instruction limited to two pupils at a
time;
         (d)   Dressmaking or apparel alterations; and
         (e)   Home child daycare facility.
      (2)   A home occupation shall not include: a clinic, funeral home,
nursing home, tearoom, restaurant, antique shop, veterinarian’s office or any
similar use.
   (G)   Permit revocation or discontinuance.
      (1)   A home occupation permit may be revoked by the Administrator if he
or she determines that the provisions of this chapter or the limitations
prescribed as a condition of the permit are being violated.
      (2)   A home occupation permit shall become void if not used within two
months of issuance, or if the use for which it was issued is discontinued for a
continuous period of six months.
(Ord. 8(1973) §§ 17.301 – 17.306; Ord. 17(2001) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 33)
§ 12-14-13 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO PARTICULAR USES.
   The regulations set out in §
12-14-14 of this chapter shall be applicable to the uses listed in that section
in any zone district in which the use is a permitted use or a conditional use.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 17.400; Ord. 29(2005) § 33)
§ 12-14-14 RESTAURANTS, BARS OR SIMILAR USES.
   (A)   In districts where restaurants, bars or similar uses are allowed, they
shall be subject to the following requirement.
   (B)   Dwelling units in the same structure or in structures adjoining
restaurants, bars, or similar uses shall have the right to privacy and the
restaurant, bar, or similar use shall be designed in such a way that view from
the use is not directly into adjoining dwelling unit or units.
   (C)   Windows may be treated with appropriate covering.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 17.401; Ord. 19(1976) § 15; Ord. 11(2005) § 1)
§ 12-14-15 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   All signs shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of Title 11
of this code. The Town Council may by ordinance provide for the administration
and enforcement of the provisions of Title 11 of this code by the Administrator
or other administrative official, and may provide for review and approval
procedures pursuant to Title 11 of this code by the Design Review Board
established by this title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 17.500; Ord. 29(2005) § 33)
§ 12-14-16 PROPERTY OWNER MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   Property owners shall be responsible for improving the area from their
property line to the edge of roadway, including necessary drainage. Improvement
of the area shall be designed so as not to impede snowplowing or impair
visibility at street intersections, which improvement shall be approved by the
Department of Public Works.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 17.700; Ord. 19(1976) § 15; Ord. 29(2005) § 33)
§ 12-14-17 SETBACK FROM WATERCOURSE.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed by Ord. 6(2022) § 1.
§ 12-14-18 BED AND BREAKFAST OPERATIONS.
   (A)   Definition. See section
12-2-2 of this title for definition of “bed and breakfast”.
   (B)   Location and criteria. Bed and breakfast operations may be allowed as
a conditional use in those zone districts as specified in this title. If
permitted as a conditional use pursuant to Chapter 16 of this title, bed and
breakfast operations shall be subject to the following requirements.
      (1)   Off-street designated parking shall be required as follows: one
space for the owner/proprietor plus one space for the first bedroom rented plus
one-half space for each additional bedroom rented.
      (2)   Enclosed trash facilities and regular garbage removal service shall
be provided.
      (3)   Removal of landscaping for the provision of additional parking is
strongly discouraged.
      (4)   Each bed and breakfast shall be allowed one residential “nameplate”
sign as defined and regulated by the town sign code.
      (5)   If a bed and breakfast operation shall use property or facilities
owned in common and/or located within a development lot, the written approval
of the other property owner, owners or applicable owners’ association shall be
required to be submitted with the application for a conditional use permit.
      (6)   A bed and breakfast operation may short term rent separately up to
three bedrooms or a maximum square footage of 900 square feet of the dwelling
unit. Bed and breakfast operations shall only be permitted to accommodate a
“family” as defined in §
12-2-2 of this title.
   (C)   Compliance. It shall be unlawful for a bed and breakfast operation to
do business without a conditional use permit from the Planning and
Environmental Commission after June 12, 1990, or to operate in violation of any
of the provisions of this code.
   (D)   Discontinuance. Any bed and breakfast operation which is discontinued
for a period of 12 months, regardless of any intent to resume operation of use,
shall not be resumed thereafter, and any future use of the site or structures
thereon shall conform to the provisions of this title.
   (E)   Review of decision. The Town Council, the applicant, adjacent property
owner or the Town Manager, may appeal/call up to the Town Council for review
any decision made by the Planning and Environmental Commission regarding a
conditional use permit for bed and breakfast as per §
12-3-3 of this title.
(Ord. 31(1989) §§ 16-119; Ord. 7(1996) § 8; 1997 Code; Ord. 31(2001) § 4; Ord.
29(2005) § 33; Ord. 27(2016) § 3)
Cross-reference:
   Additional provisions, see Title 11 of this code
§ 12-14-19 SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purposes of this section are as follows:
      (1)   To protect the health and safety of the inhabitants of the town by
setting forth requirements for the installation of satellite dish antennas;
      (2)   To protect and support the aesthetic concerns of the town, a resort
community which must remain aesthetically pleasing to visitors to remain
economically viable; and
      (3)   To provide the protection set forth in subsections (A)(1) and (A)
(2) of this section in the least restrictive manner possible.
   (B)   Definition. See §
12-2-2 of this title for definition of “satellite dish antenna”.
   (C)   Application; review.
      (1)   Satellite dish antennas shall comply with all the requirements set
forth herein. Person or persons wishing to install a satellite dish antenna
within the town shall submit an application to the Department of Community
Development for review.
      (2)   The application shall set forth the following:
         (a)   Completed Design Review Board application form;
         (b)   Site plan showing proposed location of the satellite dish
antenna;
         (c)   Description of the satellite dish antenna (i.e., size, design,
materials and the like);
         (d)   Color sample (if applicable);
         (e)   Landscape plan (if applicable);
         (f)   An improvement location certificate and/or a preliminary title
report; and
         (g)   Elevations, perspectives or renderings if deemed applicable by
the staff of the Department of Community Development.
      (3)   Upon receipt of application, it shall be reviewed by the Department
of Community Development. If the Department of Community Development determines
that the requirements set forth herein have been met, they shall forward the
application to the Design Review Board for consideration of whether or not the
satellite dish antenna meets the requirements set forth in §
12-11-5 of this title.
   (D)   Compliance with requirements; variance.
      (1)   Requirements. Satellite dish antennas shall comply with the
following requirements.
         (a)   No more than one satellite dish antenna shall be allowed on any
lot as delineated on the official zoning map.
         (b)   The temporary use and/or installation of a satellite dish
antenna shall be limited to a maximum period of one day. Only three temporary
installations shall be allowed per business or residence per year.
         (c)   The maximum height allowed for any satellite dish antenna, when
measured from the top of the satellite dish antenna down to existing or
finished grade, whichever is more restrictive, shall not exceed 15 feet.
         (d)   The maximum size of any satellite dish antenna installed for use
by a single residence or business shall be limited to nine feet in diameter.
Satellite dish antennas serving multi-family dwellings shall be limited to a
maximum of 12 feet in diameter.
         (e)   No advertising, logos or identification shall be allowed on any
satellite dish antenna.
         (f)   Satellite dish antennas shall comply with the existing setback
requirements of the zone district in which the satellite dish antenna is
installed. Satellite dish antennas shall be prohibited in easements and public
rights-of-way. No portion of a satellite dish antenna or its supporting
structure shall encroach into the vertical plane as drawn from an existing
easement or setback line.
         (g)   Issuance of a building permit from the Department of Community
Development shall be required prior to the installation of any satellite dish
antenna.
         (h)   Adjacent property owners and owners of dwelling units on the
same lot as the applicant shall be notified of any application for the
installation of a satellite dish antenna. Notification procedures shall be as
outlined in §
12-3-6(C) of this title. Names and mailing addresses of adjacent property
owners and of owners of dwelling units on the same lot as the applicant shall
be provided to the Department of Community Development by the applicant.
         (i)   Due to the special aesthetic importance of the core areas of the
town, exterior installations of satellite dish antennas in Commercial Cores 1,
2, Lionshead Mixed Use 1 and Lionshead Mixed Use 2 Districts shall be permitted
only if screened by some type of enclosing structure. Said structures required
to enclose a satellite dish antenna in these areas shall comply with all
applicable zoning regulations and shall be architecturally compatible with the
existing structure.
      (2)   Variance. A variance may be requested from any of the provisions of
this section. The procedures for obtaining a variance shall be set forth in
Chapter 17 of this title.
(Ord. 9(1985) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 3(1999) § 7; Ord. 29(2005) § 33)
§ 12-14-20 COMMERCIAL CORE CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Endorsement. The Town Council hereby endorses the commercial core
construction mitigation sign and construction fencing package (available for
public inspection at the offices of the Town Clerk of the Town of Vail).
   (B)   Regulations. In order to facilitate the implementation of the
commercial core construction mitigation sign and construction fencing package,
the following process shall be substituted for the customary zoning, design
review and sign review as set forth in this code.
      (1)   All temporary signs, construction fencing and other temporary
improvements which comply with the commercial core construction mitigation sign
and construction fencing package necessary for the mitigation of construction
impacts in Vail’s commercial cores shall be administered by the Public Works
Department Director or his or her designee.
      (2)   (a)   If town staff and a private retailer disagree on the
inclusion of their business signage on the general and direct business impact
mitigation signage, that retailer shall have the right to appeal the decision
of staff to a three person panel comprised of the Town Manager, Director of
Public Works and Director of Community Development. This three person panel
shall have two business days to convene and make a ruling on the appeal.
         (b)   Should the private retailer still feel that an incorrect
decision was made, they can then appeal the panel’s decision to Town Council.
Appeal to Town Council shall occur after this code’s requirements for appeals
are met.
   (C)   Termination of section. The authority granted pursuant to this section
shall terminate on April 1, 2011, unless sooner extended or terminated by
separate ordinance of the Council.
(Ord. 10(2005) §§ 1 – 3; Ord. 4(2008) § 1; Ord. 8(2010) § 1)
§ 12-14-21 OUTDOOR DISPLAY OF GOODS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish regulations for
the outdoor display of goods by retail establishments.
   (B)   Applicability. Outdoor display of goods shall be permitted by retail
establishments in the following zone districts and shall be prohibited in all
zone districts not listed:
      (1)   Housing (H) District;
      (2)   Commercial Core 1 (CC1) District;
      (3)   Commercial Core 2 (CC2) District;
      (4)   Commercial Core 3 (CC3) District;
      (5)   Commercial Service Center (CSC) District;
      (6)   Lionshead Mixed Use 1 (LMU-1) District;
      (7)   Lionshead Mixed Use 2 (LMU-2) District; and
      (8)   Ski Base/Recreation 2 (SBR2) District.
   (C)   Permit not required. Outdoor display on private property, where
permitted by the provisions of this title, are not subject to design review. A
permit is required to obtain a license to utilize town owned property for
outdoor display of goods by retail establishments, per Title 8, Chapter 7 of
this code.
   (D)   Requirements for outdoor display. Where permitted, outdoor display
shall be subject to the following limitations.
      (1)   Location. The area used for an outdoor display shall be located
directly in front of the retail establishment displaying the goods. Outdoor
display shall be entirely upon the establishment’s own property unless the
retail establishment is permitted to utilize town owned property, per the
requirements in Title 8, Chapter 7 of this code.
      (2)   Circulation. Outdoor display shall not impede circulation and thus,
shall not block or encroach upon the required ingress/egress of doorways,
walkways, stairways and parking or loading/delivery spaces.
      (3)   Street and sidewalk width. A minimum street width of 22 feet shall
be maintained in order to allow for emergency vehicle access. Sidewalks shall
remain a minimum width of six feet. Connection of exit discharge to the public
way, as required by the adopted Building Code, shall not be blocked.
      (4)   Public safety. Outdoor display shall not pose any risks to public
safety, shall not block or encroach upon any fire lane, and shall maintain a
minimum distance to fire hydrants of seven feet to side or rear, and 14 feet to
the front.
      (5)   Aesthetics. Outdoor display shall not negatively impact established
view corridors or acknowledged “postcard” images and shall not visually detract
from or block storefront or shop window.
      (6)   Outdoor display fixtures. Outdoor display fixtures shall be
freestanding, temporary in nature, and shall be removed from the exterior
location when the business is closed.
      (7)   Height. No part of any outdoor display shall extend more than six
feet above existing grade.
      (8)   Signage. Sale signs may be permitted on outdoor displays, as
regulated by Title 11, Chapter 6 of this code. No other signage is permitted on
or adjacent to outdoor displays that is not otherwise approved by the
Administrator, subject to the regulations of Title 11 of this code.
      (9)   Cardboard boxes prohibited. Outdoor display of goods shall not
include any cardboard boxes, unless part of individual packaging of goods.
      (10)   Code compliance. All aspects of the outdoor display shall remain
in compliance with this code and the Vail Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 32(2007) § 13)
CHAPTER 15: GROSS RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA (GRFA)
Section
12-15-1 Purpose
12-15-2 GRFA requirements by zone district
12-15-3 Definition, calculation and exclusions
12-15-4 Interior conversions
12-15-5 Additional gross residential floor area (250 Ordinance)
§ 12-15-1 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is intended to control and limit the size, bulk and mass of
residential structures within the town. Gross residential floor area (GRFA)
regulation is an effective tool for limiting the size of residential structures
and ensuring that residential structures are developed in an environmentally
sensitive manner by allowing adequate air and light in residential areas and
districts.
(Ord. 13(1996) § 3)
§ 12-15-2 GRFA REQUIREMENTS BY ZONE DISTRICT.
Zone Districts GRFA Ratio
Zone Districts              GRFA Ratio
HR Hillside Residential     0.43 of site 10,000 sq. ft., plus
                           0.25 of site area > 10,000 and ≤ 22,000 sq. ft.,
                            plus
                           0.07 of site area > 22,000 sq. ft.
SFR Single-Family           0.40 of site area ≤ 10,000 sq. ft., plus
Residential
                           0.13 of site area > 10,000 sq. ft.
R Two-Family Residential    0.46 of site area ≤ 10,000 sq. ft., plus
                           0.38 of site area > 10,000 and ≤ 15,000 sq. ft.,
                            plus
                           0.13 of site area > 15,000 and ≤ 30,000 sq. ft.,
                            plus
                           0.06 of site area > 30,000 sq. ft.
PS Two-Family Primary/      0.46 of site area ≤ 10,000 sq. ft., plus
Secondary Residential
                           0.38 of site area > 10,000 and ≤ 15,000 sq. ft.,
                            plus
                           0.13 of site area > 15,000 and ≤ 30,000 sq. ft.,
                            plus
                           0.06 of site area > 30,000 sq. ft.
                           (the secondary unit shall not exceed 40% of the
                            allowable GRFA)
RC Residential Cluster      0.36 of buildable area
LDMF Low Density Multiple-  0.44 of buildable area
Family
MDMF Medium Density         0.56 of buildable area
Multiple-Family
HDMF High Density Multiple- 0.76 of buildable area
Family
CH-1 Community Housing 1    No limitation
CH-2 Community Housing 2    No limitation
CH-3 Community Housing 3    No limitation
VVT Vail Village Townhouse  Unlimited
PA Public Accommodation     1.50 of buildable area
CC1 Commercial Core 1       0.80 of buildable area
CC2 Commercial Core 2       0.80 of buildable area
CC3 Commercial Core 3       0.30 of buildable area
CSC Commercial Service      0.40 of buildable area (GRFA shall not exceed 50%
Center                      of the total building floor area on any site)
ABD Arterial Business       0.60 of buildable area
HS Heavy Service            None permitted
LMU-1 Lionshead Mixed Use 1 2.5 of buildable area
LMU-2 Lionshead Mixed Use 2 2.5 of buildable area
PA-2 Public Accommodation 2 1.50 of buildable area
A Agricultural and Open     2,000 sq. ft.
Space
OR Outdoor Recreation       None permitted
NAP Natural Area            None permitted
Preservation
SBR Ski Base/Recreation     Per Town Council approval
SBR2 Ski Base/Recreation 2  Per Planning and Environmental Commission approval
SDD Special Development     Per underlying zoning or per development plan
Districts                   approval by Town Council
P Parking                   None permitted
GU General Use              Per Planning and Environmental Commission approval
WVMF Overlay                0.46 of site area
 
(Ord. 13(1997) § 3; Ord. 3(1999) § 8; Ord. 3(2001) § 4; Ord. 4(2003) § 1; Ord.
14(2004) § 12; Ord. 29(2005) § 34; Ord. 2(2012) § 7; Ord. 11(2020) § 1; Ord. 19
(2023) § 3; Ord. 6(2024) § 8)
§ 12-15-3 DEFINITION, CALCULATION AND EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   Within the Hillside Residential (HR), Single-Family Residential (SFR),
Two-Family Residential (R) and Two-Family Primary/Secondary Residential (PS)
Districts.
      (1)   Gross residential floor area defined. For residential uses, the
total square footage of all horizontal areas on all levels of a structure, as
measured to the outside face of the sheathing of the exterior walls (i.e., not
including exterior wall finishes). Floor area shall include, but not be limited
to, elevator shafts and stairwells at each level, lofts, fireplaces, bay
windows, mechanical spaces, vents and chases, storage areas and other similar
areas. Garages; attics; vaulted or open to below spaces; basements; crawl
spaces; and roofed or covered decks, porches, terraces or patios shall be
included as floor area; except the horizontal areas of a structure as set forth
herein shall then be deducted from the calculation of GRFA.
         (a)   GRFA shall be calculated by measuring the total square footage
of a building as set forth in the definition above.
         (b)   Excluded areas as set forth herein, shall then each be deducted
from the total square footage.
            1.   Enclosed garage area. Enclosed garage areas of up to 300
square feet per vehicle space not exceeding a maximum of two vehicle parking
spaces for each allowable dwelling unit permitted by this title.
               a.   Garage area deducted from floor area is awarded on a “per
space basis” and shall be contiguous to a vehicular parking space. Each
vehicular parking space shall be designed with direct and unobstructed
vehicular access.
               b.   Alcoves, storage areas and mechanical areas which are
located in a garage and which are 25% or more open to the garage area may be
included in the garage area deduction.
               c.   Interior walls separating the garage from other areas of a
structure may be included in the garage area deduction.
            2.   Attic areas with a ceiling height of five feet or less. Attic
areas with a ceiling height of five feet or less, as measured from the topside
of the structural members of the floor to the underside of the structural
members of the roof directly above.
            3.   Attic areas with trusses. Attic areas created by construction
of a roof with structural truss type members, provided the trusses are spaced
no greater than 30 inches apart.
            4.   Attic areas with nontruss system. Attic areas created by
construction of a roof structure utilizing a nontruss system, with spaces
greater than five feet in height, if all of the following criteria are met:
               a.   The area cannot be accessed directly from a habitable area
within the same building level;
               b.   The area shall have only the minimum access required by the
Building Code from the level below;
               c.   The attic space shall not have a structural floor capable
of supporting a “live load” greater than 40 pounds per square foot, and the
“floor” of the attic space shall not be improved with decking;
               d.   It must be demonstrated by the architect that a “truss
type” or similar structural system cannot be utilized as defined in the
definition of floor area; and
               e.   It will be necessary that a structural element (i.e.,
collar tie) be utilized when rafters are used for the roof system. In an
unusual situation, such as when a bearing ridge system is used, the staff will
review the space for compliance with this policy.
            5.   Crawl spaces.
               a.   Crawl spaces accessible through an opening not greater than
12 square feet in area, with five feet or less of ceiling height, as measured
from the surface of the earth to the underside of structural floor members of
the floor/ceiling assembly above.
               b.   Crawl spaces created by a “stepped foundation”, hazard
mitigation or other similar engineering requirement that has a total height in
excess of five feet may be excluded from GRFA calculations at the discretion of
the Administrator.
            6.   Basements. On the lowest level of a structure, the total
percentage of all exterior wall surfaces of the structure as a whole (interior
party walls are not considered exterior walls for the purposes of this section)
that are unexposed and below existing or finished grade, whichever is more
restrictive, shall be the percentage of the horizontal area of the lowest level
deducted from the GRFA calculations. The lowest level shall be the finished
floor level with the lowest USGS elevation, including all floor levels within
six vertical feet of the lowest level. A multi-unit building shall be
considered one structure. The percentage deduction calculations shall be
rounded to nearest whole percent. The lowest level exterior wall surface area
shall be measured from the finished floor elevation of that level to the
underside of the structural floor members of the floor/ceiling assembly above.
For the purposes of these calculations, retaining walls and site walls shall
not be considered part of the lowest level exterior walls. The deduction shall
be applied to all horizontal areas on the lowest level of a structure,
including garages and employee housing units also deducted from the calculation
of GRFA elsewhere in this title; but the deduction does not apply to any crawl
space or attic.
            7.   Vaulted spaces. Interior vaulted spaces and areas “open to
below” with a floor to ceiling height less than 16 feet, as measured from the
finished floor to the underside of the structural members of the floor/ceiling
assembly above.
            8.   Roofed or covered decks and the like. Roofed or covered decks,
porches, terraces, patios or similar features or spaces with no more than three
exterior walls and a minimum opening of not less than 25% of the linear
perimeter of the area of said deck, porch, terrace, patio or similar feature or
space, provided the opening is contiguous and fully open from floor to ceiling,
with an allowance for a railing of up to 44 inches in height and support posts
with a diameter of 18 inches or less which are spaced no closer than ten feet
apart. The space between the posts shall be measured from the outer surface of
the post.
            9.   Under ground vaults.
               a.   Underground vaults with a mechanical lift system for the
purpose of enclosed parking, if all the following criteria are met:
                  i.   The vault is only used for the storage of vehicles;
                  ii.   The vault floor to the finished floor elevation of the
garage does not exceed 16 feet in height;
                  iii.   The entire perimeter and volume of the vault shall be
below finished grade and be within the footprint of the garage;
                  iv.   The vault is only accessible from within the garage;
                  v.   Any openings to the vault shall be no larger than the
minimum required by the Building Code; and
                  vi.   The floor area of the vault shall not exceed 300 square
feet per vehicle space and not exceed a maximum of two vehicle spaces for each
allowable dwelling unit permitted by this title.
               b.   Underground vaults with a mechanical lift system for the
purpose of enclosed parking that meet the criteria above shall not be
considered as part of the lowest level for the purpose of the deduction for
basements in subsection (6) above.
      (2)   Additional calculation provisions.
         (a)   Common interior party walls. Where more than one dwelling unit
exists within a single structure, GRFA shall be measured for each dwelling unit
from the center of common interior party walls to the outside face of the
sheathing of the exterior walls.
         (b)   Greenhouse windows. Greenhouse windows (self-supporting windows)
shall not be counted as GRFA. GREENHOUSE WINDOWS are defined according to the
following criteria.
            1.   Distance above inside floor level. In order for a window to be
considered a greenhouse window, a minimum distance of 36 inches must be
provided between the bottom of the window and the floor surface, as measured on
the inside face of the building wall. (Floor surface shall not include steps
necessary to meet Building Code egress requirements.) The 36 inch minimum was
chosen because it locates the window too high to be comfortably used as a
window seat and because it allows for a typical four foot high greenhouse
window to be used in a room with an eight foot ceiling height.
            2.   Projection. No greenhouse window may protrude more than 18
inches from the exterior surface of the building. This distance allows for
adequate relief for appearance purposes, without substantially adding to the
mass and bulk of the building.
            3.   Construction characteristics. All greenhouse windows shall be
self-supporting and shall not require special framing or construction methods
for support, with the exception that brackets below the window may be allowed
provided they die into the wall of the building at a 45 degree angle. A small
roof over the window may also be allowed provided the overhang is limited to
four inches beyond the window plane.
            4.   Dimensional requirement. No greenhouse window shall have a
total window surface area greater than 44 square feet. This figure was derived
on the assumption that the maximum height of a window, in an average sized
room, is four feet and the maximum width for a four-foot high self-supporting
window is between six feet and eight feet (approximately 32 square feet). Since
the window would protrude no more than 18 inches, the addition of side windows
would bring the overall window area to approximately 44 square feet.
            5.   Quantity. Up to two greenhouse windows will be allowed per
dwelling unit, however, the 44 square foot size limitation will apply to the
combined area of the two windows.
            6.   Site coverage. Greenhouse windows do not count as site
coverage.
         (c)   Vaulted spaces. Any interior space with a floor to ceiling
height of 16 feet or greater, as measured from the finished floor to the
underside of the structural members of the floor/ceiling assembly above, shall
be calculated as GRFA on two levels of a structure.
   (B)   Within the Residential Cluster (RC), Low Density Multiple-Family
(LDMF), Medium Density Multiple-Family (MDMF), High Density Multiple-Family
(HDMF), Vail Village Townhouse (VVT), West Vail Multi-Family Overlay (WVMF)
Districts, Community Housing – 1 (CH-1), Community Housing – 2 (CH-2), and
Community Housing – 3 (CH-3).
      (1)   Gross residential floor area defined. For residential uses, the
total square footage of all horizontal areas on all levels of a structure, as
measured to the outside face of the sheathing of the exterior walls (i.e., not
including exterior wall finishes). Floor area shall include, but not be limited
to, elevator shafts and stairwells at each level, lofts, fireplaces, bay
windows, mechanical spaces, vents and chases, storage areas, and other similar
areas. Garages; attics; vaulted or open to below spaces; basements; crawl
spaces; and roofed or covered decks, porches, terraces or patios shall be
included as floor area; except the horizontal areas of a structure as set forth
herein shall then be deducted from the calculation of GRFA.
         (a)   GRFA shall be calculated by measuring the total square footage
of a building as set forth in the definition above. Excluded areas as set forth
herein, shall then each be deducted from the total square footage.
            1.   Common spaces. All or part of the following spaces, provided
such spaces are common spaces:
               a.   Common hallways, stairways, elevator shafts and airlocks;
               b.   Common lobby areas;
               c.   Common enclosed recreation facilities;
               d.   Common heating, cooling or ventilation systems, solar rock
storage areas, or other mechanical systems;
               e.   Common closet and storage areas, providing access to such
areas is from common hallways only;
               f.   Meeting and convention facilities;
               g.   Office space, provided such space is used exclusively for
the management and operation of on site facilities;
               h.   Floor area to be used in a Type III “employee housing unit
(EHU)” as defined and restricted by Chapter 13 of this title; and
               i.   Common enclosed garages to accommodate on site parking
requirements.
            2.   Enclosed garage areas. Enclosed garage areas, which are not
common spaces, of up to 300 square feet per vehicle space not exceeding a
maximum of two vehicle parking spaces for each allowable dwelling unit
permitted by this title.
               a.   This garage area deducted from floor area is awarded on a
“per space basis” and shall be contiguous to a vehicular parking space. Each
vehicular parking space shall be designed with direct and unobstructed
vehicular access.
               b.   Alcoves, storage areas and mechanical areas which are
located in a garage and which are 25% or more open to the garage area may be
included in the garage area deduction.
               c.   Interior walls separating the garage from other areas of a
structure may be included in the garage area deduction.
            3.   Attic areas with a ceiling height of five feet or less. Attic
areas with a ceiling height of five feet or less, as measured from the topside
of the structural members of the floor to the underside of the structural
members of the roof directly above.
            4.   Attic areas with trusses. Attic areas created by construction
of a roof with structural truss type members, provided the trusses are spaced
no greater than 30 inches apart.
            5.   Attic areas with nontruss system. Attic areas created by
construction of a roof structure utilizing a nontruss system, with spaces
greater than five feet in height, if all of the following criteria are met:
               a.   The area cannot be accessed directly from a habitable area
within the same building level;
               b.   The area shall have only the minimum access required by the
Building Code from the level below;
               c.   The attic space shall not have a structural floor capable
of supporting a “live load” greater than 40 pounds per square foot, and the
“floor” of the attic space shall not be improved with decking;
               d.   It must be demonstrated by the architect that a “truss
type” or similar structural system cannot be utilized as defined in the
definition of floor area; and
               e.   It will be necessary that a structural element (i.e.,
collar tie) be utilized when rafters are used for the roof system. In an
unusual situation, such as when a bearing ridge system is used, the staff will
review the space for compliance with this policy.
            6.   Crawl spaces.
               a.   Crawl spaces accessible through an opening not greater than
12 square feet in area, with five feet or less of ceiling height, as measured
from the surface of the earth to the underside of structural floor members of
the floor/ceiling assembly above.
               b.   Crawl spaces created by a “stepped foundation”, hazard
mitigation or other similar engineering requirement that has a total height in
excess of five feet may be excluded from GRFA calculations at the discretion of
the Administrator.
            7.   Basements. On the lowest level of a structure, the total
percentage of all exterior wall surfaces of the structure as a whole (interior
party walls are not considered exterior walls for the purposes of this section)
that are unexposed and below existing or finished grade, whichever is more
restrictive, shall be the percentage of the horizontal area of the lowest level
deducted from the GRFA calculations. The lowest level shall be the finished
floor level with the lowest USGS elevation, including all floor levels within
six vertical feet of the lowest level. A multi-unit building shall be
considered one structure. The percentage deduction calculations shall be
rounded to nearest whole percent. The lowest level exterior wall surface area
shall be measured from the finished floor elevation of that level to the
underside of the structural floor members of the floor/ceiling assembly above.
For the purposes of these calculations, retaining walls and site walls shall
not be considered part of the lowest level exterior walls. The deduction shall
be applied to all horizontal areas on the lowest level of a structure,
including garages and employee housing units also deducted from the calculation
of GRFA elsewhere in this title; but the deduction does not apply to any crawl
space or attic.
            8.   Vaulted spaces. Interior vaulted spaces and areas “open to
below” with a floor to ceiling height less than 16 feet, as measured from the
finished floor to the underside of the structural members of the floor/ceiling
assembly above.
            9.   Roofed or covered decks and the like. Roofed or covered decks,
porches, terraces, patios or similar features or spaces with no more than three
exterior walls and a minimum opening of not less than 25% of the linear
perimeter of the area of said deck, porch, terrace, patio or similar feature or
space, provided the opening is contiguous and fully open from floor to ceiling,
with an allowance for a railing of up to 44 inches in height and support posts
with a diameter of 18 inches or less which are spaced no closer than ten feet
apart. The space between the posts shall be measured from the outer surface of
the post.
            10.   Airlock. All or part of an airlock within an accommodation or
dwelling unit not exceeding a maximum of 25 square feet, providing such unit
has direct access to the outdoors.
      (2)   Additional calculation provisions.
         (a)   Common interior party walls. Where more than one dwelling unit
exists within a single structure, GRFA shall be measured for each dwelling unit
from the center of common interior party walls to the outside face of the
sheathing of the exterior walls.
         (b)   Greenhouse windows. Greenhouse windows (self-supporting windows)
shall not be counted as GRFA. GREENHOUSE WINDOWS are defined according to the
following criteria:
            1.   Distance above inside floor level. In order for a window to be
considered a greenhouse window, a minimum distance of 36 inches must be
provided between the bottom of the window and the floor surface, as measured on
the inside face of the building wall. (Floor surface shall not include steps
necessary to meet Building Code egress requirements.) The 36 inch minimum was
chosen because it locates the window too high to be comfortably used as a
window seat and because it allows for a typical four foot high greenhouse
window to be used in a room with an eight foot ceiling height;
            2.   Projection. No greenhouse window may protrude more than 18
inches from the exterior surface of the building. This distance allows for
adequate relief for appearance purposes, without substantially adding to the
mass and bulk of the building;
            3.   Construction characteristics. All greenhouse windows shall be
self-supporting and shall not require special framing or construction methods
for support, with the exception that brackets below the window may be allowed
provided they die into the wall of the building at a 45 degree angle. A small
roof over the window may also be allowed provided the overhang is limited to
four inches beyond the window plane;
            4.   Dimensional requirement. No greenhouse window shall have a
total window surface area greater than 44 square feet. This figure was derived
on the assumption that the maximum height of a window, in an average sized
room, is four feet and the maximum width for a four foot high self-supporting
window is between six feet and eight feet (approximately 32 square feet). Since
the window would protrude no more than 18 inches, the addition of side windows
would bring the overall window area to approximately 44 square feet; and
            5.   Quantity. Up to two greenhouse windows will be allowed per
dwelling unit, however, the 44 square foot size limitation will apply to the
combined area of the two windows.
            6.   Site coverage. Greenhouse windows do not count as site
coverage.
         (c)   Vaulted spaces. Any interior space with a floor to ceiling
height of 16 feet or greater, as measured from the finished floor to the
underside of the structural members of the floor/ceiling assembly above, shall
be calculated as GRFA on two levels of a structure.
   (C)   Within all other districts.
      (1)   Gross residential floor area defined. The total square footage of
all levels of a building, as measured at the inside face of the exterior walls
(i.e., not including furring, sheetrock, plaster and other similar wall
finishes). GRFA shall include, but not be limited to, elevator shafts and
stairwells at each level, lofts, fireplaces, bay windows, mechanical chases,
vents and storage areas. Attics, crawl spaces and roofed or covered decks,
porches, terraces or patios shall also be included in GRFA, unless they meet
the following provisions
         (a)   Within buildings containing two or fewer dwelling units, the
following areas shall be excluded from calculation as GRFA. GRFA shall be
calculated by measuring the total square footage of a building as set forth in
the definition above. Excluded areas as set forth herein, shall then be
deducted from total square footage:
            1.   Enclosed garages of up to 300 square feet per vehicle space
not exceeding a maximum of two spaces for each allowable dwelling unit
permitted by this title;
            2.   Attic space with a ceiling height of five feet or less, as
measured from the topside of the structural members of the floor to the
underside of the structural members of the roof directly above. Attic area
created by construction of a roof with truss type members will be excluded from
calculation as GRFA, provided the trusses are spaced no greater than 30 inches
apart;
            3.   Crawl spaces accessible through an opening not greater than 12
square feet in area, with five feet or less of ceiling height, as measured from
the surface of the earth to the underside of structural floor members of the
floor/ceiling assembly above; and
            4.   Roofed or covered deck, porches, terraces, patios or similar
features or spaces with no more than three exterior walls and a minimum opening
of not less than 25% of the linear perimeter of the area of said deck, porch,
terrace, patio, or similar feature or space, provided the opening is contiguous
and fully open from floor to ceiling with an allowance for a railing of up to
44 inches in height.
         (b)   Within buildings containing more than two allowable dwellings or
accommodation units, the following additional areas shall be excluded from
calculation as GRFA. GRFA shall be calculated by measuring the total square
footage of a building as set forth herein. Excluded areas as set forth shall
then be deducted from the total square footage:
            1.   Enclosed garages to accommodate on site parking requirements;
            2.   All or part of the following spaces, provided such spaces are
common spaces:
               a.   Common hallways, stairways, elevator shafts and airlocks;
               b.   Common lobby areas;
               c.   Common enclosed recreation facilities;
               d.   Common heating, cooling or ventilation systems, solar rock
storage areas, or other mechanical systems;
               e.   Common closet and storage areas, providing access to such
areas is from common hallways only;
               f.   Meeting and convention facilities;
               g.   Office space, provided such space is used exclusively for
the management and operation of on site facilities; and
               h.   Floor area to be used in a Type III “employee housing unit
(EHU)” as defined and restricted by Chapter 13 of this title.
            3.   All or part of an airlock within an accommodation or dwelling
unit not exceeding a maximum of 25 square feet, providing such unit has direct
access to the outdoors;
            4.   Overlapping stairways within an accommodation unit or dwelling
unit shall only be counted at the lowest level;
            5.   Attic space with a ceiling height of five feet or less, as
measured from the topside of the structural members of the floor to the
underside of the structural members of the roof directly above. Attic areas
created by construction of a roof with truss type members will be excluded from
calculation as GRFA, provided the trusses are spaced no greater than 30 inches
apart;
            6.   Crawl spaces accessible through an opening not greater than 12
square feet in area, with five feet or less of ceiling height, as measured from
the surface of the earth to the underside of structural floor members of the
floor/ceiling assembly above;
            7.   Roofed or covered decks, porches, terraces, patios or similar
features or spaces with no more than three exterior walls and a minimum opening
of not less than 25% of the linear perimeter of the area of said deck, porch,
terrace, patio or similar feature or space, provided the opening is contiguous
and fully open from floor to ceiling, with an allowance for a railing of up to
44 inches in height and support posts with a diameter of 18 inches or less
which are spaced no closer than ten feet apart. The space between the posts
shall be measured from the outer surface of the post.
      (2)   Additional calculation provisions.
         (a)   Walls. Interior walls are included in GRFA calculations. For
two-family and primary/secondary structures, common party walls shall be
considered exterior walls.
         (b)   Greenhouse windows. Greenhouse windows (self-supporting windows)
shall not be counted as GRFA. GREENHOUSE WINDOWS are defined according to the
following criteria:
            1.   Distance above inside floor level. In order for a window to be
considered a greenhouse window, a minimum distance of 36 inches must be
provided between the bottom of the window and the floor surface, as measured on
the inside face of the building wall. (Floor surface shall not include steps
necessary to meet Building Code egress requirements.) The 36 inch minimum was
chosen because it locates the window too high to be comfortably used as a
window seat and because it allows for a typical four foot high greenhouse
window to be used in a room with an eight foot ceiling height;
            2.   Projection. No greenhouse window may protrude more than 18
inches from the exterior surface of the building. This distance allows for
adequate relief for appearance purposes, without substantially adding to the
mass and bulk of the building;
            3.   Construction characteristics. All greenhouse windows shall be
self-supporting and shall not require special framing or construction methods
for support, with the exception that brackets below the window may be allowed
provided they die into the wall of the building at a 45 degree angle. A small
roof over the window may also be allowed provided the overhang is limited to
four inches beyond the window plane;
            4.   Dimensional requirement. No greenhouse window shall have a
total window surface area greater than 44 square feet. This figure was derived
on the assumption that the maximum height of a window, in an average sized
room, is four feet and the maximum width for a four foot high self-supporting
window is between six feet and eight feet (approximately 32 square feet). Since
the window would protrude no more than 18 inches, the addition of side windows
would bring the overall window area to approximately 44 square feet;
            5.   Quantity. Up to two greenhouse windows will be allowed per
dwelling unit, however, the 44 square foot size limitation will apply to the
combined area of the two windows; and
            6.   Site coverage. Greenhouse windows do not count as site
coverage.
         (c)   Vaulted spaces. Vaulted spaces and areas “open to below” are not
included in GRFA calculations.
         (d)   Garage credit.
            1.   Allowable garage area is awarded on a “per space basis”, with
a maximum of two spaces per allowable unit. Each garage space shall be designed
with direct and unobstructed vehicular access. All floor area included in the
garage credit shall be contiguous to a vehicular space.
            2.   Alcoves, storage areas and mechanical areas which are located
in the garage and which are 25% or more open to the garage area shall be
included as garage credit.
            3.   Garage space in excess of the allowable garage credit shall be
counted as GRFA.
      e.   Crawl and attic space.
            1.   Crawl spaces created by a “stepped foundation”, hazard
mitigation or other similar engineering requirement that has a total height in
excess of five feet may be excluded from GRFA calculations at the discretion of
the Administrator.
            2.   If a roof structure is designed utilizing a nontruss system,
and spaces greater than five feet in height result, these areas shall not be
counted as GRFA if all of the following criteria are met:
               a.   The area cannot be accessed directly from a habitable area
within the same building level;
               b.   The area shall have the minimum access required by the
building code from the level below six square foot opening maximum);
               c.   The attic space shall not have a structural floor capable
of supporting a “live load” greater than 40 pounds per square foot, and the
“floor” of the attic space cannot be improved with decking;
               d.   It must be demonstrated by the architect that a “truss
type” or similar structural system cannot be utilized as defined in the
definition of GRFA; and
               e.   It will be necessary that a structural element (i.e.,
collar tie) be utilized when rafters are used for the roof system. In an
unusual situation, such as when a bearing ridge system is used, the staff will
review the space for compliance with this policy.
(Ord. 13(1997) § 3; Ord. 3(1999) § 8; Ord. 6(2000) § 5; Ord. 5(2003) §§ 16, 17;
Ord. 14(2004) § 13; Ord. 29(2005) § 35; Ord. 25(2011) §§ 1, 2, 3, 4; Ord. 2
(2012) §§ 8, 9; Ord. 16(2016) §§ 1, 2; Ord. 25(2021) § 1; Ord. 19(2023) § 4;
Ord. 6(2024) § 9)
§ 12-15-4 INTERIOR CONVERSIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section provides for flexibility and latitude with the
use of interior spaces within existing dwelling units that meet or exceed the
allowable gross residential floor area (GRFA). This would be achieved by
allowing for the conversion of existing interior spaces such as vaulted spaces,
crawl spaces and other interior spaces into floor area, provided the bulk and
mass of the building is not increased. This provision is intended to
accommodate existing homes where residents desire to expand the amount of
usable space in the interior of a home. The town has also recognized that
property owners have constructed interior space without building permits. This
provision is also intended to reduce the occurrence of interior building
activity without building permits and thereby further protecting the health,
safety, and welfare of the community.
   (B)   Applicability. Within all zone districts except the Single-Family
Residential (SFR), Two-Family Residential (R), Two-Family Primary/Secondary
Residential (PS) and Vail Village Townhouse (VVT) Districts, dwelling units
that meet or exceed allowable GRFA will be eligible to make interior
conversions provided the following criteria are satisfied.
      (1)   Any existing dwelling unit shall be eligible to add GRFA, via the
“interior space conversion” provision in excess of existing or allowable GRFA
including such units located in a special development district; provided, that
such GRFA complies with the standards outlined herein.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, EXISTING UNIT shall mean any
dwelling unit that has been constructed prior to August 5, 1997, and has
received a certificate of occupancy, or has been issued a building permit prior
to August 5, 1997, or has received final Design Review Board approval prior to
August 5, 1997.
   (C)   Standards.
      (1)   No application to add floor area pursuant to this section shall be
made until such time as all the allowable GRFA has been constructed on the
property, or an application is presently pending in conjunction with the
application to add floor area that utilizes all allowable GRFA for the
property.
      (2)   Applications to add floor area pursuant to this section shall be
constructed utilizing the floor area or volume of the building that is in
existence prior to August 5, 1997. New structures or exterior additions to
existing structures built after the effective date hereof will not be eligible
for interior conversions. Examples of how floor area can be increased under the
provision of this section include the conversion of existing basement or crawl
spaces to GRFA, the addition of lofts within the building volume of the
existing building, and the conversion of other existing interior spaces such as
storage areas to GRFA.
      (3)   Proposals for GRFA pursuant to this section may involve exterior
modifications to existing buildings, however, such modifications shall not
increase the building bulk and mass of the existing building. Examples of
exterior modifications which are considered to increase building bulk and mass
include, but are not limited to, the expansion of any existing exterior walls
of the building, regrading around a building in a manner which exposes more
than two vertical feet of existing exterior walls and the expansion of existing
roofs. Notwithstanding the two vertical foot limitation to regrading around a
building described above, additional regrading may be permitted in order to
allow for egress from new interior spaces. The extent of such regrading shall
be limited to providing adequate egress areas for windows or doors as per the
minimum necessary requirement for the adopted Building Code. Examples of
exterior modifications which are not considered to increase building bulk and
mass include, but are not limited to, the addition of windows, doors,
skylights, and window wells. Subject to design approval, dormers may be
considered an exterior modification in conjunction with interior conversions
permitted by this section. Prior to approval of proposed dormers or regrading
for windows or doors as described above, the staff or the Design Review Board
shall find that they do not add significantly to the bulk and mass of the
building and are compatible with the overall scale, proportion and design of
the building. For the purpose of this section, DORMERS are defined as a
vertical window projecting from a sloping roof of a building, having vertical
sides and a gable or shed roof, in which the total cumulative length of the
dormer(s) does not exceed 50% of the length of the sloping roof, per roof
plane, from which the dormer(s) projects.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9705f9f5a609f564c22e87000bf13fb3850d87c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-29.png]
 
      (4)   Proposals for the utilization of interior conversion GRFA pursuant
to this section shall comply with all town zoning standards and applicable
development standards.
      (5)   Floor area within a garage that was originally approved through the
garage space credit may not be converted to GRFA pursuant to this section.
   (D)   Process. Applications shall be made to the Department of Community
Development staff on forms provided by the Department. Applications for
interior conversions to single-family, two-family, primary/secondary or multi-
family dwelling units located in a special development district (SDD) pursuant
to this section shall also be allowed without amending the GRFA provisions of
the SDD. However, properties with GRFA restrictions recorded on the plat for
the development shall be regulated according to the plat restrictions unless
the plat is modified to remove such restrictions. If the property is owned in
common (condominium association) and/or located within a development lot, the
written approval of the other property owner, owners or applicable owners’
association shall be required. This can be either in the form of a letter of
approval or signature on the application. The planning staff will review the
application to ensure the proposed addition complies with all provisions of the
interior conversion section. Submittals shall include:
      (1)   Application fees pursuant to the current fee schedule;
      (2)   Information and plans as set forth and required by §
12-11-4(C) of this title or as determined by the Department of Community
Development staff. Applicants need to submit as built floor plans of the
structure so that staff can identify the existing building from any new
additions that have occurred after the approval of this chapter;
      (3)   Proposals deemed by the Department of Community Development staff
to be in compliance with this section and all applicable zoning and development
regulations shall be approved by the Department of Community Development or
shall be forwarded to the Design Review Board in accordance with Chapter 11 of
this title. Proposals deemed to not comply with this section or applicable
zoning and development regulations shall be denied.
      (4)   Upon receiving approvals pursuant to this section, applicants shall
proceed with securing a building permit prior to initiating construction of the
project.
      (5)   Any decisions of the Department of Community Development pursuant
to this section may be appealed by any applicant in accordance with the
provisions of §
12-3-3 of this title.
(Ord. 13(1997) § 3; Ord. 16(1998) § 1; Ord. 24(2000) § 2; Ord. 31(2001) § 11;
Ord. 14(2004) §14; Ord. 29(2005) § 36; Ord. 2(2012) § 10; Ord. 27(2016) § 4)
§ 12-15-5 ADDITIONAL GROSS RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA (250 ORDINANCE).
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide an inducement for
the upgrading of existing dwelling units which have been in existence within
the town for a period of at least five years by permitting the addition of up
to 250 square feet of gross residential floor area (GRFA) to such dwelling
units, provided the criteria set forth in this section are met. This section
does not assure each single-family or two-family dwelling unit located within
the town an additional 250 square feet, and proposals for any additions
hereunder shall be reviewed closely with respect to site planning, impact on
adjacent properties and applicable town development standards. The 250 square
feet of additional gross residential floor area may be granted to existing
single-family dwellings, existing two-family and existing multi-family dwelling
units only once, but may be requested and granted in more than one increment of
less than 250 square feet. Upgrading of an existing dwelling unit under this
section shall include additions thereto or renovations thereof, but a demo/
rebuild shall not be included as being eligible for additional gross
residential floor area.
   (B)   Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to dwelling
units in all zone districts except the Single-Family Residential (SFR), Two-
Family Residential (R), Two-Family Primary/Secondary Residential (PS), Vail
Village Townhouse (VVT), and West Vail Multi-Family Overlay (WVMF) Districts.
   (C)   Single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings in zone districts
other than the Single-Family Residential (SFR), Two-Family Residential (R),
Two-Family Primary/Secondary Residential (PS) And Vail Village Townhouse (VVT)
Districts. A single-family or two-family dwelling unit shall be eligible for
additional gross residential floor area (GRFA) not to exceed a maximum of 250
square feet of GRFA in addition to the existing or allowable GRFA for the site.
Before such additional GRFA can be granted, the single-family or two-family
dwelling unit shall meet the following criteria.
      (1)   Eligible time frame. A single-family or two-family dwelling unit
shall be eligible for additional GRFA, pursuant to this section, if it is in
existence prior to November 30, 1995, or a completed Design Review Board
application for the original construction of said unit has been accepted by the
Department of Community Development by November 30, 1995. In addition, at least
five years must have passed from the date the single-family dwelling or two-
family dwelling unit was issued a certificate of occupancy (whether temporary
or final) or, in the event a certificate of occupancy was not required for use
of the dwelling at the time of completion, from the date of original completion
and occupancy of the dwelling.
      (2)   Use of additional floor space. Proposals for the utilization of the
additional gross residential floor area (GRFA) under this provision shall
comply with all town zoning requirements and applicable development standards.
If a variance is required for a proposal, it shall be approved by the Planning
and Environmental Commission pursuant to Chapter 17 of this title before an
application is made in accordance with this section. The applicant must obtain
a building permit within one year of final Planning and Environmental
Commission approval or the approval for additional GRFA shall be voided.
      (3)   Garage conversions.
         (a)   If any proposal provides for the conversion of a garage or
enclosed parking area to GRFA, such conversion will not be allowed unless:
            1.   Either the conversion will not reduce the number of enclosed
parking spaces below the number required by this code; or
            2.   Provision is made for creation of such additional enclosed
parking spaces as may be required for the new total GRFA under this code.
         (b)   Plans for a new garage or enclosed parking area, if required,
shall accompany the application under this section, and shall be constructed
concurrently with the conversion.
      (4)   Parking. Any increase in parking requirements as set forth in
Chapter 10 of this title due to any GRFA addition pursuant to this section
shall be met by the applicant.
      (5)   Conformity with guidelines. All proposals under this section shall
be required to conform to the design review guidelines set forth in Chapter 11
of this title. A single-family or two-family dwelling unit for which an
addition is proposed shall be required to meet the minimum town landscaping
standards as set forth in Chapter 11 of this title. Before any additional GRFA
may be permitted in accordance with this section, the staff shall review the
maintenance and upkeep of the existing single-family or two-family dwelling and
site, including landscaping, to determine whether they comply with the design
review guidelines. No temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for
any expansion of GRFA pursuant to this section until all required improvements
to the site and structure have been completed as required.
      (6)   Applicability. No pooling of gross residential floor area shall be
allowed in single-family or two-family dwelling units. No application for
additional GRFA shall request more than 250 square feet of gross residential
floor area per single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling, nor shall any
application be made for additional GRFA until such time as all the allowable
GRFA has been constructed on the property, or an application is presently
pending in conjunction with the application for additional GRFA that utilizes
all allowable GRFA for the property.
      (7)   One time grant. Any single-family or two-family dwelling unit which
has previously been granted additional GRFA pursuant to this section and is
demo/rebuild, shall be rebuilt without the additional GRFA as previously
approved.
      (8)   Demo/rebuild not eligible. Any single-family or two-family dwelling
unit which is to be demo/rebuild shall not be eligible for additional GRFA.
      (9)   Nonconforming structures and site improvements. Structures which do
not conform to density controls shall be eligible for additional GRFA pursuant
to this section.
   (D)   Multi-family dwellings. Any dwelling unit in a multi-family structure
that meets allowable GRFA shall be eligible for additional gross residential
floor area (GRFA) not to exceed a maximum of 250 square feet of GRFA in
addition to the existing or allowable GRFA for the site. Any application of
such additional GRFA must meet the following criteria.
      (1)   Eligible time frame. A multiple-family dwelling unit shall be
eligible for additional GRFA, pursuant to this section, if it is in existence
prior to November 30, 1995, or a completed Design Review Board application for
the original construction of said unit has been accepted by the Department of
Community Development by November 30, 1995. In addition, at least five years
must have passed from the date the building was issued a certificate of
occupancy (whether temporary or final) or, in the event a certificate of
occupancy was not required for use of the building at the time of completion,
from the date of original completion and occupancy of the building.
      (2)   Use of additional floor space. Proposals for the utilization of the
additional GRFA under this provision shall comply with all town zoning
requirements and applicable development standards. If a variance is required
for a proposal, it shall be approved by the Planning and Environmental
Commission pursuant to Chapter 17 of this title before an application is made
in accordance with this section. The applicant must obtain a building permit
within one year of final Planning and Environmental Commission approval or the
approval for additional GRFA shall be voided.
      (3)   Parking area conversions. Portions of existing enclosed parking
areas may be converted to GRFA under this section if there is no loss of
existing enclosed parking spaces in said enclosed parking area.
      (4)   Parking requirements observed. Any increase in parking requirements
due to any GRFA addition pursuant to this section shall be met by the
applicant.
      (5)   Guideline compliance; review. All proposals under this section
shall be reviewed for compliance with the design review guidelines as set forth
in Chapter 11 of this title. Existing properties for which additional GRFA is
proposed shall be required to meet minimum town landscaping standards as set
forth in Chapter 11 of this title. General maintenance and upkeep of existing
buildings and sites, including the multi-family dwellings, landscaping or site
improvements (i.e., trash facilities, berming to screen surface parking and the
like) shall be reviewed by the staff after the application is made for
conformance to said design review guidelines. No temporary certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for any expansion of GRFA pursuant to this section
until all required improvements to the multi-family dwelling site and building
have been completed as required.
      (6)   Condominium association submittal. An application for additional
GRFA shall be made on behalf of each of the individual dwelling unit owners by
the condominium association or similar governing body.
      (7)   Applicability. The provisions of this section are applicable only
to GRFA additions to individual dwelling units. No pooling of GRFA shall be
allowed in multi-family dwellings. No application for additional GRFA shall
request more than 250 square feet of gross residential floor area per dwelling
unit nor shall any application be made for additional GRFA until such time as
all the allowable GRFA has been constructed on the property. When exterior
additions are proposed to a multi-family structure, the addition of the GRFA
shall be designed and developed in context of the entire structure.
      (8)   Nontransferable to demo/rebuild. Any building which has previously
been granted additional GRFA pursuant to this section and is demo/rebuild,
shall be rebuilt without the additional GRFA as previously approved.
      (9)   Demo/rebuild not eligible. Any multiple-family structure or
dwelling unit which is to be demo/rebuild shall not be eligible for additional
GRFA.
      (10)   Nonconforming structures and site improvements. Structures which
do not conform to density controls shall be eligible for additional GRFA
pursuant to this section.
   (E)   Procedure.
      (1)   Application; content. Application shall be made on forms provided
by the Department of Community Development. If the property is owned in common
(condominium association) and/or located within a development lot, the written
approval of the other property owner, owners or applicable owners’ association
shall be required. This can be either in the form of a letter of approval or
signature on the application. The application shall also include:
         (a)   A fee pursuant to the current schedule shall be required with
the application;
         (b)   Information and plans as set forth and required by §
12-11-4(C) of this title; and
         (c)   Any other applicable information required by the Department of
Community Development to satisfy the criteria outlined in this section.
      (2)   Hearing set; notice. Upon receipt of a completed application for
additional GRFA, the Design Review Board shall set a date for a hearing in
accordance with §
12-11-4(C)(2) of this title. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with
§
12-11-4(C)(2) and (C)(3) of this title.
      (3)   Compliance required. If the Department of Community Development
staff determines that the site for which additional GRFA is applied for
pursuant to this section does not comply with minimum town landscaping or site
standards as provided herein, the applicant will be required to bring the site
into compliance with such standards before any such temporary or permanent
certificate of occupancy will be issued for the additional GRFA added to the
site. Before any building permit is issued, the applicant shall submit
appropriate plans and materials indicating how the site will be brought into
compliance with said town minimum standards, which plans and materials shall be
reviewed by and approved by the Department of Community Development.
      (4)   Building permit. Upon receiving the necessary approvals pursuant to
this section, the applicant shall proceed with the securing of a building
permit prior to beginning the construction of additional GRFA.
(Ord. 13(1997) § 3; Ord. 16(1998) § 2; Ord. 24(2000) § 2; Ord. 5(2001) § 4;
Ord. 14(2004) § 15; Ord. 29(2005) § 37; Ord. 2(2012) § 11; Ord. 27(2016) § 5;
Ord. 19(2023) § 5)
CHAPTER 16: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
Section
12-16-1 Purpose; limitations
12-16-2 Application; contents
12-16-3 Fee
12-16-4 Hearing
12-16-5 Planning and Environmental Commission action
12-16-6 Criteria; findings
12-16-7 Use specific criteria and standards
12-16-8 Permit approval and effect
12-16-9 Conflicting provisions
12-16-10 Amendment procedures
§ 12-16-1 PURPOSE; LIMITATIONS.
   In order to provide the flexibility necessary to achieve the objectives of
this title, specified uses are permitted in certain districts subject to the
granting of a conditional use permit. Because of their unusual or special
characteristics, conditional uses require review and evaluation so that they
may be located properly with respect to the purposes of this title and with
respect to their effects on surrounding properties. The review process
prescribed in this chapter is intended to assure compatibility and harmonious
development between conditional uses and surrounding properties and the town at
large. Uses listed as conditional uses in the various districts may be
permitted subject to such conditions and limitations as the town may prescribe
to ensure that the location and operation of the conditional uses will be in
accordance with development objectives of the town and will not be detrimental
to other uses or properties. Where conditions cannot be devised to achieve
these objectives, applications for conditional use permits shall be denied.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 18.100)
§ 12-16-2 APPLICATION; CONTENTS.
   Application for a conditional use permit shall be made upon a form provided
by the Administrator. The application shall be supported by documents, maps,
plans and other material containing the following information:
   (A)   Name and address of the owner and/or applicant and a statement that
the applicant, if not the owner, has the permission of the owner to make
application and act as agent for the owner;
   (B)   Legal description, street address and other identifying data
concerning the site;
   (C)   A description of the precise nature of the proposed use and its
operating characteristics, and measures proposed to make the use compatible
with other properties in the vicinity;
   (D)   A site plan showing proposed development of the site, including
topography, building locations, parking, traffic circulation, usable open
space, landscaped area, and utilities and drainage features;
   (E)   Preliminary building plans and elevations sufficient to indicate the
dimensions, general appearance, scale and interior plan of all buildings;
   (F)   Such additional material as the Administrator may prescribe or the
applicant may submit pertinent to the application and to the findings
prerequisite to the issuance of a conditional use permit as prescribed in §
12-16-6 of this chapter;
   (G)   A list of the owner or owners of record of the properties adjacent to
the subject property which is subject of the hearing; provided, however,
notification of owners within a condominium project shall be satisfied by
notifying the managing agent, or the registered agent of the condominium
project, or any member of the board of directors of a condominium association.
The list of owners, managing agent of the condominium project, registered agent
or members of the board of directors, as appropriate, shall include the names
of the individuals, their mailing addresses and the general description of the
property owned or managed by each. Accompanying the list shall be stamped,
addressed envelopes to each individual or agent to be notified to be used for
the mailing of the notice of hearing. It will be the applicant’s responsibility
to provide this information and stamped, addressed envelopes. Notice to the
adjacent property owners shall be mailed first class, postage prepaid; and
   (H)   If the property is owned in common (condominium association) and/or
located within a development lot, the written approval of the other property
owner, owners or applicable owners’ association shall be required. This can be
either in the form of a letter of approval or signature on the application.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 18.200; Ord. 16(1978) § 4(a); Ord. 30(1978) § 1; Ord. 50(1978)
§ 15; Ord. 49(1991) § 1; Ord. 24(2000) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 38; Ord. 27(2016) §
6)
§ 12-16-3 FEE.
   The Town Council shall set a conditional use permit fee schedule sufficient
to cover the cost of town staff time and other expenses incidental to the
review of the application. The fee shall be paid at the time of the
application, and shall not be refundable.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 18.300; Ord. 29(2005) § 38)
§ 12-16-4 HEARING.
   Upon receipt of a conditional use permit application, the Planning and
Environmental Commission shall set a date for hearing in accordance with §
12-3-6(B) of this title. Notice shall be given, and the hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with §
12-3-6(C) and (D) of this title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 18.400; Ord. 29(2005) § 38)
§ 12-16-5 PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)   Possible range of action. Within 30 days of the application for a
public hearing on a conditional use permit, the Planning and Environmental
Commission shall act on the application. The Commission may approve the
application as submitted or may approve the application subject to such
modifications or conditions as it deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of
this title, or the Commission may deny the application. A conditional use
permit may be revocable, may be granted for a limited time period, or may be
granted subject to such other conditions as the Commission may prescribe.
Conditions may include, but shall not be limited to, requiring special
setbacks, open spaces, fences or walls, landscaping or screening, and street
dedication and improvement; regulation of vehicular access and parking, signs,
illumination, and hours and methods of operation; control of potential
nuisances; prescription of standards for maintenance of buildings and grounds;
and prescription of development schedules.
   (B)   Variances. A conditional use permit shall not grant variances, but
action on a variance may be considered concurrently with a conditional use
permit application on the same site. Variances shall be granted in accordance
with the procedure prescribed in Chapter 17 of this title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 18.500; Ord. 16(1978) § 4(b); Ord. 29(2005) § 38)
§ 12-16-6 CRITERIA; FINDINGS.
   (A)   Factors enumerated. Before acting on a conditional use permit
application, the Planning and Environmental Commission shall consider the
following factors with respect to the proposed use:
      (1)   Relationship and impact of the use on development objectives of the
town;
      (2)   Effect of the use on light and air, distribution of population,
transportation facilities, utilities, schools, parks and recreation facilities,
and other public facilities and public facilities needs;
      (3)   Effect upon traffic, with particular reference to congestion,
automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control,
access, maneuverability and removal of snow from the streets and parking areas;
      (4)   Effect upon the character of the area in which the proposed use is
to be located, including the scale and bulk of the proposed use in relation to
surrounding uses;
      (5)   Such other factors and criteria as the Commission deems applicable
to the proposed use; and
      (6)   The environmental impact report concerning the proposed use, if an
environmental impact report is required by Chapter 12 of this title.
   (B)   Necessary findings. The Planning and Environmental Commission shall
make the following findings before granting a conditional use permit:
      (1)   That the proposed location of the use is in accordance with the
purposes of this title and the purposes of the zone district in which the site
is located;
      (2)   That the proposed location of the use and the conditions under
which it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or
improvements in the vicinity; and
      (3)   That the proposed use will comply with each of the applicable
provisions of this title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 18.600; Ord. 36(1980) § 1; Ord. 22(1996) § 3; Ord. 10(1998) §
9; Ord. 29(2005) § 38)
§ 12-16-7 USE SPECIFIC CRITERIA AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. The following criteria and standards shall be applicable to
the uses listed below in consideration of a conditional use permit. These
criteria and standards shall be in addition to the criteria and findings
required by §
12-16-6 of this chapter.
   (B)   Uses and criteria.
      (1)   Bakeries and confectioneries. The use shall be restricted to
preparation of products specifically for sale on the premises.
      (2)   Beauty and barber shops. Within the Commercial Core 1 and
Commercial Core 2 Zone Districts, beauty and barber shops shall have no
exterior frontage on any public way, street, walkway or mall area. Within the
Lionshead Mixed Use 1 and Lionshead Mixed Use 2 Zone Districts, beauty and
barber shops shall have no exterior frontage on any primary or secondary
pedestrian mall as defined by the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan.
      (3)   Brewpubs.
         (a)   There shall be no exterior storage of supplies, refuse or
materials on the property upon which the brewpub is operated.
         (b)   The operator of the brewpub shall comply with the town’s loading
and delivery regulations as set forth in this title.
         (c)   Brewpubs which sell beer or ale at wholesale or which sell beer
for off site consumption are allowed so long as the total of wholesale sales
and sales for off site consumption do not exceed 45% of the product
manufactured by the brewpub on an annual basis.
      (4)   Commercial storage. No exterior frontage on any public way, street,
walkway or mall area is permitted.
      (5)   Convenience food stores.
         (a)   Maximum store size shall be 8,000 square feet.
         (b)   No more than 33% of the gross building area of the entire
structure on site.
      (6)   Major arcades.
         (a)   No exterior frontage on any public way, street, walkway or mall
area is permitted.
         (b)   Amusement devices shall not be visible or audible from any
public way, street, walkway or mall area.
      (7)   Television stations.
         (a)   The production room/studio shall be visible from the street or
pedestrian mall.
         (b)   The television station shall be “cablecast” only, requiring no
additional antennas.
      (8)   Timeshare unit or fractional fee club proposal. Prior to the
approval of a conditional use permit for a timeshare estate, fractional fee,
fractional fee club, or timeshare license proposal, the following shall be
considered.
         (a)   If the proposal for a fractional fee club is a redevelopment of
an existing facility, the fractional fee club shall maintain an equivalency of
accommodation units as are presently existing. Equivalency shall be maintained
either by an equal number of units or by square footage. If the proposal is a
new development, it shall provide at least as much accommodation unit gross
residential floor area (GRFA) as fractional fee club unit gross residential
floor area (GRFA).
         (b)   Lock off units and lock off unit square footage shall not be
included in the calculation when determining the equivalency of existing
accommodation units or equivalency of existing square footage.
         (c)   The ability of the proposed project to create and maintain a
high level of occupancy.
         (d)   Employee housing units may be required as part of any new or
redevelopment fractional fee club project requesting density over that allowed
by zoning. The number of employee housing units required will be consistent
with employee impacts that are expected as a result of the project.
         (e)   The applicant shall submit to the town a list of all owners of
existing units within the project or building; and written statements from 100%
of the owners of existing units indicating their approval, without condition,
of the proposed fractional fee club. No written approval shall be valid if it
was signed by the owner more than 60 days prior to the date of filing the
application for a conditional use.
         (f)   Each of the fractional fee club units shall be made available
for short term rental in a managed program when not in use by the club members.
The project shall include or be proximate to transportation, retail shops,
eating and drinking establishments, and recreation facilities.
      (9)   Transportation businesses.
         (a)   All vehicles shall be parked upon approved parking areas.
         (b)   All vehicles shall be adequately screened from public rights-of-
way and adjacent properties, consisting of landscaping and berms, in
combination with walls and fences, where deemed necessary to reduce the
deleterious effects of vehicle storage.
         (c)   The number, size and location of vehicles permitted to be stored
shall be determined by the Planning and Environmental Commission based on the
adequacy of the site for vehicle storage. Consideration shall be given to the
adequacy of landscaping and other screening methods to prevent impacts to
adjacent properties and other commercial and/or residential uses.
         (d)   Parking associated with transportation businesses shall not
reduce or compromise the parking required for other uses on site.
      (10)   Home child daycare facility.
         (a)   The maximum number of children shall be no more children than
allowed by the State of Colorado licensing authority for a childcare home or a
total of six children, whichever is more restrictive.
         (b)   A State of Colorado license is required to operate a childcare
home and a current copy of the license shall be kept on file in the Town of
Vail Community Development Department.
         (c)   A conditional use permit for a home occupation to operate a home
childcare facility shall be valid for one year. The permit holder shall be
responsible for requesting renewals and maintaining all permits as current.
      (11)   Funiculars and other similar conveyances.
         (a)   Funiculars and other similar conveyances shall only be allowed
when designed for the purpose of providing pedestrian access to a residential
dwelling, an accessory structure, or recreation facility/structure, as
determined by the Planning and Environmental Commission.
         (b)   Funiculars and other similar conveyances shall only be allowed
when significant site constraints prevent conventional means of vehicular
access to the residential dwelling, an accessory structure, or recreation
facility/structure, as determined by the Planning and Environmental Commission.
SIGNIFICANT SITE CONSTRAINTS shall be defined as natural features such as
mature trees, natural drainages, stream courses and other natural water
features, rock outcroppings, wetlands, excessive slopes, other natural features
and existing structures that may create practical difficulties in the site
planning and development of the lot.
         (c)   Funiculars and other similar conveyances shall only be allowed
when designed to be compatible with both the site upon which they are located
and the residential dwelling to which they provide access, as determined by the
Planning and Environmental Commission.
         (d)   Funiculars and other similar conveyances shall only be allowed
when designed to be appropriately screened.
      (12)   Single-family and two-family residential dwellings in the
Lionshead Mixed Use 1 Zone District. Single-family and two-family residential
dwellings shall be allowed when:
         (a)   Developed as part of a coordinated mixed use development;
         (b)   A low density residential scale is advantageous to create
compatibility with or a transition to other low density residential development
in the vicinity of the coordinated mixed use development;
         (c)   The single-family and two-family residential dwellings are
designed to the same general scale and character of residential dwellings in
residential zone districts that allow single-family and two-family residential
dwellings; and
         (d)   The proposed coordinated mixed use development containing the
single-family and/or two-family residential dwellings is consistent with the
intent and objectives of the Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan.
      (13)   Business offices and professional offices in the Residential
Cluster Zone District.
         (a)   Offices for physicians, dentists and similar medical practices
shall be excluded in the residential cluster zone district.
         (b)   Business and professional offices shall be secondary to the
residential use of the district. The net floor area of the office use shall be
no greater than 15% of the allowable gross residential floor area of the
development site.
         (c)   The sale of merchandise shall be prohibited.
         (d)   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 10 of this title and shall be clearly separate from the
area designated for residential parking.
         (e)   No overnight parking or storage of commercial vehicles
associated with the professional or business office use shall be permitted.
         (f)   Signage shall be permitted in accordance with §
11-6-3(A), of this code, business signs within Sign District 1 (Title 11, “Sign
Regulations”) and shall be subject to review by the Design Review Board.
         (g)   The number of employees allowed in a business office or
professional office within the residential cluster zone district shall not
exceed one employee for each 200 square feet of net floor area.
         (h)   Homeowners’ association approval shall be required of all
conditional use permit applications for a professional office or a business
office within the residential cluster district, pursuant to §
12-11-4(B)(1)(d) of this title.
      (14)   Temporary business offices.
         (a)   Offices for real estate agents shall be excluded.
         (b)   The storage, sale or display of merchandise on the premises
shall occupy less than 10% of the office’s floor area.
         (c)   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title.
         (d)   Signage shall be provided in accordance Title 11, “Sign
Regulations”, of this code.
         (e)   1.   The business and service activities and transactions of a
temporary business office may only be conducted for a limited time period, not
to exceed three years. Unless the time period is limited to a shorter duration,
the approval of a conditional use permit for a temporary business office shall
expire and become void within three years from the initial date of approval.
            2.   The Planning and Environmental Commission may grant a
subsequent extension to a conditional use permit approval to allow a temporary
business office to continue activities and transactions beyond the original
time period limit, if the Commission determines special circumstances and/or
conditions exist to warrant such an extension. An extension may only be granted
for the minimum time period necessary to facilitate specific redevelopment
construction activities that achieve the town’s goals, policies and objectives,
but in no event may such an extension be allowed for more than three years
without additional review.
         (f)   A conditional use permit approval for a temporary business
office shall be reviewed by the Planning and Environmental Commission on an
annual basis to verify the applicant’s compliance with the conditions of
approval.
      (15)   Sexually oriented businesses.
         (a)   Sexually oriented businesses shall be located a minimum of 500
feet from any:
            1.   Religious institution;
            2.   Public park;
            3.   Library;
            4.   State licensed daycare facility;
            5.   School or educational facility serving persons under 18 years
of age; or
            6.   Any other sexually oriented business.
         (b)   The distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall
be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from
the closest exterior structural wall of each business. Distance between any
sexually oriented business and any religious institution, school or public park
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures,
from the nearest portion of the structure used for the sexually oriented
business to the nearest property line of the religious institution or school,
or the nearest boundary of the public park.
         (c)   Sexually explicit advertisements or other promotional displays
for sexually oriented businesses that are harmful to minors shall not be
visible to minors from pedestrianways, walkways or other public areas.
         (d)   Sexually oriented businesses shall obtain a license pursuant to
Title 4, “Business And License Regulations”, of this code, as a condition of
approval for a conditional use permit.
(Ord. 10(1998) § 11; Ord. 17(2001) § 2; Ord. 31(2001) § 6; Ord. 33(2003) § 1;
Ord. 36(2003) § 1;; Ord. 29(2005) § 38; Ord. 33(2006) § 2; Ord. 22(2007) § 3;
Ord. 35(2007) § 3; Ord. 13(2008) § 3; Ord. 1(2011) § 1; Ord. 16(2020) § 1; Ord.
6(2024) § 10)
§ 12-16-8 PERMIT APPROVAL AND EFFECT.
   Approval of a conditional use permit, or an amendment to an existing
conditional use permit, shall lapse and become void if a building permit is not
obtained and construction not commenced and diligently pursued toward
completion or the use for which the approval has been granted has not commenced
within two years from when the approval becomes final. Approval of a
conditional use permit shall also lapse and become void if the use for which
the approval has been granted is discontinued for a period of two years,
regardless of any intent to resume operation of the use.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 26)
§ 12-16-9 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   In addition to the conditions which may be prescribed pursuant to this
chapter, a conditional use shall also be subject to all other procedures,
permits and requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and
regulations of the town. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of
a conditional use permit and any other permit or requirement, the more
restrictive provision shall prevail.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 18.900; Ord. 10(1998) § 10)
§ 12-16-10 AMENDMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Administrator may approve amendments to an existing conditional
use permit (including, but not limited to, additions to buildings and
structures associated with the use, changes to the operation of the use,
changes to the previous conditions of approval and the like) if the
Administrator determines the amendment meets the following criteria:
      (1)   The amendment is in accordance with all applicable elements of this
code and the Vail Comprehensive Plan;
      (2)   The amendment does not alter the basic character or intent of the
original conditional use permit; and
      (3)   The amendment will not adversely affect the public health, safety
and welfare.
   (B)   All amendments to an existing conditional use permit not meeting the
above listed criteria, as determined by the Administrator, shall be reviewed by
the Planning and Environmental Commission in accordance with the procedures
described in §
12-16-5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 27)
CHAPTER 17: VARIANCES
Section
12-17-1 Purpose
12-17-2 Application information required
12-17-3 Fee
12-17-4 Hearing
12-17-5 Planning and Environmental Commission action
12-17-6 Criteria and findings
12-17-7 Permit approval and effect
12-17-8 Related permits and requirements
§ 12-17-1 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Reasons for seeking variance. In order to prevent or to lessen such
practical difficulties and unnecessary physical hardships inconsistent with the
objectives of this title as would result from strict or literal interpretation
and enforcement, variances from certain regulations may be granted. A practical
difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship may result from the size, shape or
dimensions of a site or the location of existing structures thereon; from
topographic or physical conditions on the site or in the immediate vicinity; or
from other physical limitations, street locations or conditions in the
immediate vicinity. Cost or inconvenience to the applicant of strict or literal
compliance with a regulation shall not be a reason for granting a variance.
   (B)   Development standards excepted. Variances may be granted only with
respect to the development standards prescribed for each zone district,
including lot area and site dimensions, setbacks, distances between buildings,
height, density control, building bulk control, site coverage, usable open
space, landscaping and site development, and parking and loading requirements;
or with respect to the provisions of Chapter 11 of this title, governing
physical development on a site.
   (C)   Use regulations not affected. The power to grant variances does not
extend to the use regulations prescribed for each zone district because the
flexibility necessary to avoid results inconsistent with the objectives of this
title is provided by Chapter 16, “Conditional Use Permits”, and by §
12-3-7, “Amendment”, of this title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 19.100; Ord. 29(2005) § 39)
§ 12-17-2 APPLICATION INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   Application for a variance shall be made upon a form provided by the
Administrator. The application shall be supported by documents, maps, plans and
other material containing the following information:
   (A)   Name and address of the owner and/or applicant and a statement that
the applicant, if not the owner, has the permission of the owner to make
application and act as agent for the owner;
   (B)   Legal description, street address and other identifying data
concerning the site;
   (C)   A statement of the precise nature of the variance requested, the
regulation involved and the practical difficulty or unnecessary physical
hardship inconsistent with the objectives of this title that would result from
strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation;
   (D)   A site plan showing all existing and proposed features on the site,
and on adjoining sites if necessary, pertinent to the variance requested,
including site boundaries, required setbacks, building locations and heights,
topography and physical features, and similar data;
   (E)   Such additional material as the Administrator may prescribe or the
applicant may submit pertinent to the application and to the findings
prerequisite to the issuance of a variance as prescribed in §
12-17-6 of this chapter;
   (F)   A list of the owner or owners of record of the properties adjacent to
the subject property which is subject of the hearing; provided, however,
notification of owners within a condominium project shall be satisfied by
notifying the managing agent, or the registered agent of the condominium
project, or any member of the board of directors of a condominium association.
The list of owners, managing agent, registered agent or members of the board of
directors, as appropriate, shall include the names of the individuals, their
mailing addresses and the general description of the property owned or managed
by each. Accompanying the list shall be stamped, addressed envelopes to each
individual or agent to be notified to be used for the mailing of the notice of
hearing. It will be the applicant’s responsibility to provide this information
and stamped, addressed envelopes. Notice to the adjacent property owners shall
be mailed first class, postage prepaid; and
   (G)   If the property is owned in common (condominium association) and/or
located within a development lot, the written approval of the other property
owner, owners, or applicable owners’ association shall be required. This can be
either in the form of a letter of approval or signature on the application.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 19.200; Ord. 30(1978) § 2; Ord. 50(1978) § 15; Ord. 49(1991) §
2; Ord. 24(2000) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 39; Ord. 27(2016) § 7)
§ 12-17-3 FEE.
   The Town Council shall set a variance fee schedule sufficient to cover the
cost of town staff time and other expenses incidental to the review of the
application. The fee shall be paid at the time of application, and shall not be
refundable.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 19.300; Ord. 29(2005) § 39)
§ 12-17-4 HEARING.
   Upon receipt of a variance application, the Planning and Environmental
Commission shall set a date for hearing in accordance with §
12-3-6(B) of this title. Notice shall be given, and the hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with §
12-3-6(C) and (D) of this title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 19.400; Ord. 29(2005) § 39)
§ 12-17-5 PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION ACTION.
   Within 20 days of the closing of a public hearing on a variance application,
the Planning and Environmental Commission shall act on the application. The
Commission may approve the application as submitted or may approve the
application subject to such modifications or conditions as it deems necessary
to accomplish the purposes of this title, or the Commission may deny the
application. A variance may be revocable, may be granted for a limited time
period, or may be granted subject to such other conditions as the Commission
may prescribe.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 19.500; Ord. 29(2005) § 39)
§ 12-17-6 CRITERIA AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Factors enumerated. Before acting on a variance application, the
Planning and Environmental Commission shall consider the following factors with
respect to the requested variance:
      (1)   The relationship of the requested variance to other existing or
potential uses and structures in the vicinity;
      (2)   The degree to which relief from the strict or literal
interpretation and enforcement of a specified regulation is necessary to
achieve compatibility and uniformity of treatment among sites in the vicinity,
or to attain the objectives of this title without grant of special privilege;
      (3)   The effect of the requested variance on light and air, distribution
of population, transportation and traffic facilities, public facilities and
utilities, and public safety; and
      (4)   Such other factors and criteria as the Commission deems applicable
to the proposed variance.
   (B)   Necessary findings. The Planning and Environmental Commission shall
make the following findings before granting a variance:
      (1)   That the granting of the variance will not constitute a grant of
special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties
classified in the same zone district;
      (2)   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or
improvements in the vicinity; and
      (3)   That the variance is warranted for one or more of the following
reasons:
         (a)   The strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the
specified regulation would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary
physical hardship inconsistent with the objectives of this title;
         (b)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applicable to the site of the variance that do not apply generally
to other properties in the same zone district; and
         (c)   The strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the
specified regulation would deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by the
owners of other properties in the same zone district.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 19.600; Ord. 29(2005) § 39)
§ 12-17-7 PERMIT APPROVAL AND EFFECT.
   Approval of the variance shall lapse and become void if a building permit is
not obtained and construction not commenced and diligently pursued toward
completion within two years from when the approval becomes final.
(Ord. 16(1978) § 5(c); Ord. 48(1991) § 2)
§ 12-17-8 RELATED PERMITS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the conditions which may be prescribed pursuant to this
chapter, any site or use subject to a variance permit shall also be subject to
all other procedures, permits and requirements of this and other applicable
chapters and regulations of the town. In event of any conflict between the
provisions of a variance permit and other permit or requirement, the more
restrictive provision shall prevail.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 19.900)
CHAPTER 18: NONCONFORMING SITES, USES, STRUCTURES AND SITE IMPROVEMENTS
Section
12-18-1 Purpose
12-18-2 Continuance
12-18-3 Sites
12-18-4 Uses
12-18-5 Structure and site improvement
12-18-6 Maintenance and repairs
12-18-7 Discontinuance
12-18-8 Change of use
12-18-9 Restoration
§ 12-18-1 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is intended to limit the number and extent of nonconforming
uses and structures by prohibiting or limiting their enlargement, their
reestablishment after abandonment and their restoration after substantial
destruction. While permitting nonconforming uses, structures and improvements
to continue, this chapter is intended to limit enlargement, alteration,
restoration or replacement which would increase the discrepancy between
existing conditions and the development standards prescribed by this title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 20.100)
§ 12-18-2 CONTINUANCE.
   Nonconforming sites, uses, structures and site improvements lawfully
established prior to the effective date hereof may continue, subject to the
limitations prescribed in this chapter. Sites, uses, structures and site
improvements lawfully authorized by permits or regulations existing prior to
the effective date hereof may continue, subject to such limitations as
prescribed by such permits or regulations.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 20.200)
§ 12-18-3 SITES.
   Sites lawfully established pursuant to regulations in effect prior to the
effective date hereof which do not conform to the minimum lot area and
dimension requirements prescribed by this title for the zone district in which
they are situated may be continued and shall be deemed legally established
building sites, subject to the site development standards prescribed by this
title. No such site shall be further reduced in area or dimensions.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 20.300; Ord. 29(2005) § 40)
§ 12-18-4 USES.
   The use of a site or structure lawfully established prior to the effective
date hereof which does not conform to the use regulations prescribed by this
title for the zone district in which it is situated may be continued, provided
that no such nonconforming use shall be enlarged to occupy a greater site area
or building floor area than it occupied on the effective date hereof. Any
subsequent reduction in site area or floor area occupied by a nonconforming use
shall be deemed a new limitation, and the use shall not thereafter be enlarged
to occupy a greater site area or floor area than such new limitation.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 20.400; Ord. 5(2001) § 5; Ord. 29(2005) § 40)
§ 12-18-5 STRUCTURE AND SITE IMPROVEMENT.
   Structures and site improvements lawfully established prior to the effective
date hereof which do not conform to the development standards prescribed by
this title for the zone district in which they are situated may be continued.
Such structures or site improvements may be enlarged only in accordance with
the following limitations.
   (A)   Lot and structure requirements. Structures or site improvements which
do not conform to requirements for setbacks, distances between buildings,
height, building bulk control or site coverage, may be enlarged; provided, that
the enlargement does not further increase the discrepancy between the total
structure and applicable building bulk control or site coverage standards; and
provided that the addition fully conforms with setbacks, distances between
buildings and height standards applicable to the addition.
   (B)   Density control. Structures which do not conform to density controls
(includes GRFA and dwelling units/acre) may be modified, only if the total
gross residential floor area of the enlarged structure does not exceed the
total gross residential floor area of the preexisting nonconforming structure.
   (C)   Open space and landscaping. Structures or site improvements which do
not conform to requirements for usable open space or landscaping and site
development may be enlarged; provided, that the usable open space requirements
applicable to such addition shall be fully satisfied, and provided that the
percentage of the total site which is landscaped shall not be reduced below the
minimum requirement.
   (D)   Off-street parking and loading. Structures or site improvements which
do not conform to the off- street parking and loading requirements of this
title may be enlarged; provided, that the parking and loading requirements for
such addition shall be fully satisfied and that the discrepancy between the
existing off-street parking and loading facilities and the standards prescribed
by this title shall not be increased.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 20.500; Ord. 29(2005) § 40; Ord. 14(2006) § 4)
§ 12-18-6 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS.
   Nonconforming uses, structures and site improvements may be maintained and
repaired as necessary for convenient, safe or efficient operation or use;
provided, that no such maintenance or repair shall increase the discrepancy
between the use, structure or site improvement and the development standards
prescribed by this title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 20.600)
§ 12-18-7 DISCONTINUANCE.
   Any nonconforming use which is discontinued for a period of 12 months,
regardless of any intent to resume operation of use, shall not be resumed
thereafter, and any future use of the site or structures thereon shall conform
to the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 20.700; Ord. 29(2005) § 40)
§ 12-18-8 CHANGE OF USE.
   A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use unless
permission has been granted by the Town Council. Prior to granting such
permission, the Council shall determine that the proposed use does not
substantially differ from the existing nonconforming use in terms of
compatibility with the character of the area in which it is located, and the
Council shall determine that the proposed use does not increase or aggravate
the degree of nonconformity existing prior to any such change of use.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 20.800; Ord. 29(2005) § 40)
§ 12-18-9 RESTORATION.
   Whenever a nonconforming use which does not conform with the regulations for
the zone district in which it is located, or a nonconforming structure or site
improvement which does not conform with the requirements for setbacks, height,
density control, building bulk control or site coverage is destroyed by fire or
other calamity, by act of God or by the public enemy, its use may be resumed or
the structure may be restored, provided the restoration is commenced within one
year and diligently pursued to completion. All new construction must conform to
the applicable adopted building codes, fire codes and other relevant codes
regarding safety and construction which are in effect at the time rebuilding is
proposed.
(Ord. 8(1973) § 20.900; Ord. 35(1981) § 1; Ord. 39(1982) § 1; Ord. 31(2001) §
12; Ord. 29(2005) §40)
CHAPTER 19: VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS
Section
12-19-1 Purpose
12-19-2 Definitions
12-19-3 Notice; hearing
12-19-4 Approval procedure
12-19-5 Effective date of approval
12-19-6 Vested property rights; duration
12-19-7 Notice of approval
12-19-8 Exception to vesting of property rights
12-19-9 Payment of costs
12-19-10 Other provisions unaffected
12-19-11 Limitations
§ 12-19-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide the procedures necessary to
implement the provisions of C.R.S. Title 24, Article 68, as amended.
(Ord. 2(1991) § 1)
§ 12-19-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Shall mean and be limited to a final major
or minor subdivision plat, or a special development district development plan.
   VESTED PROPERTY RIGHT. The right to undertake and complete the development
and use of property under the terms and conditions of the site specific
development plan, and shall be deemed established upon approval of a site
specific development plan.
(Ord. 2(1991) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 41)
§ 12-19-3 NOTICE; HEARING.
   No site specific development plan shall be approved by the Town Council or
any town board or commission as applicable, until after a public hearing
proceeded by written notice of such hearing, in accordance with Chapter 3 of
this title. Such notice may, at the option of the town, be combined with the
notice for any other hearing to be held in conjunction with the hearing on the
site specific development plan for the subject property. At such hearing,
persons with an interest in the subject matter of the hearing shall have an
opportunity to present relevant or material evidence as determined by the Town
Council or town board or commission as applicable.
(Ord. 2(1991) § 1)
§ 12-19-4 APPROVAL PROCEDURE.
   The action of the Town Council or town board or commission as applicable for
approval of a site specific development plan shall be in the same form as that
required to approve any request being considered for the subject property in
conjunction with the hearing on the site specific development plan, such action
being either by ordinance, resolution or motion as the case may be. If any
action by any board or commission is appealed to or called up by the Town
Council, approval shall be deemed to occur when a final decision of the Town
Council is rendered approving the site specific development plan. The approval
may include such terms and conditions as may be reasonably necessary to protect
the public health, safety and welfare, and the failure to abide by any such
terms and conditions may, at the option of the Town Council or town board or
commission as applicable, and after public hearing, result in the forfeiture of
vested property rights.
(Ord. 2(1991) § 1)
§ 12-19-5 EFFECTIVE DATE OF APPROVAL.
   A site specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective
date of the approval action relating thereto by the Town Council or the town
board or commission as the case may be.
(Ord. 2(1991) § 1)
§ 12-19-6 VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS; DURATION.
   A property right which has been vested as provided for in this chapter shall
remain vested for a period of three years. In the event amendments to a site
specific development plan are proposed and approved, the effective date of such
amendments for purposes of the duration of the vested property right, shall be
the date of the approval of the original site specific development plan, unless
the Town Council or applicable board or commission specifically finds to the
contrary and incorporates such finding in its approval of the amendment.
(Ord. 2(1991) § 1)
§ 12-19-7 NOTICE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Each map, plat, or site plan or other document constituting a site
specific development plan shall contain the following language:
   Approval of this plan may create a vested property right pursuant to C.R.S.
Title 24, Article 68, as amended.
   (B)   Failure to contain this statement shall invalidate the creation of the
vested property right. In addition, a notice describing generally the type and
intensity of use approved, the specific parcel or parcels of property affected,
and stating that a vested property right has been created, shall be published
once, not more than 14 days after approval of the site specific development
plan in a newspaper of general circulation within the town.
(Ord. 2(1991) § 1)
§ 12-19-8 EXCEPTION TO VESTING OF PROPERTY RIGHTS.
   (A)   A vested property right, even though once established as provided in
this chapter, precludes any zoning or land use action by the town or pursuant
to an initiated measure which would alter, impair, prevent, diminish or
otherwise delay the development or use of the property as set forth in the site
specific development plan, except:
      (1)   With the consent of the affected landowners;
      (2)   Upon the discovery of natural or human-made hazards on or in the
immediate vicinity of the subject property, which hazards could not reasonably
have been discovered at the time of site specific development plan approval,
and which hazards, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public
health, safety, and welfare; or
      (3)   (a)   To the extent that the affected landowner receives just
compensation for all costs, expenses, and liabilities incurred by the
landowner, including, but not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of
financing, and all architectural, planning, marketing, legal and other
consultants fees incurred after approval by the Town Council, or applicable
town board or commission, together with interest thereon at the legal rate
until paid.
         (b)   Just compensation shall not include any diminution in the value
of the property which is caused by such action.
   (B)   The establishment of a vested property right pursuant to law shall not
preclude the application of ordinances or regulations which are general in
nature and are applicable to all properties subject to land use regulation by
the town, including, but not limited to, building codes, fire, plumbing,
electrical and mechanical codes, housing, and dangerous building codes, and
design review guidelines.
(Ord. 2(1991) § 1)
§ 12-19-9 PAYMENT OF COSTS.
   In addition to any and all other fees and charges imposed by this code, the
applicant for approval of a site specific development plan shall pay all costs
relating to such approval as a result of the site specific development plan
review including publication of notices, public hearing and review costs. At
the option of the town, these costs may be imposed as a fee of $100.
(Ord. 2(1991) § 1)
§ 12-19-10 OTHER PROVISIONS UNAFFECTED.
   Approval of a site specific development plan shall not constitute an
exemption from or waiver of any provisions of this code pertaining to the
development and use of property.
(Ord. 2(1991) § 1)
§ 12-19-11 LIMITATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter is intended to create any vested property right, but
only to implement the provisions of C.R.S Title 24, Article 68, as amended. In
the event of the repeal of said article or judicial determination that said
article is invalid or unconstitutional or does not apply to home rule
municipalities such as the Town of Vail, this chapter shall be deemed to be
repealed, and the provisions hereof no longer effective.
(Ord. 2(1991) § 1)
CHAPTER 20: ANNEXED AREAS
Section
12-20-1 Applicability
12-20-2 Zone districts imposed
12-20-3 Designated on official zoning map
12-20-4 Zone district determination
§ 12-20-1 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall be applicable to any area annexed to the town subsequent
to the effective date hereof and in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 10(2006) § 2)
§ 12-20-2 ZONE DISTRICTS IMPOSED.
   (A)   An annexed area shall be divided into one or more zone districts as
established by §
12-4-1 of this title.
   (B)   An application for the imposition of zoning on the annexed area may be
considered in conjunction with the annexing ordinance at any time after a
petition for annexation has been found to be valid in accordance with C.R.S. §
31-12-107, as may be amended from time to time. The proposed zoning ordinance
shall not be passed on final reading prior to the passage of the annexing
ordinance on final reading.
   (C)   If an application for zoning determination is not reviewed in
conjunction with the annexing ordinance, a final zone district determination
must be made within 90 days of the effective date of the annexing ordinance.
(Ord. 10(2006) § 2)
§ 12-20-3 DESIGNATED ON OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The zone districts imposed on an annexed area shall be shown on a map which
shall become an addition to the official zoning map adopted by §
12-5-1 of this title.
(Ord. 10(2006) § 2)
§ 12-20-4 ZONE DISTRICT DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Hearing date. The date of the public hearing for consideration of the
zoning on the annexed area shall be set in accordance with the applicable
provisions of Chapter 3 of this title.
   (B)   Notice; conduct of hearing. Notice shall be given, the hearing shall
be conducted, and a report of the Planning and Environmental Commission stating
its findings and recommendations shall be transmitted to the Town Council in
accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 3 of this title.
   (C)   Council action. Upon receipt of the report of the Planning and
Environmental Commission, the Town Council shall determine the zone districts
to be imposed on the annexed area in accordance with the applicable provisions
of §
12-3-7(G) and (H) of this title.
   (D)   Ordinance enactment. The determination of zone district by the Town
Council shall be made through its enactment of an ordinance imposing zone
districts on the annexed area.
(Ord. 10(2006) § 2)
CHAPTER 21: HAZARD REGULATIONS
Section
12-21-1 Purpose
12-21-2 Definitions
12-21-3 Master hazard plans
12-21-4 Approval of master plans
12-21-5 Town Manager to accumulate information
12-21-6 Supplemental studies by applicant
12-21-7 Report to Town Council
12-21-8 Interpretation
12-21-9 Disclaimer of liability
12-21-10 Development restricted
12-21-11 Flood hazard zones
12-21-12 Restrictions in specific zones on excessive slopes
12-21-13 Restrictions in geologically sensitive areas
12-21-14 Right of appeal
12-21-15 Requirement of bond
12-21-16 Restrictions in wildfire hazard areas
12-21-17 Gore Creek setbacks
§ 12-21-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to help protect the inhabitants of the town
from dangers relating to development of floodplains, avalanche paths, steep
slopes, wildfire hazard areas and geologically sensitive areas; to regulate the
use of land areas which may be subject to wildfire, flooding and avalanche or
which may be geologically sensitive; and to further regulate development on
steep slopes; to protect the economic and property values of the town, to
protect the aesthetic and recreational values and natural resources of the
town, which are sometimes associated with floodplains, wildfire hazard areas,
avalanche areas and areas of geological sensitivity and slopes; to minimize
damage to public facilities and utilities and minimize the need for relief in
cleanup operations; to give notice to the public of certain areas within the
town where floodplains, wildfire hazard areas, avalanche areas and areas of
geologic sensitivity exist; and to promote the general public health, safety
and welfare.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 4; Ord. 5(1985) § 1; Ord. 19(2019) § 6)
§ 12-21-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
   ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan
or similar landform, which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport and deposition;
and unpredictable flow paths.
   APEX. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow
path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial
fan flooding can occur.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH or VO zone on a community’s
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1% chance or greater annual chance of
flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation shown on a FEMA flood insurance rate map
for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30 and
VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a
1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BLUE HAZARD AVALANCHE AREA. An area impacted by a snow producing a total
static and dynamic pressure less than 600 pounds per square foot on a flat
surface normal to the flow and/or a return interval in excess of 25 years.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). FEMA’s comment on a proposed
project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map, that would, upon
construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding
source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory
floodplain.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A structure or related infrastructure, but not the land
on which it is situated, as specified in §
12-21-11(I) of this chapter, that if flooded may result in significant hazards
to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for
the community at any time before, during and after a flood.
   CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ELEVATED BUILDING.
      (1)   A nonbasement building:
         (a)   Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO,
AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a
building in zones V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the floor of
the water; and
         (b)   Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity
of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood.
      (2)   In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D,
ELEVATED BUILDING also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters.
      (3)   In the case of Zones V1-30, VE or V, ELEVATED BUILDING also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of ELEVATED BUILDING, even
though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway
walls met the standards of § 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program
Regulations.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD ZONE. The land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area is designated as Zones A, AE,
AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V, on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM).
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas
(SFHA) and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that includes flood profiles and water surface elevation of
the base flood as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of FLOOD or FLOODING).
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY). The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   GEOLOGICALLY SENSITIVE AREA. An area within the Town of Vail which may be
subject to rockfalls, mudflows, debris flows, debris avalanches, and unstable
soil, slopes or rocks.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
      (4)   Classified as historically significant per Title 10, Chapter 2,
“Special Historic And Architectural Structures”, of this code.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). FEMA’s official revision of an effective
flood insurance rate map (FIRM), or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM), or
both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that
affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and
thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the
effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or special flood hazard area (SFHA).
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). FEMA’s modification of the
special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of § 60.3 of the National Flood
Insurance Program Regulations.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION.
      (1)   For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of
an initial FIRM, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
      (2)   For floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after December
4, 2007, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOODPLAIN (100-YEAR FLOODPLAIN). See the definition of
FLOOD HAZARD ZONE.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   RED HAZARD AVALANCHE AREA. Any area impacted by a snow avalanche producing a
total static and dynamic pressure in excess of 600 pounds per square foot on a
flat surface normal to the flow and/or a return interval of less than 25 years.
   SLOPE. As defined in §
12-2-2 of this title.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year, i.e., the 100-
year floodplain.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION (For Other Than New Construction Or Substantial
Improvements Under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (16 U.S.C. §§ 3501 et
seq.)). Substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The ACTUAL START means the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; the installation of streets or walkways; excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; or
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure. Market value shall be determined by a qualified assessor designated
by the Administrator. The market value of a structure is determined either:
      (1)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
      (2)   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions.
   TWO-YEAR FLOOD LINE (TYFL). The average two-year flood line on Gore Creek
and its named tributaries, as established by the data set adopted by the Town
Council by resolution.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)
(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
   WILDFIRE HAZARD AREA. An area at elevated risk to public safety from
wildland fire. WILDFIRE HAZARD AREAS contain or are surrounded by vegetation,
live or dead, which has the potential to burn and cause public safety hazards.
The entirety of the Town of Vail lies within a WILDFIRE HAZARD AREA.
   ZONE OF INFLUENCE. Any area in a potential avalanche hazard zone where
detailed information is not currently available but which may be impacted by
said hazard. These zones of influence shall be designated on the appropriate
maps of the Administrator of the town.
(Ord. 19(2013) § 1; Ord. 19(2019) § 7; Ord. 6(2022) § 2; Ord. 9(2022) § 2)
§ 12-21-3 MASTER HAZARD PLANS.
   The Town Manager shall formulate and develop master hazard plans for the
town. Said hazard plans shall be based on engineering studies and shall
indicate the location of known floodplains, avalanche, wildfire hazard areas
and geological hazard zones of influence, known red and blue avalanche and
geological hazard areas, and 40% slope areas. In addition, the plans may show
any other information or data deemed to be desirable by the Town Manager.
Maximum citizen participation during the formulation of the master hazard plans
as well as other phases of the information implementation of the hazard studies
and regulations shall be encouraged. The purpose of the master hazard plans is
to identify and alleviate present and future problems created by the
construction of improvements in the hazard areas within the town by means of
presenting in an orderly fashion the general data and information which are
essential to the understanding of the relationship between the hazards and
improvements located within said areas. The master hazard plans may be altered
from time to time to conform to new information or existing conditions.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 4; Ord. 29(2005) § 43; Ord. 19(2019) § 8)
§ 12-21-4 APPROVAL OF MASTER PLANS.
   The master hazard plans shall not be considered to be official hazard master
plans of the town until and unless the Town Council adopts the same, by motion.
No substantial modification of the master hazard plan shall be made unless it
is first approved by the Town Council in a similar manner. As soon as the
master hazard plans are adopted, or portions thereof are adopted, a copy of it
shall be placed on file in the office of the Town Clerk, where it may be
inspected by any interested party during normal business hours.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 4)
§ 12-21-5 TOWN MANAGER TO ACCUMULATE INFORMATION.
   The Town Manager, with the advice and approval of the Planning and
Environmental Commission, shall continue to study and accumulate information as
to hazard areas. When additional information is available, it shall be reviewed
by the Planning and Environmental Commission and added to the master hazard
plans.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 4)
§ 12-21-6 SUPPLEMENTAL STUDIES BY APPLICANT.
   If an application is made to build in an identified avalanche hazard zone of
influence or modification to the floodplain, the Administrator may require the
applicant to conduct supplemental studies as specified in this chapter. The
information submitted by the applicant following completion of said studies
shall be viewed by the town staff and the Planning and Environmental Commission
and may be added to the master hazard plans.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 4)
§ 12-21-7 REPORT TO TOWN COUNCIL.
   The Town Manager shall report to the Town Council not less than once each
year on any additions that have been made to the master hazard plan.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 4)
§ 12-21-8 INTERPRETATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be minimum requirements.
Nothing herein shall impair the obligations of or interfere with private
agreements in excess of the minimum requirements. Where this chapter imposes a
restriction different from that imposed by other applicable provisions of law,
contract or deed, the more restrictive provision shall control.
(Ord. 5(1985) § 3)
§ 12-21-9 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This chapter is based on scientific and engineering considerations which are
continually being developed. Compliance with the provisions herein cannot
ensure freedom from risk to life, safety or property. This section shall not
create liability on the part of the town or any officer or employee thereof for
any damage that may result from reliance on this chapter, or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder. The designation of certain areas as hazard
areas or geologically sensitive areas pursuant to maps incorporated into this
chapter does not imply in any way that areas not so designated are free from
all risk to life, safety or property.
(Ord. 5(1985) § 4)
§ 12-21-10 DEVELOPMENT RESTRICTED.
   (A)   The term "structure" as used in this Section does not include
recreational structures that are intended for seasonal use other than
residential use.
   (B)   No structure shall be constructed in any flood hazard zone or red
avalanche hazard area.
   (C)   Structures may be constructed in blue avalanche hazard areas provided
that proper mitigating measures have been taken.
   (D)   No structure shall be constructed on a slope of forty (40) percent or
greater except in the following zone districts: Single-Family Residential
(SFR); Two-Family Residential (R); Two-Family Primary/Secondary Residential
(PS); in the West Vail Multi-Family Overlay Districts; Community Housing – 1
(CH-1); Community Housing – 2 (CH- 2); or Community Housing – 3 (CH-3).
   (E)   The Administrator may require an applicant desiring to build in an
avalanche hazard zone of influence to submit a definitive study of the hazard
area in which the applicant proposes to build, if the Town’s master hazard plan
does not contain sufficient information to determine if the proposed location
is in a red hazard or blue hazard area. The study shall be completed in
accordance with
Chapter 12 of this Title.
   (F)   The Administrator may require an applicant desiring to build in a blue
avalanche hazard zone to submit a definitive study indicating whether
improvements are required to mitigate the possible hazard, and if required, a
description of the improvements proposed. The study shall be completed in
accordance with
Chapter 12 of this Title.
(Ord. 12(1978) § 4; Ord. 16(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 44; Ord. 28(2007) § 4;
Ord. 17(2023) § 1; Ord. 19(2023) § 6; Ord. 6(2024) § 11)
§ 12-21-11 FLOOD HAZARD ZONES.
   (A)   Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all
special flood hazard areas and areas removed from the floodplain by the
issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Vail, Colorado.
   (B)   Purpose. To promote public health, safety and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by
provisions designed to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health;
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in floodplains;
      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
      (7)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a
flood area;
      (8)   Ensure that those who occupy the floodplain assume the
responsibility for their actions;
      (9)   Protect the natural areas required to convey flood flows and retain
flow characteristics; and
      (10)   Obtain and maintain the benefits to the community of participating
in the national flood insurance program.
   (C)   Basis for establishing special flood hazard areas. Special flood
hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a
scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study For
Eagle County, Colorado, And Incorporated Areas” dated December 4, 2007, with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps and any revisions thereto are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
   (D)   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Town Engineer or
designee is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44
C.F.R. (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management.
   (E)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. Duties
and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      (1)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Review all permit applications to ensure that the requirements of
this chapter have been satisfied and that the proposed improvement will be
reasonably safe from flooding;
      (3)   Review, approve or deny floodplain use and modification permits to
determine whether proposed improvements meet the provisions of this chapter;
      (4)   Review evidence prior to the issuance of a floodplain use permit
that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or
local government agencies from which prior approval is required. Conditional
floodplain use permits may be issued contingent upon receipt of the above
mentioned agency permits;
      (5)   Review and verify that no new habitable structure is constructed
within the special flood hazard area;
      (6)   Review and verify that a licensed professional engineer or
professional land surveyor certified the location of the 100-year floodplain on
all development applications that are adjacent to, or partially located within
the 100-year floodplain, that are proposing improvements that may affect the
floodplain;
      (7)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where there appears
to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the
Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation;
      (8)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the
Colorado Water Conservation Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency;
      (9)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within any altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
      (10)   When base flood elevation data have not been provided in
accordance with this subsection (C) of this section, the Floodplain
Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation data and floodway data available from federal, state or other source,
in order to administer the provisions of subsection (G) of this section;
      (11)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and
AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one-half foot at any point within the community; and
      (12)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, § 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community’s FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half foot, provided
that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA
(conditional letter of map revision).
   (F)   Floodplain permits.
      (1)   Floodplain use permit.
         (a)   Purpose. The floodplain use permit is a permit to allow
temporary grading within the floodplain and allow for necessary public
infrastructure improvements within the floodplain. A floodplain use permit may
be issued under at least one of the following conditions:
            1.   Temporary grading in the floodplain approved by the Floodplain
Administrator, in which the site is returned to its existing grade and
conditions;
            2.   Utility construction/ maintenance within the floodplain
approved by the Floodplain Administrator which is deemed to have an
insignificant impact to the 100-year floodplain;
            3.   Stream bank stabilization within the floodplain approved by
the Floodplain Administrator and is deemed to have an insignificant impact to
the floodplain;
            4.   Public infrastructure construction/maintenance approved by the
Floodplain Administrator including, but not limited to, roads, bridges,
recreation paths, walks, stream drop structures and stream erosion control
measures which are deemed to have an insignificant impact to the floodplain;
         (b)   Floodplain use permit application submittal requirements.
Applicants shall provide the following information prior to design review or
any review by the Planning and Environmental Commission:
            1.   Site plan at an engineering scale showing the location,
dimensions and elevations of the proposed landscape/grade alterations, existing
and proposed structures, relevant landscape/ topographic features, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to the 100-year floodplain. The
floodplain line shall be provided on a plan certified by a licensed
professional engineer or land surveyor;
            2.   Detailed topographic cross sections provided by a licensed
professional surveyor of the area proposed to be altered, showing existing and
proposed conditions;
            3.   Description of the extent to which any floodplain will be
altered including why, when, how and when it will be replaced back to its
original configuration, and addressing each relevant criterion in subsection
(F)(3) of this section;
            4.   Copy of all other necessary approved permits (i.e., building
permit, public way permit, ACOE permit, dewatering permit, DOW permit, CDHPE
permit and the like);
            5.   If required by the Floodplain Administrator, an engineered
floodplain analysis of the impacts to the floodplain prepared by a qualified
licensed professional engineer;
            6.   Submitted application for a conditional FIRM and floodway
revision through FEMA, if applicable; and
            7.   Any additional information deemed necessary by the Floodplain
Administrator.
      (2)   Floodplain modification permit.
         (a)   Purpose. A floodplain modification permit is a permit to allow
construction of improvements and/or modifications to the adopted floodplain for
all other uses, improvements or modifications to or within the floodplain that
do not fall within the guidelines of the floodplain use permit. However, no
habitable structures or improvements shall be allowed to be constructed within
the floodplain.
         (b)   Floodplain modification application submittal requirements.
Applicants shall provide the following information prior to design review or
any review by the Planning and Environmental Commission:
            1.   Elevation of the lowest floor (including basement and crawl
space) of all new and substantially improved structures within or adjacent to
the floodplain;
            2.   Description of the extent to which any floodplain will be
altered including why, when, how and when it will be replaced back to its
original configuration, and addressing each relevant factor in subsection (F)
(3) of this section;
            3.   Signature of the owners of all property subject to an impact
by the proposed improvement;
            4.   A site plan drawn to an engineering scale showing the
location, dimensions, and elevations of the proposed landscape/grade
alterations, existing and proposed structures, relevant landscape/topographic
features, and the location of the foregoing in relation to the 100-year
floodplain. The floodplain line shall be provided on a plan certified by a
licensed professional engineer or land surveyor;
            5.   Detailed topographic cross sections provided by a licensed
professional surveyor of the area proposed to be altered, showing existing and
proposed conditions;
            6.   Copy of all other necessary approved permits (i.e., building
permit, public way permit, ACOE permit, dewatering permit, DOW permit, CDHPE
permit);
            7.   An engineered floodplain analysis of the impacts to the
floodplain prepared by a qualified licensed professional engineer;
            8.   Copy of submitted application for a conditional FIRM and
floodway revision through FEMA, if applicable;
            9.   Environmental impact report, per Chapter 12 of this title; and
            10.   Any additional information deemed necessary by the Floodplain
Administrator.
      (3)   Review, criteria and findings. At the discretion of the Floodplain
Administrator, floodplain use permits may be reviewed by the Floodplain
Administrator or the PEC. All floodplain modification permits shall be reviewed
and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the PEC.
         (a)   Criteria. The following factors shall be used to make a
determination in issuance of floodplain permits:
            1.   The effects upon the efficiency or capacity of the floodway;
            2.   The effects upon persons and personal property upstream,
downstream and in the immediate vicinity;
            3.   The effects upon the 100-year flood profile and channel
stability;
            4.   The effects upon any tributaries to the main stream, drainage
ditches and any other drainage facilities or systems;
            5.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
            6.   The susceptibility of the proposed improvement and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
            7.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
            8.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
            9.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
            10.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems;
            11.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
            12.   The effect the proposed changes will have any adverse
environmental effect on the watercourse including, without limitation, erosion
of stream banks and stream side trees and vegetation and wildlife habitat;
            13.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
            14.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
            15.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan for that area.
         (b)   Findings. The following findings shall be made before granting
of a floodplain permit:
            1.   That the proposed use or modification adequately addresses the
findings in subsection (F)(3)(a) of this section, as determined by the
Floodplain Administrator, unless the applicant can demonstrate that one or more
of the standards is not applicable, or that a practical solution consistent
with the public interest has been achieved;
            2.   That the proposed use or modification is consistent with the
adopted goals, objectives and policies outlined in the Vail Comprehensive Plan
and compatible with the development objectives of the town; and
            3.   That the proposed use or modification is compatible with and
suitable to adjacent uses and appropriate for the surrounding areas; and
            4.   That the proposed use or modification promotes the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the town and promotes the coordinated and
harmonious development of the town in a manner that conserves and enhances its
natural environment and its established character as a resort and residential
community of the highest quality.
      (4)   Permit fees. The Town Council shall set a floodplain permit
schedule sufficient to cover the cost of town staff time, consultant fees and
incidental expense.
      (5)   Expiration of permit. A floodplain permit shall expire two years
after its date of issuance if the permittee has not started construction under
the permit.
   (G)   Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
      (1)   General standards. In all special flood hazard areas, the following
provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
         (a)   Habitable structures or improvements shall not be permitted to
be constructed within the 100-year floodplain. Improvements that may be
approved for construction within the 100-year floodplain include:
            1.   Temporary grading in the floodplain approved by the Floodplain
Administrator, in which the site is returned to its existing grade and
conditions;
            2.   Utility construction/ maintenance within the floodplain
approved by the Floodplain Administrator which is deemed to have an
insignificant impact to the floodplain;
            3.   Stream bank stabilization within the floodplain approved by
the Floodplain Administrator and is deemed to have an insignificant impact to
the floodplain; and
            4.   Public infrastructure construction/maintenance approved by the
Floodplain Administrator including, but not limited to, roads, bridges,
recreation paths, walks, stream drop structures, and stream erosion control
measures which are deemed to have an insignificant impact to the floodplain.
         (b)   Insignificant impact to the floodplain: an INSIGNIFICANT IMPACT
TO THE FLOODPLAIN shall be defined as an improvement in the floodplain that is
a public benefit that meets the criteria set out in subsection (G)(1)(a) of
this section and causes no negative impacts to adjacent properties and no
permanent localized cumulative increase in the adopted base flood elevations
(BFE) greater than 0.25 vertical feet. The applicant shall apply for a
conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA, if applicable;
         (c)   All new structures or improvements, unless otherwise
specifically provided for within this chapter, shall not influence the 100-year
floodplain and shall maintain a minimum clear distance from the 100-year
floodplain of one foot in both the horizontal and vertical directions;
         (d)   Floor plans and elevations illustrating that the lowest floor
elevations including basement, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, of the new or substantially improved structure, shall be elevated
to at least one foot above the base flood elevation;
         (e)   All approved new or modified improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the improvement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
         (f)   All new approved construction or modified improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
         (g)   All new approved construction or modified improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
         (h)   All existing nonconforming structures located within the 100-
year floodplain that may require maintenance shall not negatively impact the
adopted BFEs or adjacent properties in any way, unless as provided by
subsection (G)(1)(a) of this section; and shall increase conformity and flood
protection as required by the Floodplain Administrator (i.e., floodproofing,
flotation prevention, flood resistant materials and the like);
         (i)   All existing nonconforming structures that may require
maintenance to operational systems that are within the floodplain shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
         (j)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
         (k)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
         (l)   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      (2)   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones). Located
within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection (C) of this
section, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply:
         (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities) elevated one foot above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community’s
FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified);
         (b)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures have the lowest floor (including basement, together
with attendant utility and sanitary facilities) elevated one foot above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community’s FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified),
or; together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that
one foot above the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy;
         (c)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
chapter are satisfied; and
         (d)   Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
      (3)   Floodways. Floodways located within special flood hazard areas
established in subsection (C) of this section, are areas designated as
floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion
potential, the following provisions shall apply.
         (a)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
         (b)   If this subsection (G) is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this subsection (G).
         (c)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, § 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments
within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base
flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA.
   (H)   Properties removed from floodplain by fill.
      (1)   Permit. A floodplain permit shall not be issued for the
construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a
property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map
revision based on fill (LOMR-F), unless such new structure or addition complies
with the following.
         (a)   Residential construction. The lowest floor (including basement),
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one foot
above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill.
         (b)   Nonresidential construction. The lowest floor (including
basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated
to one foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement
of fill, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed
so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one foot above the
base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy.
   (I)   Critical facilities.
      (1)   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the regulatory floodplain.
      (2)   Construction of new critical facilities in the regulatory
floodplain shall be permissible if no feasible alternative site is available,
provided:
         (a)   Critical facilities shall have the lowest floor elevated three
feet above the base flood elevation or to the height of the 500-year flood,
whichever is higher. If there is no available data on the 500-year flood, the
permit applicants shall develop the needed data in accordance with FEMA mapping
guidelines; and
         (b)   Access to and from the critical facility shall be protected to
the elevation of the 500-year flood.
(Ord. 19(2013) § 2)
§ 12-21-12 RESTRICTIONS IN SPECIFIC ZONES ON EXCESSIVE SLOPES.
   (A)   SLOPE is the gradient or configuration of the undisturbed land surface
prior to site improvement of a lot, site, or parcel which shall be established
by measuring the maximum number of feet in elevation gained or lost over each
ten feet or fraction thereof measured horizontally in any direction between
opposing lot lines; the relationship of elevation or vertical measure as
divided by the horizontal measurement shall be expressed as a percentile as a
means of quantifying the term “slope”. In determination of “slope” as defined
herein, for use in establishing buildable area requirements and maximum floor
area ratio limitations on existing and proposed lots, a grid system based on
ten-foot modules shall be superimposed on a topographic map of the subject
property and the lot slope determination established by the defined method for
each 100 square foot grid portion of the tract, lot or portion thereof.
   (B)   The following additional special restrictions or requirements shall
apply to development on any lot in a Hillside Residential, Single-Family
Residential, Two-Family Residential, or Two-Family Primary/Secondary
Residential, or West Vail Multi-Family Overlay Districts where the average
slope of the site beneath the existing or proposed structure and parking area
is in excess of thirty percent (30%):
      (1)   A soil and foundation investigation, prepared by and bearing the
seal of a registered professional engineer shall be required;
      (2)   Foundations must be designated and bear the seal of a registered
professional engineer;
      (3)   A topographic survey prepared by a registered surveyor, with
contour intervals of not more than two feet, shall be required;
      (4)   Structures must be designed by a licensed architect;
      (5)   Site coverage as it pertains to this chapter, as permitted by §§
12-6A-9,
12-6B-9,
12-6C-9 and
12-6D-9 of this title, is amended as follows:
         (a)   Not more than 10% of the total site area may be covered by
driveways and surface parking; and
         (b)   In order to protect the natural landform and vegetation on steep
slopes, not more than 60% of the total site area may be disturbed from present
conditions by construction activities. The Design Review Board (DRB) may
approve site disturbance in excess of the 60% maximum if specific design
criteria warrant the extent of the requested deviation.
      (6)   A site grading and drainage plan shall be required;
      (7)   A detailed plan of retaining walls or cuts and fills in excess of
five feet shall be required;
      (8)   A detailed revegetation plan must be submitted;
      (9)   The Administrator may require an environmental impact report as
provided in §
12-12-2 of this title;
      (10)   A minimum of one covered parking space shall be provided for each
dwelling unit;
      (11)   Setbacks, as they apply to this chapter, as required by §§
12-6A-6,
12-6B-6,
12-6C-6 and
12-6D-6 of this title, are amended as follows. There shall be no required front
setback for garages, except as may be required by the Design Review Board.
Garages located in the front setback, as provided for in this section, shall be
limited to one story in height (not to exceed ten feet) with the addition of a
pitched or flat roof and subject to review and approval by the Design Review
Board; and
      (12)   Retaining walls up to six feet in height may be permitted in the
setback by the Design Review Board when associated with a permitted garage as
referenced in subsection (B)(11) of this section.
(Ord. 13(1994) § 1; Ord. 2(1995) § 1; Ord. 5(2001) § 3; Ord. 29(2005) § 45;
Ord. 17(2006) § 1; Ord. 28(2007) § 8; Ord. 19(2023) § 7)
§ 12-21-13 RESTRICTIONS IN GEOLOGICALLY SENSITIVE AREAS.
   (A)   Maps adopted. The following maps are hereby adopted as the official
maps of the town, identifying areas of geologic sensitivity:
      (1)   The debris flow and debris avalanche hazard analysis map prepared
by Arthur I. Mears, P.E., Inc., and dated November 1984;
      (2)   The rockfall map prepared by Schmueser and Associates, Inc., and
dated November 29, 1984; and
      (3)   All areas within the boundaries of the geologic hazards map, figure
3, prepared by Lincoln DeVore Engineers, Geologists and dated August 16, 1982.
   (B)   Investigation.
      (1)   In any area located within the boundaries of the Lincoln DeVore
map, or in any area identified as a debris flow or debris avalanche area by the
Mears map, or in any area identified as a rockfall area by the Schmueser map,
no initial application for a building permit, grading permit or major or minor
subdivision shall be approved until a site specific geologic investigation is
complete. For the purpose of this section, a site specific geologic
investigation shall be deemed a detailed geologic investigation which is
applicable to each respective site. All reports and studies required by this
section shall be prepared by a “professional geologist”, as defined by C.R.S. §
23-41-208, as amended, or a “registered professional engineer”, as defined by
C.R.S. § 12-120-202, as amended, under the direction of and at the expense of
the owner/applicant and submitted to the Department of Community Development.
      (2)   The extent of the site specific ecologic investigation required
shall be determined by the geologist or engineer who is responsible for the
investigation; however, the investigation shall be of sufficient thoroughness
and accuracy to allow such expert to certify to the following:
         (a)   For all structures other than single-family and two-family
dwellings, and “accessory uses” thereto as defined in §
12-6C-4 of this code:
            1.   Whether the geologic conditions are such that the site can or
cannot be developed for the specific structure or use proposed without
corrective engineering or engineered construction, or other mitigation or
alterations; or
            2.   Whether corrective engineering or engineered construction, or
other mitigation or alterations can or cannot be accomplished to reduce the
danger to the public health, safety or to property due to problems related to
geologic sensitivity to a reasonable level, and not increase the hazard to
other properties or structures, or to public buildings, rights-of-way, roads,
streets, easements, utilities or facilities or other properties of
construction.
         (b)   For single-family and two-family dwellings, and “accessory uses”
thereto as defined in §
12-6C-4 of this title, the site specific geologic investigation shall certify
to the following:
            1.   Whether the site can be developed for the specific structure
or use proposed without corrective engineering or engineered construction or
other mitigation or alterations; or
            2.   That the site is a geologically sensitive area but development
will not increase the hazard to other property or structures, or to public
buildings, rights-of-way, roads, streets, easements, utilities or facilities or
other properties of any kind.
   (C)   Development plan or building permit. Following the completion of the
site specific geological investigation and its review by the Department of
Community Development, a development plan may be approved or a building permit
may be issued as follows.
      (1)   For all structures other than single-family and two-family
dwellings, and “accessory uses” thereto as defined in §
12-6C-4 of this title.
         (a)   If the conclusion of the engineer or geologist performing the
investigation is that the site can be developed for the specific structure or
activity proposed without corrective engineering or engineered construction or
other mitigation or alterations, the subdivision plan or building permit or
grading permit may be approved without conditions relating to the mitigation of
the areas of geologic sensitivity.
         (b)   If the finding of the engineer or geologist performing the
geologic investigation is that the site is a geologically sensitive area, but
that corrective engineering or engineered construction or other mitigation or
alterations can be accomplished to reduce the danger to the public health and
safety or to property to a reasonable level, and such mitigation does not
increase the hazard to other property or structures, or to public buildings,
roads, streets, rights-of-way, easements, utilities or facilities, approval of
the development plan and/or the issuance of the building or grading permit
shall be conditional and contingent upon approval of plans for corrective
engineering and engineered construction or other litigation or alterations as
set forth in this title.
         (c)   If the conclusion of the geologist or engineer performing the
site specific geologic investigation is that the site cannot be developed for
the structure or use proposed because the danger posed by the geologically
sensitive area cannot be reduced or mitigated to a reasonable level, the
subdivision plan or building permit or grading permit shall be denied.
      (2)   For single-family and two-family dwellings, and “accessory uses”
thereto as defined in section
12-6C-4 of this title.
         (a)   If the conclusion of the engineer or the geologist performing
the investigation is that the site can be developed for the specific structure
or use proposed without corrective engineering or engineered construction or
other mitigation or alterations, or that the site is a geologically sensitive
area, but will not increase the hazard to other property or structures or to
public buildings, roads, streets, rights-of-way, easements, utilities or
facilities, a grading permit or building permit may be issued.
         (b)   If the finding of the engineer or geologist performing the site
specific geologic investigation is that the site is a geologically sensitive
area, but that corrective engineering or engineered construction or other
mitigation or alterations can be accomplished so that there is no increased
hazard to other property or structures, or to public buildings, roads, streets,
rights-of-way, easements, utilities or facilities, the issuance of a building
or grading permit shall be conditional and contingent upon approval of plans
for corrective engineering or engineered construction or other mitigation or
alterations as set forth in this section.
         (c)   If the conclusion of the geologist or engineer performing the
site specific geologic investigation is that the site cannot be developed for
the structure proposed because the danger posed by the geologically sensitive
area cannot be reduced or mitigated so that the hazard to other properties or
structures will not increase from the present level or the hazard to public
buildings, roads, streets, rights-of-way, easements, utilities and facilities
will not increase from the present level, then the building permit or grading
permit shall be denied.
   (D)   Construction requirements. The following requirements shall pertain to
the construction of any building or structure to be built in an identified or
designated area of geologic sensitivity and which requires corrective
engineering or engineered construction or other mitigation or alterations to
reduce the danger to public health and safety or to property due to such
problems as set forth in subsections (C)(1)(b) or (C)(2)(b) of this section:
       (1)   The certified site specific reports and plans required by this
subsection (D) shall be prepared by each engineer and geologist as applicable
to their area of expertise and specialty and shall certify that:
         (a)   Adequate base data as may be pertinent has been provided;
         (b)   Said base data is utilized in the design and planning of the
proposed project or structure;
         (c)   Design and construction procedures derived from said base data
are executed; and
         (d)   Design and construction will reduce danger to the public health,
safety or property due to geologic sensitivity to a reasonable level.
      (2)   No certificate of occupancy, temporary or permanent, shall be
issued until the following have been approved by the Department of Community
Development or its authorized representatives:
         (a)   Inspection and certification by the Town Building Official and
the engineer or geologist who prepared the plans and specifications that the
work was properly performed in accordance with the plans and specifications;
         (b)   If the engineer, geologist or Building Official of the town
finds that the work is not being done in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications, the discrepancy shall be reported immediately in writing to the
contractor and to the Department of Community Development. Recommendations for
corrective measures, if necessary, shall also be submitted; and
         (c)   All geologic reports prepared under this section shall be signed
by and prepared by or under the responsible direction of “professional
geologists” as defined by C.R.S. § 34-1-201, as amended. Such professional
geologist shall be experienced and competent in the geologic specialty required
to meet the objectives of this chapter. Such professional geologist shall be
responsible for certification of all geologic maps and reports prepared by him
or her under his or her responsible direction as specified in this section. All
engineering reports required by this section shall be done by a “registered
professional engineer” as defined by C.R.S. § 12-25-102, as amended.
   (E)   Existing uses continued; exceptions. Existing use of land, structures
or premises which are not in conformity with the provisions of this regulation
may be continued, except for the following.
      (1)   No building permit will be issued for the exterior expansion,
alteration or addition to existing structures in geologically sensitive areas
except for windows, skylights and other similar minor alterations unless the
requirements of subsections (B) through (D) of this section are complied with.
      (2)   Structures existing on the effective date hereof which are damaged
or destroyed may be reconstructed without compliance to this section as long as
said structure complies with other applicable ordinances and is constructed to
substantially the same dimensions as existed prior to damage or destruction,
unless given approval by the town to alter the design.
   (F)   Notice requirements. In order to provide reasonable notice to the
public of the problems related to geologically sensitive areas, the following
notice regulations and requirements are hereby adopted for all real property
and structures located in geologically sensitive areas.
      (1)   All subdivision plats recorded after the effective date hereof
shall identify and designate each lot and block, or portions thereof, located
within any geologically sensitive area, together with applicable subzone
designations, by a stamp or writing in a manner providing reasonable notice to
interested parties.
      (2)   All plans submitted after the effective date hereof with the
building permit application for property within said areas shall be stamped by
the applicant “Geologically Sensitive Area” together with the applicable zone
designation.
      (3)   Prior to the issuance of any building permit for construction
within the geologically sensitive areas, the owner shall submit a written,
signed and notarized affidavit certifying acknowledgment of receiving personal
notice of the fact that said building or structure is in an area of geologic
sensitivity and notice of the studies conducted to date with regard thereto.
      (4)   All owners, lessors or agents who rent, lease or sublet any
structure or premises within an area of geologic sensitivity shall provide the
tenant, lessee or subtenant with written notice that said property is located
within said area prior to any lease being entered into or occupancy, whichever
occurs first, if said rental lease or sublease will extend into the period of
April 1 through July 1 of any year.
      (5)   Each and every real estate agent, salesperson and broker, and each
and every private party who offers for sale or shows a parcel of real estate
and/or structure for sale within said area of geologic sensitivity, shall
provide the prospective purchaser, with written notice that said real property
and/or structure is located within said area of geologic sensitivity.
Furthermore, written notice shall be made in all instances prior to the
execution of any sales documents and shall state that this section and the
studies and maps referred to in this section are available for public
inspection at the office of the Department of Community Development and that
said maps, studies and this section should be reviewed prior to any party
entering into any agreement or contract with regard thereto.
   (G)   Disputes; procedure. In any case where a person wishes to dispute the
designation of any property as a geologically sensitive area by one of the maps
and studies adopted by this section, the following procedures shall be
followed.
      (1)   A written application shall be filed with the Department of
Community Development requesting such a hearing and providing a supporting site
specific geologic investigation.
      (2)   A hearing shall be set on a date a minimum of 30 days after the
application has been filed to allow for a staff review.
      (3)   At the hearing before the Town Council, the applicant shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to present his or her case and submit technical
and geologic evidence to support his or her claim. If the site specific
geologic investigation establishes by clear and convincing evidence that the
property should not be designated as a geologically sensitive area, the Town
Council shall direct the Department of Community Development to amend the map
appropriately.
   (H)   Additions to maps. In any case where a person wishes to have one of
the official maps adopted by this title amended to notate more detailed site
specific information is available, the following procedure shall be followed.
      (1)   A written application shall be filed with the Department of
Community Development requesting such a hearing and providing a supporting site
specific geologic investigation.
      (2)   A hearing shall be set on a date not less than 30 days after the
application has been filed nor more than 60 days to allow for a staff review.
      (3)   If the applicant establishes at the hearing by clear and convincing
evidence that the information contained in the site specific geologic
investigation is reliable, the Town Council shall direct the Department of
Community Development to keep a copy of said site specific investigation on
file in the Department of Community Development and available to the general
public and shall further direct the Department of Community Development to
notate the appropriate official map adopted by this chapter so that it
indicates that said site specific investigation is on file with the Department
of Community Development.
(Ord. 5(1985) § 5; Ord. 20(1985) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 46; Ord. 28(2007) § 9;
Ord. 9(2022) § 3)
§ 12-21-14 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to deny any interested person
his or her rights to appeal the decision of the Administrator in accordance
with §
12-3-3 of this title. In addition, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
deny any interested person his or her rights to seek a variance from the
requirements of this chapter. Variances shall be governed by the provisions of
Chapter 17 of this title.
   (B)   Variances specific to §
12-21-11, “Flood Hazard Zones”, of this chapter shall be governed by Chapter 17
of this title and may be granted under the following conditions.
      (1)   The Appeal Board may grant variances and place conditions upon them
as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter as
stated in §
12-21-11(B) of this chapter.
      (2)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or
the state inventory of historic places, upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
      (3)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(Ord. 19(2013) § 3)
§ 12-21-15 REQUIREMENT OF BOND.
   Any applicant under this chapter may be required to post bond, a letter of
credit or other guarantee to ensure that the improvements, reports or other
requirements of this chapter are completed and complied with.
(Ord. 12(1983) § 1; Ord. 28(2007))
§ 12-21-16 RESTRICTIONS IN WILDFIRE HAZARD AREAS.
   (A)   The entirety of the Town of Vail lies within a wildfire hazard area.
The natural vegetation surrounding and throughout the community is dependent on
wildfire for regeneration and ecosystem health. The ecosystem is dependent upon
infrequent, high severity stand replacing wildfire. Wildfires of this character
can carry over many thousands of acres and burn for several weeks. Besides
substantial flaming fronts, fires of this nature frequently send large
quantities of embers miles outside of the main fire perimeter igniting
additional spot fires. Due to the long and narrow layout of the town, no
location within the town limits is outside the potential ember fall area from a
wildfire.
   (B)   Structures built within the town shall be constructed and landscaped
in a manner to resist ignition from wildfire flames and embers. Specific
requirements for ignition resistant construction and landscaping are in Title
10, Chapter 1; Title 12, Chapter 11; and Title 14, Chapter 10 of this code.
(Ord. 19(2019) § 9)
§ 12-21-17 GORE CREEK SETBACKS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health,
safety and welfare by ensuring the resiliency of Gore Creek and its named
tributaries and by mitigating hazards associated with the deterioration of Gore
Creek and its named tributaries.
   (B)   Applicability. This section shall apply to all property located within
25 feet of the TYFL, in whole or in part; provided that this section shall not
apply to any stream tract already protected by of Title 5, Chapter 14 of this
code of ordinances.
   (C)   Setbacks.
      (1)   No mowing, landscaping, grading or other disturbance shall be
permitted within ten feet of the TYFL, other than:
         (a)   Removal of noxious weeds pursuant to §
5-1-6;
         (b)   With prior approval of the Vail Fire Department, removal of
vegetation for purposes of fire mitigation;
         (c)   With approval of the Design Review Board, the installation and
maintenance of one access path per lot or parcel, of up to four feet in width,
consisting of permeable materials including without limitation native soils,
sand and gravel or flagstone set in a permeable base;
         (d)   Public roadways, public bridges, public recreational paths and
trails, public parks and open spaces;
         (e)   Utility infrastructure within utility easements;
         (f)   With approval of the Design Review Board, erosion control
measures, stream grade-control structures and riparian restoration activities
that conform with bank stabilization best management practices; and
         (g)   Buildings, structures, fences, walls, patios, walkways,
landscaping features, furniture and similar improvements lawfully existing on
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section, which
improvements shall be subject to Chapter 18 of this Title 12.
      (2)   No building or structure shall be located within 25 feet of the
TYFL, other than:
         (a)   With approval of the Design Review Board, those items listed in
§
14-10-4; and
         (b)   Buildings and structures lawfully established on the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this section, which improvements shall be
subject to Chapter 18 of this Title 12.
   (D)   Corrections.
      (1)   If a property owner wishes to correct the location of a designated
TYFL affecting such property owner’s property, the property owner shall submit
sufficient documentation to the Community Development Department to support the
property owner’s corrected delineation of the TYFL. The submittal shall comply
with all of the following standards.
         (a)   The submittal shall include a survey stamped by a licensed
Colorado surveyor.
         (b)   The survey shall include at least three cross sections,
perpendicular to the flow of the stream, in the same vertical and horizontal
datum as that referenced in the town’s data set, extending from beyond the 100-
year flood line on one bank to beyond the 100-year flood line on the opposite
bank and including all stream channels. The three cross sections shall be taken
at each property boundary and the center of the property.
         (c)   The survey shall include an adequate number of elevation points
for each cross section to accurately reflect the contours of the stream bed.
         (d)   The survey shall tie into National Geologic Survey control
points.
         (e)   The submittal shall include a site map or aerial image showing
locations of stream cross sections, and photographs of the location of each
stream cross section.
         (f)   The submittal shall include a model of the TYFL using the
Hydrologic Engineering Center’s River Analysis System (“HEC-RAS”), stamped by a
professional engineer.
      (2)   Within 30 days of receipt of a complete submittal, the town shall
correct the location of the TYFL on the property as indicated on the submittal.
   (E)   Variances. The setbacks set forth in this Section are subject to the
variance process set forth in Chapter 17 of this Title 12.
   (F)   Violation and penalty.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this
section.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to re-channel or modify Gore Creek or
any of its named tributaries so as to avoid application of this section.
      (3)   Each separate act in violation of this section and each and every
day or portion thereof during which any separate act in violation of this
section is committed, continued or permitted shall be deemed a separate
offense.
      (4)   Violations of this section shall be punishable as provided in Title
1, Chapter 4 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 6(2022) § 3) Penalty, see §
1-4-1
CHAPTER 22: VIEW CORRIDORS
Section
12-22-1 Purpose
12-22-2 Definitions
12-22-3 Vegetation; maintenance
12-22-4 Adoption of view corridors
12-22-5 Amendments
12-22-6 Encroachments into existing view corridors
12-22-7 Nonconforming structures
12-22-8 Height limitations
12-22-9 Fees
§ 12-22-1 PURPOSE.
   The town believes that preserving certain vistas is in the interest of the
town’s residents and guests. Specifically, the town believes that:
   (A)   The protection and perpetuation of certain mountain views and other
significant views from various pedestrian public ways within the town will
foster civic pride and is in the public interest of the town;
   (B)   It is desirable to designate, preserve and perpetuate certain views
for the enjoyment and environmental enrichment for the residents and guests of
the town;
   (C)   The preservation of such views will strengthen and preserve the town’s
unique environmental heritage and attributes;
   (D)   The preservation of such views will enhance the aesthetic and economic
vitality and values of the town;
   (E)   The preservation of such views is intended to promote design which is
compatible with the surrounding natural and built environment, and is intended
to provide for natural light to buildings and in public spaces in the vicinity
of the view corridors; and
   (F)   The preservation of such views will include certain focal points such
as the Clock Tower and Rucksack Tower, which serve as prominent landmarks
within Vail Village and contribute to the community’s unique sense of place.
(Ord. 18(1992) § 1)
§ 12-22-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as
shown below.
   STRUCTURE. Anything permanently constructed or erected with a fixed location
including, but not limited to, new buildings, building expansions, decks,
mechanical equipment, vents, ducts, satellite dishes, fences, stop lights,
light poles, signs, utility poles, skylights or any similar object.
   VIEW POINT ORIGINATION. The survey pin, called out as the instrument in each
legal description defining a view corridor boundary, which is the basis for
each view corridor.
(Ord. 18(1992) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 47)
§ 12-22-3 VEGETATION; MAINTENANCE.
   The maintenance of vegetation through limbing and pruning may be necessary
for preservation of the view corridors set forth in this chapter. The removal
of vegetation shall only be permitted when said vegetation is found to be
detrimental to the view corridor purposes set forth in this chapter, as
determined by the Design Review Board. Mitigation of vegetation removal may
require replacement to preserve and enhance the landscape character of the
area.
(Ord. 10(2012) § 2)
§ 12-22-4 ADOPTION OF VIEW CORRIDORS.
   Photographs on record with the Department of Community Development and the
following legal descriptions are hereby approved and adopted as official view
corridors protecting views within the town. The photographs taken represent the
boundaries defined by the legal descriptions. The camera used to take the
photographs was held five and four-tenths feet above the instrument, which is
approximate eye level for most adults. A 35 millimeter camera was used for each
photograph; however, once developed, some photographs were cropped or enlarged
to improve the graphic representation of each view corridor.
   (A)   View Point #1. A view from the south side of the Vail Transportation
Center from the main pedestrian stairway looking toward the Clock Tower, 232
Bridge Street, the Rucksack Tower, 280 Bridge Street, and beyond to the ski
slopes.
      (1)   Purpose. To protect the views of Vail Mountain, views of Vail
Village and to maintain the prominence and views of the Clock Tower and
Rucksack Tower as seen from the central staircase of the Transportation Center.
      (2)   Instrument; View Point #1. A two-inch diameter brass disc, marked
V.P. 1 on stair landing between levels 2 and 3 of Vail Village parking
structure.
      (3)   Backsight. CW 1/16 corner of Section 8.
      (4)   Height of survey transit above View Point #1. Five and four-tenths
feet.
      (5)   Table.
Horizontal Angle Zenith Angle Foresight Point On Photo As Of Feb. 7, 1992
Horizontal Angle Zenith Angle Foresight Point On Photo As Of Feb. 7, 1992
                              A - intersection of the horizon with a vertical
348°51’10”  77°21’30�line defined by the southwest corner of the sixth
                              floor deck enclosure on the Mountain Haus, 292 E.
                              Meadow Drive
                              B1 - uppermost railing of the southwest corner of
348°30’10”  87°11’30�the balcony on the fourth floor of the Mountain
                              Haus, 292 E. Meadow Drive
355°23’00”  87°37’40�B2 - east end of the Red Lion roof ridge, 304
                              Bridge Street
                              B3 - intersection of the Red Lion roof ridge with
357°39’04”  87°40’43�the southeast corner of the Rucksack Tower, 280
                              Bridge Street
357°57’59”  88°27’22�B4 - northeast corner of the base of the Rucksack
                              Tower, 280 Bridge Street
                              C1 - intersection of the Gallery Building, 225
004°05’19”  89°16’02�Gore Creek Drive, with the northeast corner of
                              the Clock Tower, immediately below the balcony
004°39’58”  89°16’33�C2 - western end of fascia board on Gallery
                              Building
                              C3 - intersection of the sloping roof of the
004°47’18”  89°41’44�Gallery Building with the ridge line of the Clock
                              Tower Building, which extends west
006°59’11”  89°42’12�D - intersection of the Clock Tower Building roof
                              and the northwest corner of the Clock Tower
012°25’56”  87°39’01�E - peak of the Plaza Lodge vent chase, 232
                              Bridge Street
                              F - intersection of the north side of roof,
027°08’54”  87°28’43�Gasthof Gramshammer Building, 231 East Gore Creek
                              Drive, with the east side of 2 large trees
                              G - intersection of the horizon line on Vail
031°53’27”  76°26’35�Mountain with the vertical line defined by the
                              top of the western, very large pine tree west of
                              Point F
 
   (B)   View Point #2. A view from upper Bridge Street looking toward the ski
slopes between 228 Bridge Street, the Golden Peak Building, and 311 Bridge
Street, the Hill Building.
      (1)   Purpose. To protect views of the ski runs and ski base area as seen
from upper Bridge Street.
      (2)   Instrument; View Point #2. A #6 rebar with a two and one-half inch
diameter aluminum cap marked V.P. 2 (PLS 16827) set in an aluminum monument box
in Bridge Street in front of the Red Lion Building, 304 Bridge Street.
      (3)   Backsight; View Point #4. A #6 rebar with a two and one-half inch
diameter aluminum cap marked V.P. 4 (PLS 16827) set in an aluminum monument
box, in the brick pavers, approximately eight feet from the entrance to
Frivolous Sal’s, located near the northeast corner of One Vail Place Building,
244 Wall Street.
      (4)   Height of survey transit above View Point #2. Five and four-tenths
feet.
      (5)   Table.
 
Horizontal Angle Zenith Angle Foresight Point On Photo As Of Nov. 15, 1991
289°25’48”  74°28’18�A - northwest corner of third floor balcony roof
                              of Golden Peak Building
                              B - PK nail in top of the 24 inch tall retaining
290°58’11”  89°58’00�wall on west side of Golden Peak House, 1 foot
                              east from west edge of planter wall, and 10 feet
                              west from the west face of the building
300°32’46”  92°05’34�C1 - top of south end of ski lockers, which are
                              on railing
301°35’24”  83°31’08�C2 - southeast corner of top deck rail on Hill
                              Building
303°32’24”  73°38’55�D - southeast corner of brick chimney on Hill
                              Building
 
   (C)   View Point #4. A view from the northeast corner of 244 Wall Street,
the One Vail Place Building, looking over the roofs of 304 Bridge Street, the
Red Lion Building, and 356 Hanson Ranch Road, the Christiania Lodge, toward the
Gore Range.
      (1)   Purpose. To protect views of the Gore Range as seen from the alley
between Founders Plaza and Seibert Circle.
      (2)   Instrument; View Point #4. A #6 rebar with a two and one-half inch
diameter aluminum cap marked V.P. 4 (PLS 16827) set in an aluminum monument
box, in the brick pavers, approximately eight feet from the entrance to
Frivolous Sal’s, located in the northeast corner of the One Vail Place
Building, 244 Wall Street.
      (3)   Backsight; View Point #2. A #6 rebar with a two and one-half inch
diameter aluminum cap marked V.P. 2 (PLS 16827) set in an aluminum monument box
in Bridge Street in front of the Red Lion Building.
      (4)   Height of survey transit above View Point #4. Five and four-tenths
feet.
      (5)   Table.
Horizontal Angle Zenith Angle Foresight Point on Photo as of Nov. 15, 1991
Horizontal Zenith    Foresight Point on Photo as of Nov. 15, 1991
Angle      Angle
343°56’562°24’1A - south fascia board of third floor roof of Plaza Lodge Building, 281 – 293
                     Bridge Street
348°37’073°05’4B - intersection of upper and second floor roof lines of Plaza Lodge Building
352°55’273°34’2C - south end of peak of second floor gable of Plaza Lodge Building
352°31’079°24’4D - eastern edge of second floor gable roof of Plaza Lodge Building
352°13’179°24’5E - intersection of second floor roof fascia and southeast corner of Plaza
                     Lodge Building
352°13’184°44’2F - intersection of southeast corner of building and top edge of first floor
                     fascia of Plaza Lodge Building
354°30’286°13’3G - top of southeasterly corner of first floor fascia of Plaza Lodge Building
354°47’286°07’5H - intersection of south edge of Red Lion chimney and upper Red Lion roof line
358°21’485°17’4I - peak of upper Red Lion roof line
359°04’385°30’3J - intersection of upper Red Lion roof line and northerly roof line of the
                     Christiania
000°16’584°36’5K - peak of northerly roof line of the Christiania
001°59’484°36’5L - intersection of northerly roof peak and southerly roof line of the
                     Christiania
003°05’483°32’4M - northwesterly corner of second floor balcony on Hill Building
006°23’383°33’5N - intersection of top of second floor balcony rail and brick wall on Hill
                     Building
005°32’167°54’5O - northwest corner of top of fascia on third floor roof of Hill Building
 
   (D)   View Point #5. A view of the Gore Range from Hanson Ranch Road just
east of the Mill Creek Bridge and south of 302 Gore Creek Drive, the Mill Creek
Court Building.
      (1)   Purpose. To protect views of the Gore Range as seen from Hanson
Ranch Road and East Gore Creek Drive.
      (2)   Instrument; View Point #5. A #6 rebar with two and one-half inch
diameter aluminum cap marked V.P. 5 (PLS 16827) set in an aluminum monument box
in Hanson Ranch Road in front of the Mill Creek Court Building.
      (3)   Backsight. #4 rebar with aluminum cap (LS 2568) in iron “Landmark”
monument box marking center line of Hanson Ranch Road - box is just west of
Mill Creek in front of the Cyrano’s Building at 298 Hanson Ranch Road.
      (4)   Height of survey transit above View Point #5. Five and four-tenths
feet.
      (5)   Table.
Horizontal Angle Zenith Angle Foresight Point On Photo As Of Nov. 15, 1991
Horizontal Angle Zenith Angle Foresight Point On Photo As Of Nov. 15, 1991
199°03’06”  81°23’49�A - intersection of southerly utility pole with
                              ridge line
                              B1 - intersection of northerly extension of
204°06’43”  85°10’40�Garden of the Gods Building, roof line with
                              hillside ridge line
206°00’02”  85°10’40�B2 - northern end of roof line of the Garden of
                              the Gods Building, 365 Vail Valley Drive
                              C1 - intersection of southerly extension of the
208°12’53”  85°10’40�Garden of the Gods building roof line and the
                              Villa Valhalla roof line, 360 Hanson Ranch Road
208°33’36”  84°55’50�C2 - northwest corner of the Villa Valhalla at
                              roof fascia
                              D - intersection of top of the Villa Valhalla
210°41’41”  84°01’47�roof fascia and the upward extension of the north
                              edge of the trim on the window column
                              E - the upward extension of the north edge of the
210°41’41”  82°01’51�trim on the window column on the Villa Valhalla
                              to a point above the horizon
 
   (E)   View Point #6. A view looking east to the Gore Range from Gore Creek
Drive between retail shops at 174 Gore Creek Drive, the Lodge at Vail, and 193
Gore Creek Drive, the Gore Creek Plaza Building projecting east to the Gore
Range.
      (1)   Purpose. To protect views of the Gore Range as seen from the Gore
Creek Drive Area.
      (2)   Instrument; View Point #6. A #6 rebar with two and one-half inch
diameter aluminum cap marked V.P. 6 (PLS 16827) set in an aluminum monument box
in Gore Creek Drive in front of the Gore Creek Plaza Building.
      (3)   Backsight. A #6 rebar with a two and one-half inch diameter
aluminum cap marked V.P. 6 B.S. (PLS 16827) set in an aluminum monument box in
Gore Creek Drive near the southwest corner of Pepi’s deck.
      (4)   Height of survey transit above View Point #6. Five and four-tenths
feet.
      (5)   Table.
Horizontal Angle Zenith Angle Foresight Point On Photo As Of Nov. 15, 1991
Horizontal Zenith    Foresight Point On Photo As Of Nov. 15, 1991
Angle      Angle
356°08’381°02’1A - point on horizon left of the chimney on Gasthof Gramshammer roof, 231 East
                     Gore Creek Drive
356°55’083°02’0B - intersection of southeast edge of chimney and Gasthof Gramshammer’s roof
                     line
000°31’382°54’2C - southern end of gable on Gasthof Gramshammer’s roof
001°48’185°17’3D1 - intersection of northerly extension of Gorsuch Building’s roof line and
                     Gasthof Gramshammer’s roof, 231 East Gore Creek Drive
003°14’485°17’4D2 - north end of Gorsuch Building’s roof
007°56’085°11’3D3 - south end of Gorsuch Building’s roof
013°30’385°11’3E - intersection of southerly extension of Gorsuch Building’s roof line and
                     brick pillar on Lazier Arcade Building/Wall Street Building, 225 Wall Street
013°38’178°48’3F - intersection of face of stucco and eaves line on Lazier Arcade Building/
                     Wall Street Building
012°55’178°14’5G - top of fascia on northeast corner of roof on Lazier Arcade Building/Wall
                     Street Building
014°44’273°13’3H - top of roof on Lazier Arcade Building/Wall Street Building
 
   (F)   View Point #7. A view from the west end of the Lionshead parking
structure, standing at street level at the front of the entrance to the Subway
restaurant (395 E. Lionshead Circle) and looking southwest toward the gondola
lift line.
      (1)   Purpose. To protect the views of Vail Mountain from the Lionshead
area.
      (2)   Survey control. Based on published material from Town of Vail GPS
control map. Points Spraddle and 1766 were used for this survey. Bearings
reported below are tied to this control.
      (3)   Instrument; View Point #7. A two inch diameter brass monument,
flush in brick payers, stamped View 7.
      (4)   Backsight. A two inch diameter aluminum Johnson, Kunkel &
Associates, Inc., monument which bears S11°47’42”W 327.94 feet distant. Located
at the north edge of a concrete ring for a water manhole approximately 15 feet
north of the north edge of the bike path.
      (5)   Height of survey instrument above View Point #7. Five and twenty-
six one-hundredths feet.
      (6)   Table.
Bearing Zenith Angle Foresight Point On Photo As Of June 12, 2001
Bearing     Zenith Angle Foresight Point On Photo As Of June 12, 2001
                         A - intersection of the horizon with a vertical line
S05°14’2579°09’13�defined by the southwest corner roofline on the
                         Treetops Condominium building, 452 E. Lionshead Circle
                         B - intersection of the roof overhang at the west end
S05°22’1880°11’31�of the Treetops Condominium building and the southwest
                         corner of said building, 452 E. Lionshead Circle
                         B1 - westerly upper corner of the roof overhang at the
S05°38’2480°17’55�west end of the Treetops Condominium building, 452 E.
                         Lionshead Circle
                         B2 - westerly lower corner of the roof overhang at the
S05°48’3881°42’54�west end of the Treetops Condominium building, 452 E.
                         Lionshead Circle
                         B3 - intersection of the roof overhang at the west end
S05°22’2881°43’15�of the Treetops Condominium building and the southwest
                         corner of said building, 452 E. Lionshead Circle
                         B4 - a point on the westerly edge of the Treetops
                         Condominium building, 452 E. Lionshead Circle and
S05°22’2890°01’11�running horizontal with and perpendicular to the
                         southeast corner roofline of the bus stop building at
                         Lionshead Circle
                         C - southeast corner roofline of the bus stop building
                         at Lionshead Circle. Said point being the lower limit
S24°16’4590°01’11�of View Point #7, intersecting with the vertical line
                         described below for point D and running horizontal
                         with and perpendicular to the westerly edge of the
                         Treetops Condominium building, 452 E. Lionshead Circle
                         D - intersection of the horizon with a vertical line
S23°11’0385°40’57�defined by the southeast corner roofline on the Vail
                         Lionshead Centre Condominiums, 520, Lionshead Circle
                         E - point of intersection of the southwest roofline of
S23°11’0379°09’13�said Treetops Condominiums building defined by point A
                         and the southeast corner of said Vail Lionshead
                         Condominium building as defined by point D
 
   (G)   View Point #8. A view from the pedestrian plaza at the east end of the
Lifthouse Lodge (555 E. Lionshead Circle) looking south directly up the gondola
lift line.
      (1)   Purpose. To protect the views of Vail Mountain from the core of the
Lionshead area.
      (2)   Survey control. Based on published material from Town of Vail GPS
control map. Points Spraddle and 1766 were used for this survey. Bearings
reported below are tied to this control.
      (3)   Instrument; View Point #8. A two and one-half inch diameter
aluminum monument, flush in brick pavers, stamped View 8.
      (4)   Backsight. A two and one-half inch diameter aluminum monument,
which bears S84°22’18”W a distance of 164.53 feet. Located flush on top of the
stone wall running east to west in front of the Montauk Deck east of the main
entrance, stamped CP Montauk.
      (5)   Height of survey instrument above View Point #8. Five and three-
tenths feet (to match previous height before streetscape).
      (6)   (1)   Table.
Horizontal Angle Zenith Angle Foresight Point On Photo As Of July 8, 2008
Horizontal Angle Zenith Angle Foresight Point On Photo As Of July 8, 2008
                              A - intersection of the horizon with a vertical
267°00’33”  79°08'’15�line defined by the southerly roof line on the
                              Vail Lionshead Centre Condominiums, 520 E.
                              Lionshead Circle
                              B - intersection of a lower roof at the westerly
266°52’31”  85°10’55�end and the westerly building wall of the Vail
                              Lionshead Centre Condominiums
                              C - westerly end of the lower roof on the
268°09’29”  85°55’59�westerly end of the Vail Lionshead Centre
                              Condominiums
                              D - intersection of the red awning and the
267°50’34”  87°46’40�westerly wall of the Vail Lionshead Centre
                              Condominiums
269°10’34”  87°51’15�E - top westerly corner of red awning
                              F - point of intersection of the red awning and
269°10’34”  88°28’56�the main level roofline on the westerly end of
                              the Vail Lionshead Centre Condominiums
                              G - point of intersection of a line projected
                              from View Point F across the Eagle Bahn Gondola
271°54’54”  88°28’56�ski yard to the support post of the sloped roof
                              of the terrace on the 1st level along the east
                              side of the Arrabelle at Vail Square
                              H - underside intersection of sloped roof and the
281°17’48”  87°51’18�support post of the terrace on the 1st level on
                              the east side of Arrabelle at Vail Square
                              I - underside of sloped roof of the terrace on
280°52’19”  87°46’16�the first level on the east side of Arrabelle at
                              Vail Square
                              J - top edge of overhang/beginning of sloped roof
280°42’31”  87°24’36�of the terrace at the 1st level on the east side
                              of the Arrabelle at Vail Square
                              K - intersection of sloped roof of the terrace at
281°30’24”  87°06’00�the 1st level and the east wall of the Arrabelle
                              at Vail Square
                              L - intersection of the east wall of the
281°31’32”  79°37’37�Arrabelle at Vail Square and the bottom outer
                              edge of the concrete deck on the 6th level of the
                              Arrabelle at Vail Square
281°09’32”  79°02’30�M - top outer edge of concrete deck on the 6th
                              level of the Arrabelle at Vail Square
                              O - line projected from View Point M straight up
                              to the horizon line of Vail Mountain
 
      (2)   Permitted. The following are permitted within View Corridor #8:
drain pipes; roof snow fences; streetlights; decorative outdoor lights/
lighting; ski lifts/tows and appurtenances; ski area installations and
appurtenances, e.g., signs, fencing; other items not comprising the structure
of the building; all structures permitted under this code contained within the
following described parcels:
         (a)   Parcels A and B, Lot 1, Block 2, Vail Village Sixth Filing;
         (b)   Units A and B, Lot 5, Block 4, Vail Village Third Filing;
         (c)   Lot 4, Block 4, Vail Village Third Filing (a.k.a. Beaver Dam
Condominiums);
         (d)   Parcels A and B, Lot 1, Block 1, Vail Village Sixth Filing;
         (e)   Units 1 and 2, House in Forest Condominiums;
         (f)   Parcels A and B, Lot 3, Block 1, Vail Village Sixth Filing;
         (g)   Lots 1 and 3, Forest Place Subdivision; and
         (h)   Lot 6, Block 1, Vail Village Third Filing.
   (H)   View Point #9. A view from the top west stair above the ice rink of
the Arrabelle at Vail Square looking south across the pedestrian mall of the
Arrabelle at Vail Square towards the Eagle Bahn Gondola.
      (1)   Purpose. To protect the views of Vail Mountain from the core of the
Lionshead area.
      (2)   Survey control. Based on published material from Town of Vail GPS
control map. Points Spraddle and 1766 were used for this survey. Bearings
reported below are tied to this control.
      (3)   Instrument; View Point #9. A two and one-half inch diameter
aluminum monument, set at the center of the top of the west stair above the ice
rink of the Arrabelle flush in pavers, stamped View 9.
      (4)   Backsight. A two and one-half inch diameter aluminum monument,
which bears S84°22’18”W a distance of 164.53 feet. Located flush on top of the
stone wall running east to west in front of the Montauk Deck east of the main
entrance, stamped CP Montauk.
      (5)   Height of survey instrument above View Point #9. Five and two-
tenths feet.
      (6)   (1)   Table.
Horizontal Angle Zenith Angle Foresight Point On Photo As Of June 1, 2008
Horizontal Angle Zenith Angle Foresight Point On Photo As Of June 1, 2008
67°13’19”   83°39’37�A - intersection of underside of the pedestrian
                              bridge and the east wall at the 3rd level
67°13’16”   84°01’27�B - intersection of east wall and sloped roof at
                              the third level
68°58’53”   84°34’10�C - east end of sloped roof/top of deck railing
                              at the third level
68°58’15”   86°49’52�D - underside of outermost edge of terrace on the
                              east side of the third level
68°19’45”   86°54’20�E - intersection of east wall and underside of
                              terrace of the third level
68°19’36”   90°52’16�F - angle point in east wall
68°51’23”   94°34’30�G - intersection of east wall at ground level
71°35’08”   93°11’36�H - intersection of west wall at ground level
71°40’40”   91°48’13�I - angle point of west wall
72°18’05”   90°07’47�J - angle point of west wall
72°17’49”   89°39’20�K - top of the great room terrace wall at the
                              second level
                              L - intersection of the great room terrace wall
74°14’07”   89°32’05�at the second level and the east side of the
                              outdoor fireplace chimney in the pedestrian plaza
                              M - angle point of the east side of the outdoor
74°36’40”   87°55’34�fireplace chimney and the intersection of the
                              underside of sloped roof overhang at the second
                              level
74°09’55”   87°56’16�N - underside of sloped roof overhang at the
                              second level
73°52’09”   87°36’45�O - top side of sloped roof overhang for the
                              second level
74°36’25”   86°58’15�P - intersection of sloped roof for the second
                              level and the fireplace chimney
74°32’38”   84°09’29�Q - top east side of the fireplace chimney
76°31’13”   83°59’23�R - top west side of the fireplace chimney
                              S - intersection of the west side of the
76°28’06”   86°17’44�fireplace chimney and sloped roof for the second
                              level
78°20’42”   85°21’48�T - intersection of sloped roof and dormer
                              overhang at the third level
78°58’36”   83°28’40�U - intersection of dormer overhang at the third
                              level and the underside of the pedestrian bridge
 
      (2)   Permitted. The following are permitted within View Corridor #9:
aboveground pedestrian bridge connecting buildings; maypole and attachments;
signs attached to the building; umbrellas located on decks, skier bridge and
appurtenances; menu boards; movie screens; decorative outdoor lights/lighting;
railings defining restaurant decks; flower containers; directional/directory
signs; trash containers; bollards; roof snow fences; streetlights; ski lifts/
tows and appurtenances; ski area installations and appurtenances, e.g., signs,
fencing; other items not comprising the structure of the building; all
structures permitted under this code contained within the following described
parcels:
         (a)   Parcels A and B, Lot 1, Block 2, Vail Village Sixth Filing;
         (b)   Units A and B, Lot 5, Block 4, Vail Village Third Filing;
         (c)   Lot 4, Block 4, Vail Village Third Filing (a.k.a. Beaver Dam
Condominiums); and
         (d)   Parcels A and B, Lot 1, Block 1, Vail Village Sixth Filing.
   (I)   View Point #10. A view from the top of the stairs east of the Landmark
building looking south directly up the Eagle Bahn Gondola lift line through the
Arrabelle at Vail Square to the horizon line of Vail Mountain.
      (1)   Purpose. To protect the views of Vail Mountain from the core of the
Lionshead area.
      (2)   Survey control. Based on published material from Town of Vail GPS
control map. Points Spraddle and 1766 were used for this survey. Bearings
reported below are tied to this control.
      (3)   Instrument; View Point #10. A two and one-half inch diameter
aluminum monument, located 25 feet north west of the top step east of the
Landmark building in the grass, near the bend in the sidewalk heading toward
the North Day Lot, stamped View 10.
      (4)   Backsight. A two and one-half inch diameter aluminum monument which
bears S10°14’26”E a distance of 171.51 feet. Located on the top of the west
stair above the ice rink of the Arrabelle at Vail Square flush in pavers,
stamped View 9.
      (5)   Height of survey instrument above View Point #10. Five and two-
tenths feet.
      (6)   (1)   Table.
Horizontal Angle Zenith Angle Foresight Point On Photo As Of June 1, 2008
Horizontal Angle Zenith Angle Foresight Point On Photo As Of June 1, 2008
350°36’14"    79°31’45�A - intersection of roof line of the seventh
                              level and evergreen tree
353°22’18”  79°23’31�B - west edge of roof line of the seventh level
                              C - point along the sloping overhang roof line
353°35’53”  80°22’46�and a line projected from the top of the ball on
                              the finial cap at the seventh level
                              D - line intersection projected from View Point C
354°19’54”  80°22’46�and a line from the west edge of the finial cap
                              at the seventh level
                              E - intersection of west edge of the finial cap
354°19’54”  81°11’30�and the covered outside terrace curved roof line
                              at the seventh level
                              F - intersection of the covered outside terrace
355°31’32”  81°39’33�curved roof line and the air louver on the west
                              side of the seventh level
                              G - west outer edge of air louver on covered
355°58’38”  81°39’33�outside terrace curved roof line along the west
                              wall of the seventh level
356°06’33”  85°03’26�H - intersection of the seventh level west wall
                              and the top of terrace railing at the sixth level
357°08’18”  85°15’26�I - west outer edge of the top terrace railing at
                              the sixth level
357°10’48”  85°53’17�J - west outer edge at the bottom of the decking
                              at the sixth level
356°05’50”  86°25’18�K - intersection of the plaza area east wall and
                              the bottom of the decking at the sixth level
356°04’55”  87°47’08�L - intersection of the plaza area east wall and
                              the sloped roof
356°25’23”  88°07’16�M - west outer edge of sloped roof
356°04’55”  88°23’50�N - intersection of the plaza area east wall and
                              the underside of the sloped roof
356°05’50”  89°15’05�O - intersection of the plaza area east wall and
                              the top of the pedestrian bridge
                              P - intersection of the pedestrian bridge and the
02°45’18”   89°14’43�eastern point of the dormer roof line for the
                              third level
02°45’18”   89°07’46�Q - top eastern point of the dormer roof line of
                              the third level
                              R - intersection of the dormer roof line at the
03°35’07”   89°07’14�third level and the stucco support column for the
                              terrace for the 3rd level
03°35’07”   89°02’37�S - east corner of stucco support column for the
                              third level
03°43’19”   89°01’45�T - intersection of wood support post and the top
                              base of stucco column for the third level
03°43’19”   88°15’55�U - underside of sloped roof overhang for the
                              third level roof overhang
03°11’51”   88°01’36�V - east outer edge of sloped roof overhang for
                              the third level roof overhang
04°06’01”   85°17’14�W - top east edge of roof line for the third
                              level roof overhang
                              X - an intersection point of a line projected
06°47’20”   85°22’54�along the roof line for the third level and a
                              line projecting down from the underside of the
                              fifth level deck
06°47’20”   83°33’42�Y - top east edge of the terrace railing at the
                              fifth level
                              Z - intersection of a line projecting along the
07°35’22”   83°33’18�top edge of the terrace railing at the fifth
                              level to a point on the concrete terrace patio at
                              the sixth level
                              A1 - a line projected from the described point in
08°02’43”   78°52’04�View Point W to the east outer edge of the roof
                              line at the sixth level
                              B1 - an intersection point of a line projected
09°32’54”   78°52x’04�along the sixth level roof line and the copper
                              gutter of the Clock Tower
                              C1 - a line projected from the described point in
09°57’53”   76°04’24�View Point Y to the eastern edge of the sloped
                              roof line of the turret for the sixth level
 
      (2)   Permitted. The following are permitted within view corridor #10:
drain pipes; snow cable clips; flower boxes; roof snow fences; decorative
outdoor lights/lighting; ski lifts/tows and appurtenances; ski area
installations and appurtenances, e.g., signs, fencing; other items not
comprising the structure of the building; all structures permitted under this
code contained within the following described parcels:
         (a)   Parcels A and B, Lot 1, Block 2, Vail Village Sixth Filing;
         (b)   Units A and B, Lot 5, Block 4, Vail Village Third Filing;
         (c)   Lot 4, Block 4, Vail Village Third Filing (a.k.a. Beaver Dam
Condominiums);
         (d)   Parcels A and B, Lot 1, Block 1, Vail Village Sixth Filing;
         (e)   Units 1 and 2, House in Forest Condominiums;
         (f)   Parcels A and B, Lot 3, Block 1, Vail Village Sixth Filing;
         (g)   Lots 1 and 3, Forest Place Subdivision; and
         (h)   Lot 6, Block 1, Vail Village Third Filing.
(Ord. 18(1992) § 1; Ord. 16(2002) § 1; Ord. 23(2008) § 1)
§ 12-22-5 AMENDMENTS.
   An amendment of the regulations of this chapter, including a request to add
a new view corridor, delete an existing view corridor, or amend the boundary of
an existing view corridor, may be initiated by the Town Council on its own
motion, by the Planning and Environmental Commission on its own motion, or by
application of any resident or property owner in the town, or by the
Administrator or his or her designee.
   (A)   Application information for amendments. An application for the
amendment of the provisions of this chapter including the addition of a new
view corridor, the deletion of an existing view corridor or an amendment to the
boundary of an existing view corridor shall be filed with the Department of
Community Development on a form to be prescribed by the Administrator. The
application shall include the following information:
      (1)   A summary or description of the proposed amendment;
      (2)   A photograph of the proposed view to be protected if the
application is to add a new view corridor or amend the boundary of an existing
view corridor. The point used as the view point origination and the height of
the camera above existing grade or pavement at the time the photograph was
taken shall be identified. The
photograph or photographs shall be marked to show the proposed view corridor
boundary or shall be marked to show the proposed improvements in relation to
existing improvements and existing view corridor boundaries;
      (3)   The Department of Community Development may require models,
overlays, sketches or other submittal requirements to show:
         (a)   For a new view corridor, the potential impact the new view
corridor could have on the development potential of surrounding properties; or
         (b)   For a modification to a view corridor boundary, the potential
impact the change would have upon the protected view corridor.
      (4)   Names and addresses of the property owners whose development
potential, as set forth in this title on the date the application is received
by the Department of Community Development, may be increased or decreased by
the proposed view corridor or by the proposed modification to the existing view
corridor;
      (5)   If the application is to add a new view corridor or amend the
boundary of an existing view corridor, the applicant shall submit a legal
description of the new view corridor or the amended boundary prepared in the
same format as those set forth in §
12-22-4 of this chapter, and any other information deemed necessary by the
Department of Community Development 30 days prior to the final Planning and
Environmental Commission public hearing; and
      (6)   An application for an amendment may require review by consultants
other than town staff. Should a determination be made by the town staff that an
outside consultant is needed to review an amendment application, the Department
of Community Development shall obtain the approval of the Town Council for the
hiring of such a consultant. Upon approval of the Town Council to hire an
outside consultant, the Department of Community Development shall estimate the
amount of money necessary to pay the outside consultant, and this amount shall
be forwarded to the town by the applicant at the time the amendment application
is submitted to the Department of Community Development. Upon completion of the
review of the application by the consultant, any of the funds forwarded by the
applicant for payment of the consultant which have not been paid to the
consultant, shall be returned to the applicant. Expenses incurred by the town
in excess of the amount forwarded by the applicant shall be paid to the town by
the applicant within 30 days of notification by the town.
   (B)   Notice and hearing procedure.
      (1)   Upon the filing of an application for an amendment to this chapter,
or upon initiation of an amendment by the Town Council, Planning and
Environmental Commission or Department of Community Development Director, the
Department of Community Development Director or his or her designee shall set a
date for a public hearing before the Planning and Environmental Commission.
Subsequent to the hearing, the Planning and Environmental Commission shall make
a recommendation for approval or denial to the Town Council. After considering
the Planning and Environmental Commission’s recommendation, the Town Council
shall make a final determination on the amendment at a public hearing by
ordinance.
      (2)   Notice for the public hearing before the Planning and Environmental
Commission shall be given to the property owners designated in subsection (A)
(4) of this section, or §
12-22-6(B)(1)(b) of this chapter, in accordance with §
12-3-6(C) of this title and the hearing shall be conducted in conformity with §
12-3-6(D) of this title.
   (C)   Criteria for amendments. The Town Council shall only approve an
amendment to this chapter adding a new view corridor, deleting an existing view
corridor, or amending the boundary of an existing view corridor if the
amendment complies with the policies and goals of the applicable elements of
the Vail land use plan, town policies, and urban design guide plans and other
adopted master plans, and meets all of the following criteria.
      (1)   If the request is to add a new view corridor or to amend the
boundary of an existing view corridor in such a way which expands an existing
view corridor:
         (a)   That the proposed view corridor or the boundary amendment
protects and perpetuates a view or views from public pedestrian areas, public
ways or public spaces within the town which foster civic pride and are in the
public interest for the town;
         (b)   That the proposed view corridor or boundary amendment protects
and enhances the town’s attraction to residents, guests and property owners;
and
         (c)   That the proposed view corridor or boundary amendment protects a
view which is commonly recognized and has inherent qualities which make it more
valuable to the town than other more common views.
      (2)   If the amendment is to amend the boundary of an existing view
corridor in such a way which reduces the existing view corridor or is to repeal
an existing view corridor:
         (a)   That the boundary amendment or repeal will not reduce or
eliminate any view or views from public pedestrian areas, public ways, or
public spaces within the town which foster civic pride and are in the public
interest for the town;
         (b)   That the boundary amendment or repeal will not reduce the town’s
attraction to residents, guests and property owners nor be detrimental to the
enjoyment of public pedestrian areas, public ways, public spaces or public
views; and
         (c)   That the boundary amendment or repeal will not diminish the
integrity or quality, nor compromise the original purpose of the existing view
corridor.
(Ord. 18(1992) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 48)
§ 12-22-6 ENCROACHMENTS INTO EXISTING VIEW CORRIDORS.
   (A)   No part of a structure shall be permitted to encroach into any view
corridor set forth in this chapter unless an encroachment is approved in
accordance with this section.
   (B)   An application for approval to encroach into an existing view corridor
may be initiated by the Town Council on its own motion, by the Planning and
Environmental Commission on its own motion, or by application of any resident
or property owner in the town, or by the Administrator or his or her designee.
      (1)   Application information for encroachments. An application for an
encroachment shall be filed with the Department of Community Development on a
form to be prescribed by the Administrator. The application shall include the
following information:
         (a)   A summary or description of the proposed encroachment;
         (b)   Names and addresses of property owners located within 500 feet
of the proposed encroachment;
         (c)   Photographs of the existing view corridor. The photographs shall
be marked with tape to identify the existing view corridor boundaries, and
shall show the proposed encroachment. The photographs shall be taken from the
view point origination at the same height as identified in the legal
descriptions in §
12-22-4 of this chapter;
         (d)   The Department of Community Development may require models,
overlays, sketches or other submittal requirements to show how the proposed
encroachment could impact the protected view corridor; and
         (e)   An application for an encroachment may require review by
consultants other than town staff. Should a determination be made by the town
staff that an outside consultant is needed to review an encroachment
application, the Department of Community Development shall obtain the approval
of the Town Council for the hiring of such a consultant. Upon approval of the
Town Council to hire an outside consultant, the Department of Community
Development shall estimate the amount of money necessary to pay the outside
consultant, and this amount shall be forwarded to the town by the applicant at
the time the encroachment is submitted to the Department of Community
Development. Upon completion of the review of the application by the
consultant, any of the funds forwarded by the applicant for payment of the
consultant which have not been paid to the consultant, shall be returned to the
applicant. Expenses incurred by the town in excess of the amount forwarded by
the applicant shall be paid to the town by the applicant within 30 days of
notification by the town.
      (2)   Notice and hearing procedure. Notice and hearing on an application
for an encroachment into an existing view corridor shall be in accordance with
§
12-22-5(B) of this chapter.
      (3)   Criteria for encroachment. No encroachment into an existing view
corridor shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates by clear and
convincing evidence that the encroachment meets all of the following criteria:
         (a)   That the literal enforcement of this chapter would preclude a
reasonable development of a proposed structure on the applicant’s land;
         (b)   That the development of the structure proposed by the applicant
would not be such as to defeat the purposes of this chapter;
         (c)   That the development proposed by the applicant would not be
detrimental to the enjoyment of public pedestrian areas, public ways, public
spaces or public views;
         (d)   That the development proposed by the applicant complies with
applicable elements of the Vail land use plan, town policies, urban design
guide plans and other adapted master plans; and
         (e)   That the proposed structure will not diminish the integrity or
quality nor compromise the original purpose of the preserved view.
(Ord. 18(1992) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 49; Ord. 10(2012) § 2)
§ 12-22-7 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Removal of encroachments encouraged; exceptions. Any structure which
presently encroaches into an existing view corridor which was lawfully
authorized by ordinances or regulations existing prior to the effective date
hereof may continue. However, such encroachments will be encouraged to be
removed as part of any remodeling or reconstruction of the structure. In the
case of certain focal points, such as the Clock Tower and Rucksack Tower, the
town recognizes their importance to the character of Vail Village and to the
quality of the urban design of Vail Village. Notwithstanding their
nonconforming status, the town does not encourage their removal.
   (B)   Allowed modifications to existing structures. Structures lawfully
established prior to the effective date hereof may be modified; provided, that
such modification does not cause the structure to encroach into a view corridor
to a greater extent in any dimension or configuration, specifically height,
width or mass, than the existing structure.
   (C)   Maintenance; repair. Nonconforming structures may be maintained and
repaired as necessary for the convenient, safe or efficient operation or use
provided that no such maintenance or repair shall cause the structure to
encroach into a view corridor to a greater extent in any dimension or
configuration, specifically height, width or mass, than the structure
encroached prior to such maintenance and repair.
   (D)   Restoration. Whenever a nonconforming structure which does not conform
to the provisions of this chapter is destroyed by fire or other calamity, by
act of God, or by the public enemy, its use may be resumed or the structure may
be restored, provided the restoration is commenced within one year and
diligently pursued to completion. The structure after such restoration shall
not encroach into a view corridor to a greater extent in any dimension or
configuration, specifically height, width or mass, than the encroachment which
existed prior to destruction.
(Ord. 18(1992) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 50)
§ 12-22-8 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   If the maximum height allowed in any zone district within the town differs
from the height permitted by a view corridor, the more restrictive height
limitation shall apply.
(Ord. 18(1992) § 1)
§ 12-22-9 FEES.
   The Town Council shall by motion establish a view application fee sufficient
to cover the cost of town staff time and other expenses incidental to the
review of the application. The fee shall be paid at the time of the
application, and shall not be refundable.
(Ord. 18(1992) § 1)
CHAPTER 23: COMMERCIAL LINKAGE
Section
12-23-1 Purpose and applicability
12-23-2 Employee generation and mitigation rates
12-23-3 Size and building requirements
12-23-4 Redevelopment
12-23-5 Exemptions
12-23-6 Methods of mitigation
12-23-7 Mitigation bank
12-23-8 Administration
12-23-9 Occupancy and deed restrictions
12-23-10 Timing
12-23-11 Variances
12-23-12 Review
§ 12-23-1 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that new commercial
development and redevelopment in the town provide for a reasonable amount of
employee housing to mitigate the impact on employee housing caused by such
commercial development and redevelopment.
   (B)   Except as provided in §
12-23-5 of this chapter, this chapter shall apply to all new commercial
development and redevelopment located within the following zone districts:
      (1)   High Density Multiple-Family (HDMF);
      (2)   Public Accommodation (PA);
      (3)   Public Accommodation 2 (PA-2);
      (4)   Commercial Core 1 (CC1);
      (5)   Commercial Core 2 (CC2);
      (6)   Commercial Core 3 (CC3);
      (7)   Commercial Service Center (CSC);
      (8)   Arterial Business (ABD);
      (9)   General Use (GU);
      (10)   Heavy Service (HS);
      (11)   Lionshead Mixed Use 1 (LMU-1);
      (12)   Lionshead Mixed Use 2 (LMU-2);
      (13)   Ski Base/Recreation (SBR);
      (14)   Ski Base/Recreation 2 (SBR2);
      (15)   Parking District (P); and
      (16)   Special Development (SDD).
   (C)   The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to all other
requirements of this code.
   (D)   When any provision of this chapter conflicts with any other provision
of this code, the provision of this chapter shall control.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 24)
§ 12-23-2 EMPLOYEE GENERATION AND MITIGATION RATES.
   (A)   The employee generation rates found in Table 23-1, “Employee
Generation Rates By Type Of Commercial Use”, of this section, shall be applied
to each type of use in a commercial development. For any use not listed, the
Administrator shall determine the applicable employee generation rate by
consulting the town’s current nexus study.
Table 23-1
Employee Generation Rates by Type of Commercial Use
Type of Use Employee Generation Rate
Table 23-1
Employee Generation Rates by Type of Commercial Use
Type of Use                             Employee Generation Rate
Accommodation unit/ limited service     0.6 employee per net new units
lodge unit
Business office and professional office 3.2 employees per 1,000 feet of new net
(including real estate and property     floor area
management office)
Conference facility                     0.8 employee per 1,000 feet of new net
                                        floor area
Eating and drinking establishment       10.2 employees per 1,000 feet of new
                                        net floor area
Health club                             0.96 employee per 1,000 feet of new net
                                        floor area
Retail store/personal service/repair    2.4 employees per 1,000 feet of new net
shop                                    floor area
Spa                                     2.1 employees per 1,000 feet of new net
                                        floor area
 
   (B)   If an applicant submits competent evidence that the employee
generation rates contained in Table 23-1 of this section or the nexus study do
not accurately reflect the number of employees generated by the proposed
commercial development or redevelopment and the Administrator finds that such
evidence warrants a deviation from those employee generation rates, the
Administrator shall allow for such a deviation as the Administrator deems
appropriate.
   (C)   (1)   Each commercial development or redevelopment shall mitigate its
impact on employee housing by providing EHUs for 20% of the employees
generated, pursuant to Table 23-1 of this section, or the nexus study, in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   For example, for a development proposing 2,500 square feet of new
net floor area for an eating and drinking establishment, the equation would be
as follows:
 
([2,500 square feet/1,000 square feet] x [10.2]) = 25.5 new employees generated
25.5 new employees generated x 20% = 5.1 employees to be housed
 
(Ord. 24(2018) § 1)
§ 12-23-3 SIZE AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Table 23-2, “Size Of Employee Housing Units”, of this section,
establishes the minimum size of EHUs and the number of employees that can be
housed in each. All EHUs shall meet or exceed the minimum size requirements.
Table 23-2
Size of Employee Housing Units
Type of Unit Minimum Size (GRFA) Number of Employees Housed
Table 23-2
Size of Employee Housing Units
Type of Unit       Minimum Size (GRFA) Number of Employees Housed
Dormitory          250                 1
Studio             438                 1.25
1 bedroom          613                 1.75
2 bedroom          788                 2.25
3 or more bedrooms 1,225               3.5
 
   (B)   Every EHU shall contain a kitchen facility or kitchenette and a
bathroom.
   (C)   All trash facilities shall be enclosed.
   (D)   (1)   Generally. Parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title.
      (2)   Exception for on site units. At the discretion of the applicable
governing body, variations to the parking standards outlined in Chapter 10 of
this title may be approved during the review of an employee housing plan
subject to a parking management plan. The parking management plan may be
approved by the applicable governing body and may provide for a reduction in
the parking requirements for on site units based on a demonstrated need for
fewer parking spaces than Chapter 10 of this title would require. For example,
a demonstrated need for a reduction in the required parking could include:
         (a)   Proximity or availability of alternative modes of transportation
including, but not limited to, public transit or shuttle services;
         (b)   A limitation placed in the deed restrictions limiting the number
of cars for each unit; and
         (c)   A demonstrated permanent program including, but not limited to,
rideshare programs, car share programs, shuttle service or staggered work
shifts.
   (E)   Each EHU shall have its own entrance. There shall be no interior
access from any EHU to any dwelling unit to which it may be attached.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 24)
§ 12-23-4 REDEVELOPMENT.
   Employee housing impacts need only be mitigated for a redevelopment that
results in a greater number of employees generated from an increase in net
floor area, or an increase in the number of accommodation units or limited
service lodge units in the redevelopment; provided however, that if any
existing EHUs are to be removed, an equal amount of EHUs shall be replaced in
addition to the other requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 24)
§ 12-23-5 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from this chapter:
   (A)   The redevelopment of existing commercial development, if no new net
floor area, accommodation units or limited service lodge units are created; and
   (B)   The construction of EHUs.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 24)
§ 12-23-6 METHODS OF MITIGATION.
   (A)   For all new construction (i.e., development that does not affect any
existing buildings or structures) and demo/rebuild projects that result in a
mitigation requirement of 1.25 employees or greater, no less than one-half the
mitigation of employee housing required by this chapter shall be accomplished
with on site units.
      (1)   Exceptions. At the sole discretion of the applicable governing
body, an exception may be granted from this subsection (A) based upon one of
the following findings.
         (a)   Implementation of the on site unit mitigation method would be
contrary to the intent and purpose of the applicable zone district.
         (b)   Implementation of the on site unit mitigation method would be
contrary to the goals of the applicable elements of the Vail Comprehensive Plan
and the town’s development objectives.
         (c)   Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions apply
to the site that prevents the implementation of the on site unit mitigation
method.
         (d)   The method of mitigation proposed better achieves the intent and
purpose of this chapter and general and specific purposes of this title than
the on site mitigation unit method.
      (2)   On site EHUs. All on site EHUs shall be deed restricted as a “Type
IV-CL” (type four, commercial linkage mitigation) or “Type VII-CL” (type seven,
commercial linkage mitigation) EHU in accordance with Chapter 13, “Employee
Housing”, of this title.
      (3)   On site dormitory style units. At the sole discretion of the
applicable governing body, an applicant may provide on site dormitory style
units.
      (4)   Fees in lieu. An applicant may provide a payment of fees in lieu
only for any fractional remainder of the requirement generated under this
chapter totaling less than one employee.
      (5)   Remaining portion of requirement. Any remaining portion of the
mitigation requirement not provided with on site units shall be provided in
accordance with subsection (B) of this section.
   (B)   For all development projects except those mitigated by subsection (A)
of this section, the mitigation of employee housing required by this chapter
shall be accomplished through one, or any combination, of the methods further
described in this section. Unless otherwise regulated by this title, the choice
of method(s) used to mitigate the employee housing requirements of this chapter
shall be at the sole discretion of the applicant.
      (1)   On site units.
         (a)   All on site EHUs shall be deed restricted as a “Type IV-CL”
(type four, commercial linkage mitigation) or “Type VII-CL” (type seven,
commercial linkage mitigation) EHU in accordance with Chapter 13, “Employee
Housing”, of this title.
         (b)   At the sole discretion of the applicable governing body, an
applicant may provide on site dormitory style units.
      (2)   Conveyance of vacant property on site. An applicant may convey on
site real property to the town on which no covenants, restrictions or issues
exist that would limit the construction of EHUs, at the sole discretion of the
Town Council. This method does not mitigate the on site unit requirements of
subsection (A) of this section.
      (3)   Off site units.
         (a)   The requisite number of EHUs, or a portion thereof, may be
provided off site within the town, provided that such EHUs are deed restricted
in accordance with this chapter.
         (b)   At the sole discretion of the Planning and Environmental
Commission, an applicant may provide off site dormitory units, unless the
application is for a special development district, in which case, the Town
Council, in its sole discretion, may accept dormitory units as a method of
mitigation.
      (4)   Payment of fees in lieu.
         (a)   The fee in lieu for each employee to be housed shall be
established annually by resolution of the Town Council, provided that, in
calculating that fee, the Town Council shall include the net cost (total cost
less the amount covered by rental or sale income) of real property and all
related planning, design, site development, legal, construction and
construction management costs of the project, in current dollars, which would
be incurred by the town to provide housing for the employee to be housed in
that year.
         (b)   An administrative fee, established by resolution of the Town
Council, shall be added to the amount set forth in subsection (B)(4)(a) of this
section.
         (c)   Fees in lieu shall be due and payable prior to the issuance of a
building permit for the development.
         (d)   The town shall use monies collected from fees in lieu only to
provide incremental new employee housing units.
         (e)   An applicant may provide a payment of fees in lieu only for any
fractional remainder of the requirement generated under this chapter totaling
less than one employee.
      (5)   Conveyance of vacant property off site. The Town Council may, at
its sole discretion, accept the conveyance of vacant property off site in lieu
of requiring the provision of EHUs, provided that no covenants, restrictions or
issues exist on such property that would limit the construction of EHUs.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 24; Ord. 23(2016) § 2)
§ 12-23-7 MITIGATION BANK.
   (A)   The town will provide credit for any EHUs constructed on site,
constructed off site, or otherwise acquired in anticipation of future
commercial development or redevelopment, provided that those EHUs meet all
applicable requirements of this title. However, the construction or acquisition
of EHUs in anticipation of future development is at the sole risk of the
applicant, because the commercial development shall be subject to all
regulations pertaining to EHUs which are in effect at the time the application
for commercial development review is submitted to the town, even if those
regulations change after the EHUs are constructed.
   (B)   It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to provide documentation of
any existing EHU credit upon submission of an application for development
review. If the applicant cannot adequately document such credits, the town
shall not be obligated to provide such credit.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 24)
§ 12-23-8 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Employee housing plan. Each application for development review, except
those exempt pursuant to §
12-23-5 of this chapter, shall include an employee housing plan which includes
the following:
      (1)   Calculation method. The calculation of employee generation,
including credits if applicable, and the mitigation method by which the
applicant proposes to meet the requirements of this chapter;
      (2)   Plans. A dimensioned site plan and architectural floor plan that
demonstrates compliance with §
12-23-3, “Size And Building Requirements”, of this chapter;
      (3)   Lot size. The average lot size of the proposed EHUs and the average
lot size of other dwelling units in the commercial development or
redevelopment, if any;
      (4)   Schedules. A time line for the provision of any off site EHUs;
      (5)   Off site units. A proposal for the provision of any off site EHUs
shall include a brief statement explaining the basis of the proposal;
      (6)   Off site conveyance request. A request for an off site conveyance
shall include a brief statement explaining the basis for the request;
      (7)   Fees in lieu. A proposal to pay fees in lieu shall include a brief
statement explaining the basis of the proposal; and
      (8)   Written narrative. A written narrative explaining how the employee
housing plan meets the purposes of this chapter and complies with the town’s
comprehensive plan.
   (B)   Review.
      (1)   The Administrator shall approve, approve with modifications or deny
an employee housing plan involving a total mitigation requirement of less than
1.25 employees.
      (2)   The Planning and Environmental Commission shall approve, approve
with modifications or deny an employee housing plan unless the plan involves a
total mitigation requirement of less than 1.25 employees; the development is
located within a special development district; or the plan includes a request
to convey property.
      (3)   The Town Council shall approve, approve with modifications or deny
an employee housing plan for a development located within a special development
district or a plan requesting to convey property.
      (4)   Before granting approval of an employee housing plan, the
applicable governing body shall make findings that the employee housing plan
conforms to the general and specific purposes of this title, and that the plan
is compatible with the applicable elements of the Vail Comprehensive Plan and
the development objectives of the town.
   (C)   Housing plan modification. If modifications to a submitted application
for development review changes the obligations of the applicant under this
chapter, the applicant shall submit a modified employee housing plan. A
modification to an employee housing plan shall be reviewed by the body that
reviewed the initial employee housing plan, in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
   (D)   Approved housing plan. An approved employee housing plan shall become
part of the approved application for development review for the affected site.
   (E)   Amendment requests. Requests to amend an approved employee housing
plan shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures described in this
chapter. At the discretion of the Administrator, minor amendments that do not
alter the basic intent or methodology of the plan may be approved, or approved
with modifications or denied by the Administrator.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 24)
§ 12-23-9 OCCUPANCY AND DEED RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No EHU shall be subdivided or divided into any form of timeshare unit
or fractional fee club unit.
   (B)   EHUs shall not be leased for a period less than 30 consecutive days.
   (C)   An EHU may be sold or transferred as a separate unit on the site.
   (D)   An EHU shall be continuously occupied by an employee and shall not
remain vacant for a period in excess of three consecutive months unless,
despite reasonable and documented efforts to occupy the EHU, efforts are
unsuccessful.
   (E)   No later than February 1 of each year, the owner of an EHU shall
submit a sworn affidavit on a form provided by the town to the Town of Vail
Community Development Department containing the following information:
      (1)   Evidence to establish that the EHU has been occupied throughout the
year by an employee;
      (2)   The rental rate (unless owner occupied);
      (3)   The employee’s employer; and
      (4)   Evidence to demonstrate that at least one person residing in the
EHU is an employee.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 24)
§ 12-23-10 TIMING.
   All EHUs required by this chapter shall be ready for occupancy prior to the
issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy for the affected commercial
development or redevelopment.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 24)
§ 12-23-11 VARIANCES.
   Variances from the requirements of this chapter may be granted pursuant to
the procedures and standards set forth in Chapter 17 of this title.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 24)
§ 12-23-12 REVIEW.
   (A)   Purpose. The Town Council intends that the application of this chapter
not result in an unlawful taking of private property without the payment of
just compensation, and therefore, the Town Council adopts the review procedures
set forth in this section.
   (B)   Planning and Environmental Commission Review. Any applicant for
commercial development who feels that the application of this chapter would
effect an unlawful taking may apply to the Planning and Environmental
Commission for an adjustment of the requirements imposed by this chapter. If
the Planning and Environmental Commission determines that the application of
this chapter would result in an unlawful taking of private property without
just compensation, the Planning and Environmental Commission may alter, lessen
or adjust employee housing requirements as applied to the particular project
under consideration to ensure that there is no unlawful uncompensated taking.
   (C)   Town Council review. If the Planning and Environmental Commission
denies the relief sought by an applicant, the applicant may request a hearing
before the Town Council. Such hearing shall be a quasi-judicial hearing and
conducted according to the town’s rules and regulations regarding quasi-
judicial hearings. At such hearing, the burden of proof shall be on the
applicant to establish that the fulfillment of the requirements of this chapter
would effect an unconstitutional taking without just compensation pursuant to
applicable law. If the Town Council determines that the application of this
chapter would effect an illegal taking without just compensation, the Town
Council may alter, lessen or adjust the employee housing requirements as
applied to the particular project under consideration to ensure that no illegal
uncompensated taking occurs. The decision of the Town Council shall be final,
subject only to judicial review.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 24)
CHAPTER 24: INCLUSIONARY ZONING
Section
12-24-1 Purpose and applicability
12-24-2 Employee housing requirements
12-24-3 Building requirements
12-24-4 Redevelopment
12-24-5 Exemptions
12-24-6 Methods of mitigation
12-24-7 Mitigation bank
12-24-8 Administration
12-24-9 Occupancy and deed restrictions
12-24-10 Timing
12-24-11 Variances
12-24-12 Review
§ 12-24-1 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that new residential
development and redevelopment in the Town provide for a reasonable amount of
employee housing to mitigate the impact on employee housing caused by such
residential development and redevelopment.
   (B)   This chapter shall apply to all new residential development and
redevelopment located within the following zone districts, except as provided
in §
12-24-5 of this chapter:
      (1)   High Density Multiple-Family (HDMF);
      (2)   Vail Village Townhouse (VVT);
      (3)   Public Accommodation (PA);
      (4)   Public Accommodation 2 (PA-2);
      (5)   Commercial Core 1 (CC1);
      (6)   Commercial Core 2 (CC2);
      (7)   Commercial Core 3 (CC3);
      (8)   Commercial Service Center (CSC);
      (9)   Arterial Business (ABD);
      (10)   General Use (GU);
      (11)   Heavy Service (HS);
      (12)   Lionshead Mixed Use 1 (LMU-1);
      (13)   Lionshead Mixed Use 2 (LMU-2);
      (14)   Ski Base/Recreation (SBR);
      (15)   Ski Base/Recreation 2 (SBR2);
      (16)   Parking District (P);
      (17)   Special Development (SDD); and
      (18)   West Vail Multi-Family Overlay (WVMF).
   (C)   The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to all other
requirements of this code. In the case of a conflict, the stricter provision
shall apply.
   (D)   When any provision of this chapter conflicts with any other provision
of this code, the provision of this chapter shall control.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 25; Ord. 2(2012) § 12; Ord. 19(2023) § 8)
§ 12-24-2 EMPLOYEE HOUSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every residential development and redevelopment shall be required to
mitigate its direct and secondary impacts on the town by providing employee
housing at a mitigation rate of 10% of the total new GRFA.
   (B)   For example, for a development proposing 5,500 square feet of new
GRFA, the calculation would be as follows:
 
5,500 square feet of new GRFA x 10% mitigation rate = 550 square feet of
employee housing to be provided
 
(Ord. 1(2008) § 25)
§ 12-24-3 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Table 24-1, “Size Of Employee Housing Units”, of this section,
establishes the minimum size requirements for EHUs under this chapter. All EHUs
shall meet or exceed the minimum size requirements.
Table 24-1
Size of Employee Housing Units
Type of Unit Minimum Size (GRFA)
Table 24-1
Size of Employee Housing Units
Type of Unit       Minimum Size (GRFA)
Dormitory          250
Studio             438
1 bedroom          613
2 bedroom          788
3 or more bedrooms 1,225
 
   (B)   Every EHU shall contain a kitchen facility or kitchenette and a
bathroom.
   (C)   All trash facilities shall be enclosed.
   (D)   (1)   Generally. Parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
10 of this title.
      (2)   Exception for on site EHUs. At the discretion of the applicable
governing body, variations to the parking standards outlined in Chapter 10 of
this title may be approved during the review of an employee housing plan
subject to a parking management plan. The parking management plan may be
approved by the applicable governing body and may provide for a reduction in
the parking requirements for on site units based on a demonstrated need for
fewer parking spaces than Chapter 10 of this title would require. For example,
a demonstrated need for a reduction in the required parking could include:
         (a)   Proximity or availability of alternative modes of transportation
including, but not limited to, public transit or shuttle services;
         (b)   A limitation placed in the deed restrictions limiting the number
of cars for each unit; and
         (c)   A demonstrated permanent program including, but not limited to,
rideshare programs, car share programs, shuttle service or staggered work
shifts.
   (E)   Each EHU shall have its own entrance. There shall be no interior
access from any EHU to any dwelling unit to which it may be attached.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 25)
§ 12-24-4 REDEVELOPMENT.
   Employee housing need only be provided for the increase in the GRFA of a
redevelopment; provided however, that if any existing EHUs are to be removed,
an equal amount of EHUs shall be replaced in addition to other requirements of
this chapter.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 25)
§ 12-24-5 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from this chapter:
   (A)   The remodeling of an existing dwelling unit;
   (B)   The replacement of a demolished residential development, provided the
replacement structure does not exceed the total GRFA of the original structure;
and
   (C)   The construction of EHUs.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 25)
§ 12-24-6 METHODS OF MITIGATION.
   (A)   For all new construction (i.e., development that does not affect any
existing buildings or structures) and demo/rebuild projects that result in a
mitigation requirement of 438 square feet or greater, no less than one-half the
mitigation of employee housing required by this chapter shall be accomplished
with on site units.
      (1)   Exceptions. At the sole discretion of the applicable governing
body, an exception may be granted from this subsection (A) based upon one of
the following findings.
         (a)   Implementation of the on site unit mitigation method would be
contrary to the intent and purpose of the applicable zone district.
         (b)   Implementation of the on site unit mitigation method would be
contrary to the goals of the applicable elements of the Vail Comprehensive Plan
and the town’s development objectives.
         (c)   Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions apply
to the site that prevents the implementation of the on site unit mitigation
method.
         (d)   The method of mitigation proposed better achieves the intent and
purpose of this chapter and general and specific purposes of this title than
the on site mitigation unit method.
      (2)   On site EHUs. All on site EHUs shall be deed restricted as a “Type
IV-IZ” (type four, inclusionary zoning mitigation) or “Type VII-IZ” (type
seven, inclusionary zoning mitigation) EHU in accordance with Chapter 13,
“Employee Housing”, of this title.
      (3)   On site dormitory style units. At the sole discretion of the
applicable governing body, an applicant may provide on site dormitory style
units.
      (4)   Fees in lieu. An applicant may provide a payment of fees in lieu
only for any fractional remainder of the requirement generated under this
chapter totaling less than 438 square feet of EHU floor area.
      (5)   Remaining portion of requirement. Any remaining portion of the
mitigation requirement not provided with on site units shall be provided in
accordance with subsection (B) of this section.
   (B)   For all development projects except those mitigated by subsection (A)
of this section, the mitigation of employee housing required by this chapter
shall be accomplished through one, or any combination, of the methods further
described in this section. Unless otherwise regulated by this title, the choice
of method(s) used to mitigate the employee housing requirements of this chapter
shall be at the sole discretion of the applicant.
      (1)   On site units.
         (a)   All on site EHUs shall be deed restricted as a “Type IV-IZ”
(type four, inclusionary zoning mitigation) or “Type VII-IZ” (type seven,
inclusionary zoning mitigation) EHU in accordance with Chapter 13, “Employee
Housing”, of this title.
         (b)   At the sole discretion of the applicable governing body, an
applicant may provide on site dormitory style units.
      (2)   Conveyance of vacant property on site. An applicant may convey on
site real property to the town on which no covenants, restrictions or issues
exist that would limit the construction of EHUs, at the sole discretion of the
Town Council. This method does not mitigate the on site unit requirements of
subsection (A) of this section.
      (3)   Off site units.
         (a)   The requisite number of EHUs, or a portion thereof, may be
provided off site within the town, provided that such EHUs are deed restricted
in accordance with this chapter.
         (b)   At the sole discretion of the Planning and Environmental
Commission, an applicant may provide off site dormitory units, unless the
application is for a special development district, in which case, the Town
Council, in its sole discretion, may accept dormitory units as a method of
mitigation.
      (4)   Payment of fees in lieu.
         (a)   The fee in lieu for each square foot shall be established
annually by resolution of the Town Council, provided that in calculating that
fee, the Town Council shall include the net cost (total cost less the amount
covered by rental or sale income) of real property and all related planning,
design, site development, legal, construction and construction management costs
of the project, in current dollars, which would be incurred by the town to
provide the square feet in that year.
         (b)   An administrative fee, established by resolution of the Town
Council, shall be added to the amount set forth in subsection (B)(4)(a) of this
section.
         (c)   Fees in lieu shall be due and payable prior to the issuance of a
building permit for the development.
         (d)   The town shall use monies collected from the fees in lieu only
to provide incremental new employee housing units.
         (e)   An applicant may provide a payment of fees in lieu only for any
fractional remainder of the requirement generated under this chapter totaling
less than 438 square feet of EHU floor area.
      (5)   Conveyance of vacant property off site. The Town Council may, at
its sole discretion, accept a conveyance of vacant property off site in lieu of
requiring construction of EHUs, provided that no covenants, restrictions or
issues exist on the property that would limit the construction of EHUs.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 25; Ord. 23(2016) § 3)
§ 12-24-7 MITIGATION BANK.
   (A)   The town will provide credit for any EHUs constructed on site,
constructed off site or otherwise acquired in anticipation of future
residential development or redevelopment, provided that those EHUs meet all
applicable requirements of this chapter. However, the construction or
acquisition of EHUs in anticipation of future development is at the risk of the
applicant, because the residential development shall be subject to all
regulations pertaining to EHUs which are in effect at the time the application
for development review is submitted to the town, even if those regulations
change after the EHUs are constructed.
   (B)   It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to provide documentation of
any existing EHU credits upon submission of an application for development
review. If the applicant cannot adequately document such credits, the town
shall not be obligated to provide such credits.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 25)
§ 12-24-8 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Employee housing plan. Each application for development review, except
those exempt pursuant to §
12-24-5 of this chapter, shall include an employee housing plan which includes
the following:
      (1)   Calculation method. The calculation of the inclusionary zoning
requirement, including credits if applicable, and the mitigation method by
which the applicant proposes to meet the requirements of this chapter;
      (2)   Plans. A dimensioned site plan and architectural floor plan that
demonstrates compliance with §
12-24-3, “Building Requirements”, of this chapter;
      (3)   Lot size. The average lot size of the proposed EHUs and the average
lot size of other dwelling units in the commercial development or
redevelopment, if any;
      (4)   Schedules. A time line for the provision of any off site EHUs;
      (5)   Off site units. A proposal for the provision of any off site EHUs
shall include a brief statement explaining the basis of the proposal;
      (6)   Off site conveyance request. A request for an off site conveyance
shall include a brief statement explaining the basis for the request;
      (7)   Fees in lieu. A proposal to pay fees in lieu shall include a brief
statement explaining the basis of the proposal; and
      (8)   Written narrative. A written narrative explaining how the employee
housing plan meets the purposes of this chapter and complies with the town’s
Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Review.
      (1)   The Administrator shall approve, approve with modifications or deny
an employee housing plan involving a total mitigation requirement of less than
438 square feet of EHU floor area or a housing plan in the West Vail Mult-
Family Overlay (WVMF) District that does not include a development plan.
      (2)   The Planning and Environmental Commission shall approve, approve
with modifications or deny all employee housing plans except plans that
involves less than 438 square feet of EHU floor area; plans where the
development is located within a special development district; plans that
includes a request to convey property; or plans located in the West Vail Multi-
Family Overlay (WVMF) District that do not include a development plan.
      (3)   The Town Council shall approve, approve with modifications or deny
an employee housing plan for a development located within a special development
district or a plan requesting to convey property.
      (4)   Before granting approval of an employee housing plan, the
applicable governing body shall make findings that the employee housing plan
conforms to the general and specific purposes of this title, and that the plan
is compatible with the applicable elements of the Vail Comprehensive Plan and
the development objectives of the town.
   (C)   Housing plan modification. If modifications to a submitted application
for development review changes the obligations of the applicant under this
chapter, the applicant shall submit a modified employee housing plan. A
modification to an employee housing plan shall be reviewed by the body that
reviewed the initial employee housing plan, in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
   (D)   Approved housing plan. An approved employee housing plan shall become
part of the approved application for development review for the affected site.
   (E)   Amendment requests. Requests to amend an approved employee housing
plan shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures described in this
chapter. At the discretion of the Administrator, minor amendments that do not
alter the basic intent or methodology of the plan may be approved, or approved
with modifications or denied by the Administrator.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 25; Ord. 19(2023) § 9)
§ 12-24-9 OCCUPANCY AND DEED RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No EHU shall be subdivided or divided into any form of timeshare unit
or fractional fee club unit.
   (B)   EHUs shall not be leased for a period less than 30 consecutive days.
   (C)   An EHU may be sold or transferred as a separate unit on the site.
   (D)   An EHU shall be continuously occupied by an employee and shall not
remain vacant for a period in excess of three consecutive months unless,
despite reasonable and documented efforts to occupy the EHU, efforts are
unsuccessful.
   (E)   No later than February 1 of each year, the owner of each EHU shall
submit a sworn affidavit on a form provided by the town with the following
information:
      (1)   Evidence to establish that the EHU has been rented or owner
occupied throughout the year;
      (2)   The rental rate (unless owner occupied);
      (3)   The employee’s employer; and
      (4)   Evidence to demonstrate that at least one person residing in the
EHU is an employee at a business located in Eagle County.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 25)
§ 12-24-10 TIMING.
   All EHUs required by this chapter shall be ready for occupancy prior to the
issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy for the affected residential
development.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 25)
§ 12-24-11 VARIANCES.
   Variances from the requirements of this chapter may be granted pursuant to
the procedures and standards set forth in Chapter 17 of this title.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 25)
§ 12-24-12 REVIEW.
   (A)   Purpose. The Town Council intends that the application of this chapter
not result in an unlawful taking of private property without the payment of
just compensation, and therefore, the Town Council adopts the review procedures
set forth in this section.
   (B)   Planning and Environmental Commission review. Any applicant for
residential development who feels that the application of this chapter would
effect an unlawful taking may apply to the Planning and Environmental
Commission for an adjustment of the requirements imposed by this chapter. If
the Planning and Environmental Commission determines that the application of
this chapter would result in an unlawful taking of private property without
just compensation, the Planning and Environmental Commission may alter, lessen
or adjust employee housing requirements as applied to the particular project
under consideration to ensure that there is no unlawful uncompensated taking.
   (C)   Town Council review. If the Planning and Environmental Commission
denies the relief sought by an applicant, the applicant may request a hearing
before the Town Council. Such hearing shall be a quasi-judicial hearing and
conducted according to the town’s rules and regulations regarding quasi-
judicial hearings. At such hearing, the burden of proof shall be on the
applicant to establish that the fulfillment of the requirements of this chapter
would effect an unconstitutional taking without just compensation pursuant to
applicable law. If the Town Council determines that the application of this
chapter would effect an illegal taking without just compensation, the Town
Council may alter, lessen or adjust the employee housing requirements as
applied to the particular project under consideration to ensure that no illegal
uncompensated taking occurs. The decision of the Town Council shall be final,
subject only to judicial review.
(Ord. 1(2008) § 25)
CHAPTER 25: PUBLIC ART
Section
12-25-1 Purpose
12-25-2 Applicability
12-25-3 Public art requirements
12-25-4 Public art review
12-25-5 Public art completion and performance bonds
12-25-6 Maintenance
§ 12-25-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines, procedures and
standards for the integration of public art into development projects in the
town. The enhancement of public places by integrating the creative work of
artists improves the pedestrian experience and promotes vibrancy, creativity
and livelihood in the community. The presence of and access to public art
enlivens the public areas of buildings and their grounds and makes them more
welcoming. It creates a deeper interaction with the places where we live, work,
and visit. Public art illuminates the diversity and history of a community, and
points to its aspirations for the future. A wealth of art and culture in the
public realm will foster the economic development of the community.
(Ord. 8(2008) § 4)
§ 12-25-2 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to projects that have a public art component in the
approved development plan, as part of a special development district or an
exterior alteration or modification in the Public Accommodation (PA), Public
Accommodation-2 (PA-2), Lionshead Mixed Use 1 (LMU-1), Lionshead Mixed Use 2
(LMU-2) and Ski Base/Recreation 2 (SBR2) districts.
(Ord. 8(2008) § 4)
§ 12-25-3 PUBLIC ART REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Eligible public art. The following, when produced in limited edition,
shall be considered eligible as public art:
      (1)   Attached or site integrated art elements such as passageways,
bridges, street furniture, paving materials or artistic features within a
garden;
      (2)   Mosaics, painted murals or terrazzo covering walls, floors and
passageways;
      (3)   Independent or freestanding sculpture;
      (4)   Interdisciplinary artwork including the written word, glass,
photography, sound, video or any other multimedia works of art appropriate for
the site;
      (5)   Earthworks or the integration of natural and human-made materials
in the landscape;
      (6)   Fountains and water features;
      (7)   Works that are decorative, ornamental or functional elements of the
architecture and that contemporary approaches sculpture, site furnishings,
earthwork and the like are welcomed; or
      (8)   Any other project deemed eligible by the AIPPB.
   (B)   Ineligible public art. The following shall not be eligible as public
art:
      (1)   Reproductions or unlimited editions of original work;
      (2)   Directional elements such as supergraphics, signage or graphic
elements already part of the project; or
      (3)   Business or corporate logos or signage.
   (C)   Professional artist. The public art project shall be designed by an
artist that meets at least two of the following criteria, provided that
emerging artists who demonstrate a high level of competence, ability to create
unique artistic enhancements, understanding of mediums and relationship of
artwork to the site may be acceptable at the discretion of the AIPPB.
      (1)   The artist has obtained a Bachelor of Fine Arts or Master of Fine
Arts from an accredited college or university.
      (2)   The artist has exhibition experience in a professional context
(i.e., galleries, museum, art centers or other exhibit venues).
      (3)   The artist has received peer recognition such as honorable
mentions, awards, prizes, scholarships, appointments or grants.
      (4)   The artist is pursuing his or her work as a means of livelihood
and/or a way to achieve the highest level of professional recognition.
      (5)   The artist’s work has been discussed in a published writing.
      (6)   The artist’s artwork has been held in public or private
collections.
   (D)   Location. Public art shall be installed in a location that is open to
the public and is visible from a pedestrian or vehicular way. Locations
include, but are not limited to, community hubs or gathering places, portals,
entrances or gateways, adjacent to sidewalks, adjoining parks and plazas,
integrated into the floors, walls and ceilings within public areas and high
traffic areas or areas along a bus route. The public art shall be located on
site unless otherwise permitted to use town owned property or right-of-way by
the Vail Town Council.
(Ord. 8(2008) § 4)
§ 12-25-4 PUBLIC ART REVIEW.
   (A)   Public art plan required. When required, the applicant shall submit a
public art plan for review by the Art in Public Places Board. The Administrator
may require the submission of additional plans, drawings, specifications,
samples and other materials if deemed necessary to properly evaluate the
proposal. The public art plan shall include the following:
      (1)   Site plan showing location of art;
      (2)   Elevations and/or renderings of the project including public art
component;
      (3)   Written description of proposed type of public art;
      (4)   Project schedule, including project and public art installation
schedule;
      (5)   Representations of the artwork (i.e., drawings, pictures of similar
works by the artist);
      (6)   Estimated public art budget, for purposes of determining the amount
of performance bond; and
      (7)   A written description of the maintenance plan.
   (B)   Final review. Within 30 days of submittal of the public art plan, the
AIPPB shall review the public art plan at a regularly scheduled public hearing
and shall make a determination of approval, approval with conditions or
modifications, or denial, based on the requirements in subsection (C) of this
section. The Design Review Board shall not have purview over any aspect of the
public art within the project.
   (C)   Criteria for review of public art plan. Prior to approving a public
art plan, the AIPPB shall find that the public art plan meets all of the
following criteria.
      (1)   Compatibility with the site. Works of art shall be contextual to
the site, and be compatible in style, scale, material, form and content with
their surroundings, and should enhance the relationships between the natural
and human-made features of the site.
      (2)   Location. The public art shall be viewable from public spaces, and
shall be accessible to the public.
      (3)   Compatible with the architecture. Works of art that are decorative,
ornamental or functional elements of the architecture shall be contextual to
the architectural design of the building(s).
      (4)   Scale. The scale of the artwork shall be commensurate with the
scale of the development or redevelopment project.
      (5)   Public safety. Public art shall not create safety issues.
      (6)   Permanence. Public art that requires expensive or continual
maintenance is discouraged. Public art shall be resistant to theft and
vandalism.
   (D)   Appeals. AIPPB decisions may be appealed in accordance with the
provisions in §
12-3-3, “Appeals”, of this title.
(Ord. 8(2008) § 4)
§ 12-25-5 PUBLIC ART COMPLETION AND PERFORMANCE BONDS.
   All public art installations that are not complete prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for the project will require a performance bond equal
to 125% of the estimated cost of the public art outlined in the public art
plan. The public art shall be installed as outlined in the approved public art
plan within one year after issuance of certificate of occupancy for the
project, or the town may use the performance bond to complete the public art
installation. Following installation, applicants shall schedule a final
inspection with the Administrator. Upon a determination by the Administrator
that the public art installation is complete and in compliance with this code,
the town shall release the performance bond.
(Ord. 8(2008) § 4)
§ 12-25-6 MAINTENANCE.
   Public art shall be maintained as outlined in the public art plan.
Maintenance of the public art shall be the sole responsibility of the current
property owner in perpetuity, and this obligation shall be deemed to run with
the land. Failure to maintain public art in compliance with the public art plan
shall be considered a violation of this chapter, subject to the penalties found
in §
12-3-9 of this title.
(Ord. 8(2008) § 4)
CHAPTER 26: TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES
Section
12-26-1 Findings and purpose
12-26-2 Applicability
12-26-3 Fee
12-26-4 Credit
12-26-5 Review
§ 12-26-1 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Findings. The Town Council finds and determines as follows:
      (1)   A legitimate, identifiable public purpose is served by requiring a
transportation impact fee for new development and redevelopment projects in the
town;
      (2)   There is an essential nexus between the transportation impact fee
imposed in this chapter and the town’s interest in providing transportation
infrastructure, facilities and services;
      (3)   The town is acting within its power to provide transportation
infrastructure, facilities and services;
      (4)   But for new development and redevelopment projects, the town would
not be considering either the provision or expansion of transportation
infrastructure, services or facilities;
      (5)   New development and redevelopment projects are contributing causes
to the need for new or expanded transportation infrastructure, facilities and
services;
      (6)   The town would be legally justified in denying applications for new
development or redevelopment projects unless the transportation impact fee is
imposed, because of the burden the new development or redevelopment projects
would place on the town’s transportation infrastructure, facilities and
services; and
      (7)   The town has conducted a study to determine the amount of the
transportation impact fee, and the study demonstrates that the transportation
impact fee will be roughly proportional, both in nature and extent, to the
impacts of new development and redevelopment projects.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to impose a transportation
impact fee on new development and redevelopment projects in the town, as set
forth herein.
(Ord. 4(2017) § 1)
§ 12-26-2 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The transportation impact fee shall be imposed on the following
construction, development or redevelopment in the town:
      (1)   For commercial development (except accommodation units), on any net
new square footage to be constructed;
      (2)   For residential development, on each new residential unit to be
constructed; and
      (3)   For accommodation units, on each new accommodation unit to be
constructed.
   (B)   The transportation impact fee shall not be imposed on the
construction, development or redevelopment of any employee housing unit.
(Ord. 4(2017) § 1)
§ 12-26-3 FEE.
   The transportation impact fee shall be in the amount set by resolution of
the Town Council. The fee shall be imposed by the Community Development
Department, Design Review Board, Planning and Environmental Commission or Town
Council, as part of the last land use approval for the project. The fee shall
be payable prior to issuance of the building permit for the project.
(Ord. 4(2017) § 1)
§ 12-26-4 CREDIT.
   (A)   An applicant may apply for a credit as set forth in this section,
which credit shall be applied to offset the transportation impact fee that
would otherwise be imposed for the project.
   (B)   Credit shall be provided for any dedication or conveyance of land from
the applicant to the town. The amount of the credit shall be the present, fair
market value of the land being dedicated or conveyed, as determined by the town
in its reasonable discretion.
   (C)   Credit shall be provided for any construction of town-approved system
level transportation infrastructure or facilities as identified in the Vail
Transportation Impact Fee Study, undertaken by the applicant at the applicant’s
cost that offset the transportation impacts of the project. The transportation
infrastructure or facilities may be constructed as part of the project, or in
other areas of the town, as determined by the town and the applicant. The value
of the credit shall be determined by the town, in its reasonable discretion,
considering the total cost of construction and other relevant factors.
   (D)   Credit shall be provided for any transportation services provided by
the applicant at the applicant’s cost, that offset the transportation impacts
of the project, as approved by the town. The value of the credit shall be
determined by the town, in its reasonable discretion, considering actual costs
to provide the services and other relevant factors.
(Ord. 4(2017) § 1)
§ 12-26-5 REVIEW.
   (A)   An applicant aggrieved by the application of this chapter by the
Community Development Department, the Planning and Environmental Commission or
Design Review Board may apply for review by the Town Council, by filing a
written request for review within ten days of the decision at issue.
   (B)   Within 30 days of receipt of the written request, the Town Council
shall hold a public hearing. At such hearing, the burden of proof shall be on
the applicant to establish that the imposition of the transportation impact fee
as assessed would result in an unconstitutional taking of private property
without just compensation.
   (C)   If the Town Council determines that the application of this chapter
would result in an unconstitutional taking of private property without just
compensation, the Town Council may decrease the transportation impact fee (or
increase any credit) to ensure that there is no unconstitutional taking. The
decision of the Town Council shall be final, subject only to judicial review
pursuant to C.R.C.P. § 106(a)(4).
   (D)   An applicant aggrieved by the application of this chapter by the Town
Council may seek judicial review pursuant to C.R.C.P. § 106(a)(4).
(Ord. 4(2017) § 1)
CHAPTER 27: WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES
Section
12-27-1 Purpose and applicability
12-27-2 Definitions
12-27-3 Standards for all WSFs
12-27-4 Freestanding WSFs
12-27-5 Building mounted WSFs
12-27-6 Small cell facilities
12-27-7 Micro WSFs
12-27-8 Eligible facility requests
§ 12-27-1 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purposes of this chapter are: to allow the location of
wireless service facilities in the town while protecting the public health,
safety and general welfare of the community; to act on applications for the
location of wireless service facilities within a reasonable time; to encourage
co-location of wireless service facilities, and to prevent unreasonable
discrimination among providers of functionally equivalent services.
   (B)   Applicability. This chapter applies to all WSFs, in addition to all
other applicable provisions of this code.
(Ord. 8(2018) § 1)
§ 12-27-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
   ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT. Equipment, including buildings and structures, used to
protect and enable radio switching equipment, back up power and other devices
incidental to a WSF, but excluding antennas.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used to provide wireless service.
   BASE STATION. A structure or equipment, other than a tower, at a fixed
location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications
between user equipment and a communications network, including equipment
associated with wireless communications services, including radio transceivers,
antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and
comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including
distributed antenna systems and small-cell networks), and any structure, other
than a tower, to which any of the equipment described herein is attached.
   BUILDING MOUNTED WSF. A WSF that is mounted and supported entirely on the
roof of a legally existing building or structure or on the wall of a legally
existing building or structure.
   ELIGIBLE FACILITY REQUEST. A request for approval of the modification of an
existing tower or base station that involves the co-location of new
transmission equipment, the removal of transmission equipment or the
replacement of transmission equipment.
   EQUIPMENT STORAGE SHELTER. Buildings, storage shelters, and cabinets used to
house WSF equipment.
   FAA. Federal Aviation Administration.
   FCC. Federal Communications Commission.
   FREESTANDING WSF. A WSF that consists of a stand-alone support structure
such as a tower or monopole, and antennas and accessory equipment.
   MICRO WSF. A WSF that is no larger than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in
width and 12 inches in height, with exterior antenna, if any, of no more than
11 inches in length.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any road, street, alley, trail, sidewalk, easement or
right-of-way dedicated to public use, including without limitation access and
utility easements.
   SMALL CELL FACILITY. Either a personal wireless service facility as defined
by the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, or a WSF where: each antenna is
located inside an enclosure of no more than three cubic feet in volume or, in
the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its
exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than three
cubic feet; and primary equipment enclosures are no larger than 17 cubic feet
in volume; provided that the following associated equipment may be located
outside of the primary equipment enclosure and, if so located, is not included
in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter; concealment;
telecommunications demarcation box; ground-based enclosures; back-up power
systems; grounding equipment; power transfer switch; and cut-off switch. A
SMALL CELL FACILITY includes a micro WSF.
   SMALL CELL NETWORK. A collection of interrelated small cell facilities
designed to deliver wireless service.
   SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE. A modification to an existing tower or base station
under the following circumstances:
      (1)   A SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE in the height of an existing tower or base
station occurs as follows:
         (a)   For a tower outside of a public right-of-way, when the height of
the tower is increased by more than 10%, or by the height of one additional
antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed
20 feet, whichever is greater.
         (b)   For a tower located in a public right-of-way or a base station,
when the height of the structure increases by more than 10% or by more than ten
feet, whichever is greater.
      (2)   Changes in height are measured as follows.
         (a)   When deployments are separated horizontally, changes in height
shall be measured from the original support structure, not from the height of
any existing telecommunications equipment.
         (b)   When deployments are separated vertically, changes in height
shall be measured from the height of the tower or base station, including any
appurtenances, as the tower or base station existed on February 22, 2012.
      (3)   A SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE in the width of an existing tower or base
station occurs as follows.
         (a)   For a tower outside of public rights-of-way, when the addition
of an appurtenance to the body of the tower protrudes from the edge of the
tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the
level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater.
         (b)   For a tower in a public right-of-way or a base station, when the
addition of an appurtenance to the body of the structure would protrude from
the edge of the structure by more than six feet.
      (4)   A SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE also occurs for an existing tower in a public
right-of-way or an existing base station as follows:
         (a)   When the change involves the installation of any new equipment
cabinets on the ground, if no ground cabinets presently exist; or
         (b)   When the change involves the installation of ground cabinets
that are more than 10% larger in height or overall volume than any existing
ground cabinets.
      (5)   A SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE also occurs for any existing tower or base
station when any of the following are found:
         (a)   When the change involves installation of more than the standard
number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, or more than four
new cabinets, whichever is less;
         (b)   When the change entails any excavation or deployment outside the
current site;
         (c)   When the change would defeat the concealment elements of the
eligible support structure; and
         (d)   When the change does not comply with conditions associated with
the original approval of the construction or modification of the tower, base
station or base station equipment. This limitation does not apply if the
noncompliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, addition of
cabinets, or new excavation that would not exceed the thresholds identified in
subsections (1) through (5)(b) of this definition.
   TOWER. A structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any
FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including
structures that are constructed for wireless communications services, including
without limitation private, broadcast, public safety services, unlicensed
wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
   WIRELESS SERVICE. Data and telecommunications services, including commercial
mobile services, commercial mobile data services, unlicensed wireless services
and common carrier wireless exchange access services, as defined by federal
law.
   WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY (WSF). A facility for the provision of wireless
services, including a small cell facility, excluding coaxial or fiber-optic
cable that is not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a
particular antenna.
(Ord. 8(2018) § 1)
§ 12-27-3 STANDARDS FOR ALL WSFs.
   (A)   Compliance with law. All WSFs shall meet the current standards of the
FCC and any other applicable law. By adopting this section, the town is not
attempting to regulate radio frequency power densities or electromagnetic
fields, which are controlled by the FCC.
   (B)   Verification. Upon a request by the town at any time, a WSF owner or
operator shall verify that:
      (1)   The WSF complies with current FCC regulations prohibiting localized
interference with reception of television and radio broadcasts; and
      (2)   The WSF complies with the current FCC standards for cumulative
field measurements of radio frequency power densities and electromagnetic
fields.
   (C)   Applications.
      (1)   An application to locate a new WSF not deemed to be an eligible
facility request shall be approved or denied by the town within 90 days of the
town’s receipt of a completed application. This time period may be tolled by
mutual agreement. The time it takes for an applicant to respond to a first
request for additional information will not count toward the 90-day period set
forth herein if the town notifies the applicant of an incomplete application.
      (2)   An application for approval of a WSF shall include all information
regularly required for other development applications, in addition to the
following: a written, narrative statement describing in detail how the WSF will
comply with the standards in this chapter; and if requested by the town for any
WSF other than a small cell facility, photographic simulations showing the
proposed WSF and, if applicable, the structure on which it will be attached.
      (3)   When an application for approval of any WSF is incomplete, the town
shall provide written notice to the applicant within 30 days, specifically
identifying all missing documents or information. If an application remains
incomplete after a supplemental submission, the town shall notify the applicant
within ten days. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not require
the production of documents or information that were not requested in the
original notice of incompleteness.
   (D)   Denial. A final decision by the town to deny any application under
this chapter shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence
contained in a written record.
(Ord. 8(2018) § 1)
§ 12-27-4 FREESTANDING WSFs.
   (A)   Design review required. Prior to the location of a freestanding WSF in
any zone district, design approval shall be required pursuant to Chapter 11 of
this title.
   (B)   Setbacks. A freestanding WSF located within 250 feet of property zoned
for residential use shall be set back from each property line one foot of
distance for every one foot of height, plus an additional ten feet. A
freestanding WSF located more than 250 feet from property zoned for residential
use shall meet the minimum setbacks for buildings and structures in the
underlying zone district.
   (C)   Maximum height. A freestanding WSF, including antennas, shall not
exceed the maximum structure height limit in the underlying zone district. In
no case shall a freestanding WSF, including its appurtenances, exceed 100 feet
in height.
(Ord. 8(2018) § 1)
§ 12-27-5 BUILDING MOUNTED WSFs.
   (A)   Design review required. Prior to the location of a building mounted
WSF in any zone district, design approval shall be required pursuant to Chapter
11 of this title.
   (B)   Equipment. All accessory equipment shall be placed inside a building
if feasible. Equipment storage shelters shall be grouped as closely as
technically possible, and the total area of all accessory equipment, including
storage shelters, shall not exceed 400 square feet per WSF.
(Ord. 8(2018) § 1)
§ 12-27-6 SMALL CELL FACILITIES.
   (A)   Small cell facilities shall be considered a permitted use in all zone
districts. A permit shall be required for all small cell facilities, and each
small cell facility is subject to review for compliance with this chapter;
provided that a consolidated application for a single permit may be filed for a
small cell network involving multiple individual small cell facilities.
   (B)   If a small cell facility (or each small cell facility in a small cell
network) complies with the following criteria, the town shall issue a permit:
      (1)   All equipment related to the small cell facility is as
architecturally compatible with the surrounding area as feasible;
      (2)   All electrical, communication and other wiring including radios,
antennas and backhaul connections, shall be fully concealed, internal to the
structure, where possible and shrouded in all other instances;
      (3)   The facility shall be sited in a manner that takes into
consideration its proximity to residential structures and residential district
boundaries, uses on adjacent and nearby properties, and the compatibility of
the facility to these uses, including without limitation the proximity of the
facility to first and second story windows;
      (4)   The facility and any associated equipment shall be designed and
located outside of intersection sight distances and in accordance with the
town’s applicable roadway design criteria; and
      (5)   The facility and any associated equipment shall be designed to be
compatible with the site, with particular reference to design characteristics
that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
   (C)   A telecommunications provider or broadband provider may locate or
collocate small cell facilities or small cell networks on light poles, light
standards, traffic signals or utility poles owned by the town in public rights-
of-way, subject to the following.
      (1)   A small cell facility or a small cell network shall not be located
or mounted on an apparatus, pole or signal with tolling collection or
enforcement equipment attached.
      (2)   A license agreement with the town shall be required to address the
attachment of small cell facilities to any town-owned poles or structures in
the right-of-way. The town shall not request or receive from a
telecommunications provider, in exchange for or as a condition upon a grant of
permission to attach a small cell facility, any in-kind payment or payment in
excess of the amount that would be authorized if the town were regulated
pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 224. The license agreement may include design standards
for the small cell facilities.
      (3)   If upon inspection, the town concludes that a WSF fails to comply
with applicable law and constitutes a danger to persons or property, upon 30
days’ prior written notice to the owner or operator, the owner or operator
shall bring the WSF into compliance. Upon good cause shown, the town may extend
such compliance period for not more than 90 days from the date of said notice.
If the owner or operator fails to bring the WSF into compliance, the town may
remove the WSF at the expense of the owner or operator.
(Ord. 8(2018) § 1)
§ 12-27-7 MICRO WSFs.
   (A)   No permit shall be required for the installation, placement,
operation, maintenance or replacement of a micro WSF that is suspended on cable
operator-owned cables or lines that are strung between existing utility poles
in compliance with applicable law.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town may require a permit for
installation, placement, operation, maintenance or replacement of a micro WSF
where the installation, placement, operation, maintenance or replacement:
      (1)   Involves working within a highway travel lane or requires the
closure of a highway travel lane;
      (2)   Disturbs the pavement or a shoulder, roadway or ditch line;
      (3)   Includes placement on limited access rights-of-way; or
      (4)   Requires any specific precautions to ensure the safety of the
traveling public; the protection of public infrastructure; or the operation of
public infrastructure; and such activities either were not authorized in, or
will be conducted in a time, place or manner that is inconsistent with, the
approval terms of the existing permit for the facility or structure upon which
the micro WSF is attached.
(Ord. 8(2018) § 1)
§ 12-27-8 ELIGIBLE FACILITY REQUESTS.
   (A)   Time. An eligible facility request shall be approved or denied by the
town within 60 days of the town’s receipt of the initial application. This time
period may be tolled only by mutual agreement or when an application is
incomplete. If the town fails to approve or deny an eligible facility request
within 60 days of the town’s receipt of the completed application (accounting
for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted; provided that this
automatic approval shall become effective only upon the town’s receipt of
written notice from the applicant after the review period has expired
(accounting for any tolling) indicating that the application has been deemed
granted.
   (B)   Approval. The following standards shall apply to an eligible facility
request, in lieu of any other provisions of this chapter:
      (1)   The town shall approve an eligible facility request that does not
substantially change the physical dimensions of a tower or base station;
      (2)   The town may approve an eligible facility request that
substantially changes the physical dimensions of a tower or base station if it
complies with the remainder of this code; and
      (3)   The town may condition the approval of any eligible facility
request on compliance with generally applicable Building, Structural,
Electrical and Safety Codes or with other laws codifying objective standards
reasonably related to health and safety.
(Ord. 8(2018) § 1)
TITLE 13: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
13-1-1 Abbreviations
13-1-2 Purpose
13-1-3 Compliance
13-1-4 Approval required for recordation
13-1-5 Jurisdiction
13-1-6 Interpretation
13-1-7 Variances and amendments
13-1-8 Notification of surface development
§ 13-1-1 ABBREVIATIONS.
   COUNCIL. Town of Vail Town Council.
   DRB. Town of Vail Design Review Board.
   EIR. Environmental impact report.
   PEC. Town of Vail Planning and Environmental Commission.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-1-2 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Statutory authority. The subdivision regulations contained in this
title have been prepared and enacted in accordance with C.R.S. Title 31,
Article 23, for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and welfare of the
present and future inhabitants of the town.
   (B)   Goals. To these ends, these regulations are intended to protect the
environment, to ensure efficient circulation, adequate improvements, sufficient
open space and in general, to assist the orderly, efficient and integrated
development of the town. These regulations also provide for the proper
arrangement of streets and ensure proper distribution of population. The
regulations also coordinate the need for public services with governmental
improvement programs. Standards for design and construction of improvements are
hereby set forth to ensure adequate and convenient traffic circulation,
utilities, emergency access, drainage, recreation and light and air. Also
intended is the improvement of land records and surveys, plans and plats and to
safeguard the interests of the public and subdivider and provide consumer
protection for the purchaser; and to regulate other matters as the Town
Planning and Environmental Commission and Town Council may deem necessary in
order to protect the best interests of the public.
   (C)   Specific purposes. These regulations are further intended to serve the
following specific purposes:
      (1)   To inform each subdivider of the standards and criteria by which
development proposals will be evaluated, and to provide information as to the
type and extent of improvements required;
      (2)   To provide for the subdivision of property in the future without
conflict with development on adjacent land;
      (3)   To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the
municipality and the value of buildings and improvements on the land;
      (4)   To ensure that subdivision of property is in compliance with the
town’s zoning ordinances, to achieve a harmonious, convenient, workable
relationship among land uses, consistent with town development objectives;
      (5)   To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide
adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks,
playgrounds, recreation and other public requirements and facilities and
generally to provide that public facilities will have sufficient capacity to
serve the proposed subdivision;
      (6)   To provide for accurate legal descriptions of newly subdivided land
and to establish reasonable and desirable construction design standards and
procedures; and
      (7)   To prevent the pollution of air, streams and ponds, to assure
adequacy of drainage facilities, to safeguard the water table and to encourage
the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the town in order
to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community and the value
of the land.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
Cross-reference:
   Zoning Regulations, see Title 12 of this code
§ 13-1-3 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   General prohibition. It is unlawful for any person, business or
corporation to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or to transfer,
sell, lease or agree to sell or lease, any lot, tract, parcel, site, separate
interest (including a leasehold interest), interest in common, condominium
interest, timeshare estate, fractional fee or timeshare license, or any other
division within a subdivision within the town until such subdivision has been
approved in writing by the Administrator, Planning and Environmental Commission
and/or the Council (whichever is applicable) and a plat thereof recorded in the
office of the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder; provided, however, that a
written agreement to sell or lease which is expressly conditioned upon full
compliance by the seller with the subdivision regulations of the town within a
specified period of time and which expressly recites the seller’s failure to
satisfy such condition within such period of time shall terminate the agreement
and entitle the buyer to the prompt return of all consideration heretofore paid
by the buyer under such agreement, shall not constitute a violation of this
subsection (A).
   (B)   Prohibitive conveyance. No lot or parcel of land, nor any interest
therein, shall be transferred, conveyed, sold, subdivided or acquired either in
whole or in part, so as to create a new nonconforming lot, or to avoid or
circumvent or subvert any provision of this chapter.
   (C)   Responsibility. The owner, developer, buyer or seller shall be fully
responsible for all acts of agents or employees thereof that are committed in
violation of the terms of this chapter.
   (D)   Prohibited construction. No structure shall be constructed, nor
building permit issued for a structure, on any parcel of land except where such
structure is to be constructed upon a parcel which meets the regulations
contained herein. The lot lines, common walls, individual units, condominium
units established in such development or parcel shall not be changed or altered
by conveyance of a part thereof, nor shall any part of the same be joined with
a part of any other for conveyance or construction or converted to condominiums
or time sharing unless and until written application, and other required
materials, has been made to and approved in writing by the Administrator,
Planning and Environmental Commission and/or the Council (whichever is
applicable).
   (E)   Remedies for violations. In addition to all remedies provided by law,
the town shall be authorized to enforce its subdivision regulations as follows.
      (1)   The town, in addition to other remedies provided, may institute an
action for injunction, mandamus, abatement or other appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate, remove an unlawful construction, use,
occupancy or conveyance or to enjoin any subdivider from selling, agreeing to
sell or offering to sell, or otherwise convey, before full compliance with the
provisions of the chapter, any parceled land or other interest which sale
conveyance would constitute a “subdivision” as defined in §
13-2-2 of this title.
      (2)   The Town Building Official shall refuse to issue permits of any
kind for the construction of any building or other improvements upon any land
for which an approved final plat is required by this chapter, unless and until
the requirements hereof have been complied with.
      (3)   No building permit shall be issued for any lot or parceled land
which has been transferred, conveyed, sold, subdivided or acquired in violation
of this chapter. Any transferee who acquires a lot or a parcel of land in
violation of this chapter without knowledge of such violation, and any
subsequent transferee, shall have the right to rescind and/or receive damages
from any transferor who violates the provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   The Administrator, Planning and Environmental Commission and/or
Council (whichever is applicable) may withdraw any approval of a plan or plat
or require certain corrective measures to be taken following a determination
that information provided by the subdivider, or by anyone on his or her behalf,
upon which a decision was based is false or inaccurate. The Administrator shall
cause written notice to be served on the subdivider, or his or her assignees,
setting out a clear and concise statement of the alleged false or inaccurate
information provided by the subdivider, or agents on his or her behalf and
directing the subdivider to appear at a certain time for a hearing before the
Planning and Environmental Commission not less than 15 days nor more than 30
days after the date of service of notice. The Planning and Environmental
Commission shall determine at the hearing the nature and extent of the alleged
false or inaccurate information and shall have power, for good cause being
shown, to withdraw any approval or require certain corrective measures to be
taken. However, withdrawal of approval or imposition of corrective requirements
shall not be an exclusive remedy on finding by the Planning and Environmental
Commission that inaccurate information has been received, and any and all
remedies provided by law may be exercised.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-1-4 APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR RECORDATION.
   All plats of a subdivision of land within the town shall be filed and
recorded only after having been approved and signed by the Administrator,
Planning and Environmental Commission and/or Council (whichever is applicable).
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-1-5 JURISDICTION.
   These regulations are applicable within the following described areas:
   (A)   All land located within the legal boundaries of the town; and
   (B)   All land located within three miles of the corporate limits of the
town and not located in any other municipality for the purposes of control with
reference to major streets only.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-1-6 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of the provisions of these
regulations, the following regulations shall govern.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of these regulations shall be regarded as the minimum requirements
for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Most restrictive regulation prevails. Whenever both a provision of
these regulations, and any other provisions of these regulations, or any
provision of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any
kind, contains any restriction covering any of the same subject matter,
whichever restrictions are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements shall govern.
   (C)   Limitation. These regulations are not intended to abrogate or annul
the following:
      (1)   Any permits issued before the effective date of these regulations;
or
      (2)   Any easement or covenant.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-1-7 VARIANCES AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Variance procedure. Variances to the provisions of this title shall
follow the procedures in Title 12, Chapter 17 of this code.
   (B)   Amendment procedure. Amendments to the provisions of this title shall
follow the procedures outlined in §
12-3-7 of this code.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-1-8 NOTIFICATION OF SURFACE DEVELOPMENT.
   It shall be the sole responsibility of the subdivider to provide notice of
any application for development to any mineral estate owners and the Town of
Vail in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. Title 24, Article 65.5,
notification of surface development. It shall also be the sole responsibility
of the subdivider to certify that said notice was provided to the mineral
estate owner pursuant to C.R.S. § 24-65.5-103(1).
(Ord. 18(2008) § 2)
CHAPTER 2: DEFINITIONS
Section
13-2-1 Rules of language construction
13-2-2 Definitions
§ 13-2-1 RULES OF LANGUAGE CONSTRUCTION.
   For the purposes of this title, words used herein shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules.
   (A)   The particular controls the general.
   (B)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text
of this chapter and the captions for each article, the text shall control.
   (C)   The word “shall” is mandatory unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary. The word “may” is permissive.
   (D)   Words used in the present tense include the future, unless the context
clearly indicates the future tense.
   (E)   Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used
in the plural number include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates
the contrary.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-2-2 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this title, the following words and phrases shall have the
specific meanings as defined in this chapter.
   ACCEPTED, ROADS AND STREETS. When used in regard to roads and streets, shall
mean written acceptance of the road or street by the Town Engineer as per the
design standards (Chapter 10 of this title).
   ADEQUATE ACCESS. Compliance with Chapter 10 of this title as it relates to
private streets and drives.
   ADJACENT. When used with respect to a lot or property ownership, shall mean
all properties with a common point or line to the subject property and the
property which would have a common point or line with the subject property if a
public vehicular right-of- way separating the properties were not there.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the Department of Community Development
or his or her designee.
   AGGRIEVED OR ADVERSELY AFFECTED PERSON. Any person who will suffer an
adverse effect to an interest protected or furthered by this title. The alleged
adverse interest may be shared in common with other members of the community at
large, but shall exceed in degree the general interest in community good shared
by all persons.
   AS BUILT PLAN. The final development plan that reflects the constructed
subdivision.
   BIKE PATH. A corridor for use by bicycles and pedestrians, prohibited for
use by motorized vehicles.
   BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision which is entirely bounded by
streets, highways, natural boundaries or the exterior boundary or boundaries of
the subdivision.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, or any
other enclosed structure, for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals or
property.
   BUILDING CONNECTION SEWER. A sewer within a public street or right-of-way,
proposed to connect any parcel, lot or part of a lot with a main line sewer.
   BUILDING SEWER. A sewer, wholly within private property, proposed to connect
any building to a building connection.
   BYLAWS. Shall refer to the bylaws of the unit owners’ association or
corporation.
   COMMUNITY APARTMENT. A development in which there is an undivided interest
in the land coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of an apartment
located therein. COMMUNITY APARTMENTS shall be subject to the same restrictions
and conditions set forth in this title for condominium units.
   CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION. The development or use of the land and existing
structures as a condominium project regardless of the present or prior use of
such lands and structures, and regardless of whether substantial improvements
have been made to such structures.
   CONDOMINIUM PROJECT. The entire parcel of real property, including all
structures thereon, to be divided into two or more units for the purpose of
constructing or converting existing structures to condominium units.
   CONDOMINIUM UNIT. An individual air space unit together with the interest in
the common elements appurtenant to such unit.
   CONDOMINIUMS. A building containing condominium units which means an
individual air space unit (any enclosed room or rooms occupying all or part of
a floor or floors in a building of one or more floors to be used for
residential, professional, commercial or industrial purposes which has access
to a public street) together with the interest in the common elements
appurtenant to said unit.
   CONTRACTOR. The individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture or other
legal entity performing the work. In the case of work being performed under
permit issued by the town, the permittee shall be construed to be the
CONTRACTOR.
   CORRECTION PLAT. Corrections to previously approved plats where the
character and intent of the original plat is not altered. Examples include
address changes, plat note amendments, plat title corrections, easement
vacations and other minor corrections.
   CULVERT. A ditch, drain or conduit, not incorporated in a closed system,
that carries drainage water under a driveway, roadway, railroad, pedestrian
walk or public way, or other type of overhead structure.
   DAYS. Consecutive calendar days, unless otherwise specified.
   DECLARATION. An instrument recorded pursuant to the statutes of the state
and which defines the character, duration, rights, obligations and limitations
of condominium ownership. The declaration shall include all restrictions,
limitations and specifications which may be required by the Planning and
Environmental Commission or Town Council, including provisions relative to
timesharing estates, licenses or fractional fees; and the procedure for
amendments of the declaration which requires approval of the town.
   DEDICATION. A grant by the owner of a right to use land to the public in
general, involving a legally recorded transfer of property rights, and an
acceptance of the dedicated property by the town.
   DRAINAGE. Surface water runoff or the removal of surface water or ground
water from land by drains, grading or other means, which include runoff
controls to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development.
   DUPLEX. A detached building on a single parcel containing two dwelling
units, designed for or used as dwellings exclusively by two families, each
living as an independent housekeeping unit.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms in a two-family, or multiple-
family building with kitchen facilities designed for or used by one family as
an independent housekeeping unit.
   EASEMENT. A grant of land by the owner for the specified use of the land.
   EMPLOYEE HOUSING UNIT. A dwelling unit occupied by at least one person who
is an employee in Eagle County.
   ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT. A document outlining the effect of proposed
development or action on the environment, as further regulated by Title 12,
Chapter 12, “Environmental Impact Reports”, of this code.
   EXEMPTION PLAT. The platting of a portion of land or property that does not
fall within the definition of a “subdivision”, as contained in this section.
   FINAL APPROVAL. Approval by the Planning and Environmental Commission of the
final plat or approval of the Council if appealed. Planning and Environmental
Commission final approval does not take place until 11 days after the Planning
and Environmental Commission decision on the final plat, if the Council does
not appeal.
   FRACTIONAL FEE. A tenancy in common interest in improved real property,
including condominiums, created or held by persons, partnerships, corporations
or joint ventures or similar entities, wherein the tenants in common have
formerly arranged by oral or written agreement or understanding, whether
recorded or unrecorded, allowing for the use and occupancy of the property by
one or more cotenants to the exclusion of one or more cotenants during any
period, whether annually recurring or not, which is binding upon any assignee
or future owner of a fractional fee interest, or if such agreement continues to
be in any way binding or effective upon any cotenant for the sale of any
interest in the property.
   INDIVIDUAL AIR SPACE UNIT. Consists of any enclosed room or rooms occupying
all or part of a floor or floors of a building of one or more floors to be used
for residential, professional, commercial or industrial purposes, which has
access to a public street.
   INSPECTOR. An authorized representative of the Public Works Director,
assigned to make any or all necessary inspections of materials furnished and
work performed by the contractor.
   LOT. A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions by
legal description and abutting upon one or more public streets or roads and
intended as a unit for the transfer whether immediate or future, of ownership
or for development.
   MODERATE INCOME. Shall be as defined from time to time by the Town Council.
   PLANS. The drawings, profiles, cross sections, working drawings, and
supplemental drawings, or reproductions thereof, approved by the Town Engineer
or building official, which show the location, character, dimensions or details
of the work.
   PLAT, FINAL. A map, drawing or chart upon which the subdivider presents
proposals for the physical development of subdivision, and which he or she
submits for approval and intends to record in final form.
   PRELIMINARY PLAN. The preliminary drawings described in these regulations
indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to
the Planning and Environmental Commission for approval.
   PRIVATE CONTRACT. Work subject to town inspection, control and approval,
involving private funds, not administered by the town.
   PROJECT DOCUMENTS. Defined in accordance with the statutes of the state.
   REFERENCE SPECIFICATIONS. Those bulletins, standards, rules, methods of
analysis or tests, codes and specifications of other agencies, engineering
societies or industrial associations referred to in the contract documents.
These refer to the latest edition, including amendments in effect and published
at the time of advertising the project or issuing the permit, unless
specifically referred to by edition, volume or date.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The width between property lines of a street.
   SAME OWNERSHIP. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity,
partnership or unincorporated association or ownership by different
corporations, firms, partnerships, entities or unincorporated associations, in
which a stockholder, partner, associate or a member of such family owns an
interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity or unincorporated
association.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. All or any portion of the conduit, cable, or duct,
including meter, between a utility distribution line and an individual
consumer.
   SEWER. Any conduit intended for the reception and transmission of sewage and
fluid industrial waste.
   SOIL STABILITY ANALYSIS. A study conducted to determine the status of the
soil on a property.
   SPECIAL PROVISIONS. Any written provisions which supplement or modify these
specifications.
   SPECIFICATIONS. Standard specifications, reference specifications, special
provisions and specifications in supplemental agreements between the contractor
and the town.
   STANDARD PLANS. Details of standard structures, devices or instructions
referred to on the plans or in specifications by title or number.
   STORM SEWER. Any conduit and appurtenances intended for the reception and
transfer of storm water.
   STREET, PRIVATE. Any street not dedicated to the public for purposes of
vehicular or pedestrian use.
   STREET, PUBLIC.
      (1)   The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
      (2)   The entire width of every way declared to be a public highway by
any law of this state; and further classified and defined as follows.
         (a)   ARTERIAL. Those which permit the relatively rapid and unimpeded
movement of large volumes of traffic from one part of the community to another.
         (b)   COLLECTOR. Those which collect traffic from minor streets and
carry it to arterial streets or to local traffic generators. COLLECTOR STREETS
include the principal entrance streets to a residential development, those
linking such adjacent developments and those streets providing circulation
within such developments.
         (c)   MINOR. Those used primarily for direct access to properties
abutting the right-of-way. MINOR STREETS carry traffic having an origin or
destination within the development and do not carry through traffic.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, estate, trust or any other group or combination acting as a unit,
dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a SUBDIVISION as
defined herein, including any agent of the subdivider.
   SUBDIVISION or SUBDIVIDED LAND.
      (1)   Meaning.
         (a)   A tract of land which is divided into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels, sites, separate interests (including leasehold interests), interests
in common or other division for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership, or for building or other development, or for street use
by reference to such subdivision or recorded plat thereof;
         (b)   A tract of land including land to be used for condominiums,
timeshare units, or fractional fee club units; or
         (c)   A house, condominium, apartment or other dwelling unit which is
divided into two or more separate interests through division of the fee or
title thereto, whether by conveyance, license, lease, contract for sale or any
other method of disposition.
      (2)   Exceptions. Unless the method of land disposition is adopted for
the purpose of evading this definition, the term SUBDIVISION as defined herein
shall not apply to any of the following divisions of land or interests in land:
         (a)   The division of land by order of any court in this state or by
operation of law;
         (b)   The division of land by a lien, mortgage, deed of trust or any
other security instrument;
         (c)   The division of land by a security or unit of interest in any
investment trust regulated under the laws of this state or any other interest
in an investment entity;
         (d)   The division of land which creates an interest or interests in
oil, gas or minerals which are now or hereafter severed from the surface
ownership of real property;
         (e)   The division of land by the acquisition of an interest in land
in the name of a husband and wife or other persons in joint tenancy or as
tenants in common and any such interest shall be deemed for purposes of this
definition as only one interest; provided, however, that no agreement exists,
either recorded or unrecorded, between the cotenants allowing for the use and
occupancy of the property by one or more cotenants to the exclusion of one or
more cotenants during any period, whether annually recurring or not if such
agreement is in any way binding or effective upon any assignee or future owner
of a fractional fee interest or if such agreement continues to be in any way
binding or effective upon any cotenant for the sale of any interest in the
property; and
         (f)   The division of land by reason of the dissolution of a joint
venture or other business entity.
      (3)   Compliance. No subdivision shall be approved which includes
elements not in conformance with the provisions of any applicable zoning
ordinance or other ordinance of the town or law or regulations of the state.
      (4)   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision involving more than four lots,
or a subdivision proposal without all lots having frontage on a public or
approved street, or with a request to extend municipal facilities in a
significant manner, or a proposal which would negatively affect the natural
environment as determined under §
12-12-2, “Applicability”, of this code, or if the proposal would adversely
affect the development of the remainder of the parcel or the adjacent property.
      (5)   MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision containing not more than four
lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road or
the extension of municipal facilities and not adversely affecting the
development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property.
      (6)   SINGLE-FAMILY SUBDIVISION. A subdivision of an existing lot, which
is recognized by the Town of Vail as a legally subdivided lot, and which shall
contain a single-family or two-family dwelling. Each such dwelling shall be
separated from any other dwelling by space on all sides. For zoning purposes,
the lots created by a single-family subdivision shall be treated as one lot.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The executive representative for the contractor present on
the work at all times, authorized to receive and fulfill instructions from the
Town Engineer and capable of superintending the work efficiently.
   SUPERVISION. Where used to indicate supervision by the engineer, shall mean
the performance of obligations, and the exercise of rights, specifically
imposed upon and granted to the town in becoming a party to the contract except
as specifically stated herein, supervision by the town shall not mean active
and direct superintendence of details of the work.
   SURETY. Any individual, firm or corporation, bound with and for the
contractor for the acceptable performance, execution and completion of the
work, and for the satisfaction of all obligations incurred.
   TIME SPAN ESTATE. Defined in accordance with the statutes of the state.
   TIMESHARE LICENSE. A contractual right to exclusive occupancy of specified
premises; provided that the occupancy of the premises is divided into five or
more separate time periods extending over a term of more than two years. The
premises may consist of one parcel, unit or dwelling or any of several parcels,
units or dwellings identified at the time the license is created to be
identified later. No timeshare is a TIMESHARE LICENSE if it meets the
definition of “interval estate”, “timeshare” or “time span estate”.
   TOWN. The Town of Vail, County of Eagle, State of Colorado.
   TOWNHOUSE. A building that has one-family dwelling units erected in a row or
in a clustered fashion as a single building on adjoining lots, each being
separated from the adjoining unit or units by a party wall or walls extending
from the basement floor to the roof along the dividing lot line, and each such
building being separated from any other building by space on all sides.
   UTILITY. Tracks, overhead or underground wires, pipelines, conduits,
ditches, ducts or structures, sewers or storm drains owned, operated or
maintained in or across a public right-of-way or private easement.
   WORK. That which is proposed to be constructed or done under the contract or
permit, including the furnishing of all labor materials, supervision, tools and
equipment.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 25(1983) § 1; Ord. 22(1999) § 1; Ord. 2(2001) § 4; Ord.
5(2001) § 7; Ord. 24(2005) § 4; Ord. 29(2005) § 51)
CHAPTER 3: MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS
Section
13-3-1 Requirements and procedures
13-3-2 Consultation required; preliminary review
13-3-3 Preliminary plan
13-3-4 Commission review of application; criteria and necessary findings
13-3-5 Review and appeal periods, false statements
13-3-6 Final plat
13-3-7 Review criteria for final plat
13-3-8 Required improvements
13-3-9 Commission action; public hearing
13-3-10 Town Council right to appeal
13-3-11 Council acceptance of dedications
13-3-12 Filing and recording
13-3-13 Site improvement permit issuance
13-3-14 Completion and maintenance of improvements
13-3-15 Inspection of improvements required
13-3-16 As built plans
13-3-17 Failure to install improvements; rights relinquished
§ 13-3-1 REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES.
   The following submittal requirements and procedures apply to a major
subdivision proposal.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-3-2 CONSULTATION REQUIRED; PRELIMINARY REVIEW.
   The first step in the process for a major subdivision is for the applicant
to request a meeting with the Administrator to assist in meeting submittal
requirements, address related zoning issues and generally give the proposal a
preliminary review.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-3-3 PRELIMINARY PLAN.
   (A)   Preliminary presentation to Planning and Environmental Commission.
Consideration of a major subdivision proposal shall be formally considered with
a preliminary plan presentation by the subdivider and/or his or her
representative(s) to the Planning and Environmental Commission at a regularly
scheduled meeting. This preliminary presentation shall be a public hearing
according to §
12-3-6 of this code. The presentation shall reflect the proposed development
for an entire same ownership and shall indicate all adjacent lands owned or
under option to the subdivider at the time of subdivision.
   (B)   Submittal requirements. At least 30 days prior to the preliminary plan
presentation to the Planning and Environmental Commission, the subdivider shall
submit at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger, 12 copies of each of
the following (exceptions can be granted on individual items by the Director of
Public Works or the Administrator) to the Department of Community Development:
      (1)   The environmental impact report required;
      (2)   A topographic survey with a north arrow, graphic scale, dimensioned
to nearest foot prepared by a Colorado registered land surveyor, shall be
submitted including the following information:
         (a)   Boundary lines;
         (b)   Preliminary proposed lots and blocks with numbers and sizes;
         (c)   Easements: location, width and purpose;
         (d)   Proposed streets, their widths of right-of-way and pavement,
approximate grades in percentage and center line radii of curves; areas with
cuts and fills exceeding six feet and extent thereof;
         (e)   Utilities on and adjacent to the tract, including their type,
location, size and invert elevations of sanitary sewers, storm drainage
facilities and water mains. If utilities are not found on the tract, distance
to, direction of, and size and elevations of the nearest utilities should be
indicated;
         (f)   Contour intervals of no less than two feet if the site is two
acres or less; contour intervals of five feet or less if the tract is more than
two acres, elevations to be based on USGS datum;
         (g)   Drainage conditions on and adjacent to the tract including
location and extent of watercourses, areas of 100-year floodplain (verified by
a registered professional engineer in State of Colorado), perpetual drainage
easements and location of natural springs and ground water;
         (h)   Existing conditions on adjacent land: The area within 200 feet
from each subdivision boundary should be included in the preliminary plan to
show its land slope percentage, zoning, location of physical improvements and
land uses, owners of said property, division of property into lots or tracts
including subdivision names and any significant natural features. The objective
of showing how the preliminary plan interfaces with all adjoining properties
and uses thereof should be met;
         (i)   Existing zoning;
         (j)   All areas of 40% slope or greater, and avalanche areas indicated
as shaded areas;
         (k)   Letters from all applicable utility agencies verifying service;
         (l)   Indications showing that access to the subdivision is via a
maintained public road; and
         (m)   Soil stability analysis.
   (C)   Agencies review.
      (1)   The Administrator shall inform any of the following agencies that
copies of the preliminary plan are available for review and comment.
Notification shall be mailed at least 15 days prior to the date set by the
Planning and Environmental Commission for public hearing:
         (a)   Department of Public Works;
         (b)   Town Fire Department;
         (c)   Town Police Department;
         (d)   Public Service Company of Colorado;
         (e)   Holy Cross Electric Association;
         (f)   U.S. West;
         (g)   Cablevision company serving the area;
         (h)   National Forest Service;
         (i)   Eagle River Water and Sanitation District;
         (j)   Vail Recreation District;
         (k)   Eagle County Ambulance District; and
         (l)   Other interested agencies when applicable.
      (2)   Such agencies shall be required to make recommendations and
comments within 15 days from the date of receipt of notification that the
preliminary plan is available for review. Failure to make recommendations and/
or comments within the prescribed 15-day period shall be deemed approval of the
preliminary plan.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 29(2005) § 52)
§ 13-3-4 COMMISSION REVIEW OF APPLICATION; CRITERIA AND NECESSARY FINDINGS.
   The Planning and Environmental Commission shall conduct a public hearing on
an application for a preliminary plan for subdivision. The Planning and
Environmental Commission shall consider the application, relevant additional
materials, staff report and recommendations as well as any other comments or
public information given at the hearing. The Planning and Environmental
Commission may discuss advisable changes to the proposed subdivision with the
applicant. The burden of proof shall rest with the applicant to show that the
application is in compliance with the intent and purposes of this chapter, the
zoning ordinance and other pertinent regulations that the Planning and
Environmental Commission deems applicable. Due consideration shall be given to
the recommendations made by public agencies, utility companies and other
agencies consulted under §
13-3-3(C) of this chapter.
   (A)   Before recommending approval, approval with conditions or disapproval
of the preliminary plan, the Planning and Environmental Commission shall
consider the following criteria with respect to the proposed subdivision:
      (1)   The extent to which the proposed subdivision is consistent with all
the applicable elements of the adopted goals, objectives and policies outlined
in the Vail Comprehensive Plan and is compatible with the development
objectives of the town;
      (2)   The extent to which the proposed subdivision complies with all of
the standards of this title, as well as, but not limited to, Title 12, “Zoning
Regulations”, of this code, and other pertinent regulations that the Planning
and Environmental Commission deems applicable;
      (3)   The extent to which the proposed subdivision presents a harmonious,
convenient, workable relationship among land uses consistent with municipal
development objectives;
      (4)   The extent of the effects on the future development of the
surrounding area;
      (5)   The extent to which the proposed subdivision is located and
designed to avoid creating spatial patterns that cause inefficiencies in the
delivery of public services, or require duplication or premature extension of
public facilities, or result in a “leapfrog” pattern of development;
      (6)   The extent to which the utility lines are sized to serve the
planned ultimate population of the service area to avoid future land disruption
to upgrade undersized lines;
      (7)   The extent to which the proposed subdivision provides for the
growth of an orderly viable community and serves the best interests of the
community as a whole;
      (8)   The extent to which the proposed subdivision results in adverse or
beneficial impacts on the natural environment, including, but not limited to,
water quality, air quality, noise, vegetation, riparian corridors, hillsides
and other desirable natural features; and
      (9)   Such other factors and criteria as the commission and/or Council
deem applicable to the proposed subdivision.
   (B)   Necessary findings. Before recommending and/or granting an approval of
an application for a major subdivision, the Planning and Environmental
Commission shall make the following findings with respect to the proposed major
subdivision:
      (1)   That the subdivision is in compliance with the criteria listed in
subsection (A) of this section;
      (2)   That the subdivision is consistent with the adopted goals,
objectives and policies outlined in the Vail Comprehensive Plan and compatible
with the development objectives of the town;
      (3)   That the subdivision is compatible with and suitable to adjacent
uses and appropriate for the surrounding areas; and
      (4)   That the subdivision promotes the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the town and promotes the coordinated and harmonious
development of the town in a manner that conserves and enhances its natural
environment and its established character as a resort and residential community
of the highest quality.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 29(2005) § 53)
§ 13-3-5 REVIEW AND APPEAL PERIODS, FALSE STATEMENTS.
   (A)   Commission decision. The Planning and Environmental Commission shall
have 21 days from the date of reviewing the preliminary plan to approve,
disapprove or approve with conditions or modifications, unless a longer period
of time is agreed upon by the subdivider and the Planning and Environmental
Commission or the preliminary plan shall be deemed approved.
   (B)   False information. It is unlawful for any person to intentionally or
knowingly submit a false statement as part of an application for subdivision
approval, exemption or exception.
   (C)   Council may appeal. Within ten days the decision of the Planning and
Environmental Commission on the final plat shall be transmitted to the Council
by the staff. The Council may appeal the decision of the Planning and
Environmental Commission within 17 days of the Planning and Environmental
Commission’s action. If Council appeals the Planning and Environmental
Commission’s decision, the Council shall hear substantially the same
presentation by the applicant as was heard at the Planning and Environmental
Commission hearing(s). The Council shall have 30 days to affirm, reverse or
affirm with modifications the Planning and Environmental Commission decision,
and the Council shall conduct the appeal at a regularly scheduled Council
meeting.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-3-6 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Submission. At any time within one year after the Planning and
Environmental Commission has completed its review of the preliminary plan, a
final plat shall be submitted to the Department of Community Development. If
more than a year has passed from the date of the Planning and Environmental
Commission’s review, the proposal shall be required to be reviewed on a
preliminary basis again.
   (B)   Requirements and procedure.
      (1)   Copies required. The subdivider shall submit eight copies of the
final plat, two or more of which shall be Mylars, 12 copies of the final
environmental impact report and any additional material as required by
subsection (B)(3) of this section. The final plat shall substantially conform
to the preliminary plan and shall include changes as required after
consideration on a preliminary basis by the Planning and Environmental
Commission. If it does not substantially conform to the preliminary plan and
include any revisions required by Planning and Environmental Commission, it
shall be required to go back through preliminary plan procedures. Within 30
days of receiving the complete and correct submittal for a final plat, the
Planning and Environmental Commission shall hold a public hearing to consider
the final plat. The Administrator shall cause a copy of a notice of the time,
place and general nature of the hearing and proposal to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the town at least 15 days prior to said
hearing. Also, adjacent property owners to the proposed subdivision shall be
notified in writing at least seven days prior to the public hearing.
      (2)   Final plat; staff review. The final plat shall be circulated to and
reviewed by the town’s departments, including, but not limited to, Public
Works, Community Development, Administration, Police and Fire. Comments and
concerns of these departments will be forwarded to the Planning and
Environmental Commission prior to the public hearing.
      (3)   Final plat and supplementary material; contents. The final plat and
supplementary material shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The final plat shall be drawn in India ink, or other substantial
solution, on a reproducible medium (preferably Mylar) with dimensions of 24
inches by 36 inches and shall be at a scale of 100 feet to one inch or larger
with margins of one and one-half inches to two inches on the left and one-half
inch on all other sides;
         (b)   Accurate dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot for
all lines, angles and curves used to describe boundaries, streets, setbacks,
alleys, easements, structures, areas to be reserved or dedicated for public or
common uses and other important features. All curves shall be circular arcs and
shall be defined by the radius, central angle, arc chord distances and
bearings. All dimensions, both linear and angular, are to be determined by an
accurate control survey in the field which must balance and close within a
limit of one in 10,000;
         (c)   North arrow and graphic scale;
         (d)   A systematic identification of all existing and proposed
buildings, units, lots, blocks and names for all streets;
         (e)   Names of all adjoining subdivisions with dotted lines of
abutting lots. If adjoining land is unplatted, it shall be shown as such;
         (f)   An identification of the streets, alleys, parks, and other
public areas or facilities as shown on the plat, and a dedication thereof to
the public use. An identification of the easements as shown on the plat and a
grant thereof to the public use. Areas reserved for future public acquisition
shall also be shown on the plat;
         (g)   A written survey description of the area including the total
acreage to the nearest appropriate significant figure. The acreage of each lot
or parcel shall be shown in this manner as well;
         (h)   A description of all survey monuments, both found and set, which
mark the boundaries of the subdivision, and a description of all monuments used
in conducting the survey. Monument perimeter per Colorado statutes. Two
perimeter monuments shall be established as major control monuments, the
materials which shall be determined by the Town Engineer;
         (i)   A statement by the land surveyor explaining how bearing base was
determined;
         (j)   The proper plat title format for filing a plat in the town, as
outlined in §
13-11-1 of this title;
         (k)   A certificate by the registered land surveyor as outlined in
Chapter 11 of this title as to the accuracy of the survey and plat, and that
the survey was performed by him or her in accordance with C.R.S. Title 38,
Article 51;
         (l)   A certificate by an attorney admitted to practice in the state,
or corporate title insurer, that the owner(s) of record dedicating to the
public the public rights-of-way, areas or facilities as shown thereon are the
owners thereof in fee simple, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances
except as noted. (See example in Chapter 11 of this title.)
         (m)   The proper form for approval of the plat by the Planning and
Environmental Commission Chairperson and acceptance of dedication and easements
by the Council with signature by the Mayor and attestation by the Town Clerk.
Examples are found in Chapter 11 of this title;
         (n)   The proper form for filing of the plat with the Eagle County
Clerk and Recorder as per example in Chapter 11 of this title;
         (o)   Certificate of dedication and ownership as per example in
Chapter 11 of this title. Should the certificate of dedication and ownership
provide for a dedication of land or improvement to the public, all
beneficiaries of deeds of trust and mortgage holders on said real property will
be required to sign the certificate of dedication and ownership in addition to
the fee simple owner thereof;
         (p)   A certificate by the Treasurer of Eagle County as outlined in §
13-11-10 of this title that will certify that the entire amount of taxes due
and payable upon all parcels of real estate described on the plat are paid in
full;
         (q)   Additional material which shall accompany the final plat
includes, but is not limited to:
            1.   Complete and final environmental impact report if required by
the zoning ordinance;
            2.   Complete engineering plans and specifications for all
improvements to be installed, including, but not limited to, water and sewer
utilities, streets and related improvements, pedestrian and bicycle paths,
bridges and storm drainage improvements;
            3.   Maps at the same scale as the final plat showing existing
topography and proposed grading plan (contour interval requirements same as
preliminary plan), a landscape and/or revegetation plan showing locations, type
and sizes of existing and proposed vegetation.
            4.   A map the same scale as the final plat depicting all high and
moderate avalanche hazard areas, 40% and higher slope areas and 100- year
floodplain areas as defined in the hazard ordinance of this code;
            5.   Title insurance company proof of ownership of all lands within
the proposal;
            6.   Copies of any monument records required of the land surveyor
in accordance with C.R.S. Title 38, Article 53;
            7.   Any agreements with utility companies when required;
            8.   Protective covenants in form for recording; and
            9.   Other data, certificates, affidavits or documents as may be
required by the Administrator or Planning and Environmental Commission or
Council in the enforcement of these regulations.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 11(1986) § 1; Ord. 12(1996) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 29
(2005) § 54)
Cross-reference:
   Zoning Regulations, see Title 12 of this code
§ 13-3-7 REVIEW CRITERIA FOR FINAL PLAT.
   The criteria for reviewing the final plat shall be as contained in §
13-3-4 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-3-8 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   The following improvements shall be required by the subdivider unless
otherwise waived by either the Administrator, Director of Public Works,
Planning and Environmental Commission or Council. All improvements shall meet
the design standards, Chapter 10 of this title:
   (A)   Paved street and parking lots;
   (B)   Bicycle and pedestrian path linked with town system and within the
subdivision itself;
   (C)   Traffic control signs, signals or devices;
   (D)   Streetlights;
   (E)   Landscaping;
   (F)   Water lines and fire hydrants;
   (G)   Sanitary sewer lines;
   (H)   Storm drainage improvements and storm sewers;
   (I)   Bridges and culverts;
   (J)   Electrical lines;
   (K)   Telephone lines;
   (L)   Natural gas lines; and
   (M)   Other improvements not specifically mentioned above but found
necessary by the Town Engineer due to the nature of the subdivision.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-3-9 COMMISSION ACTION; PUBLIC HEARING.
   The Planning and Environmental Commission shall review the final plat and
associated material and information and shall approve, approve with
modifications or disapprove the plat within 21 days of the public hearing on
the final plat of the subdivision or the final plat is deemed approved. A
longer time period for rendering a decision may be granted subject to agreement
between the applicant and the Planning and Environmental Commission.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-3-10 TOWN COUNCIL RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   Within 20 days the decision of the Planning and Environmental Commission on
the final plat shall be transmitted to the Council by the staff. The Council
may appeal the decision of the Planning and Environmental Commission within 20
days of the Planning and Environmental Commission’s action. If Council appeals
the Planning and Environmental Commission decision, the Council shall hear
substantially the same presentation by the applicant as was heard at the
Planning and Environmental Commission hearing(s). The Council shall have 30
days to affirm, reverse or affirm with modifications the Planning and
Environmental Commission decision, and the Council shall conduct the appeal at
a regularly scheduled Council meeting.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 55)
§ 13-3-11 COUNCIL ACCEPTANCE OF DEDICATIONS.
   Within 30 days of Council approval of the final plat, the Council shall (if
they so choose) accept in writing by the Mayor, the lands dedicated as herein
required, or accept the monetary payment in lieu thereof.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-3-12 FILING AND RECORDING.
   The Department of Community Development will record the plat and any related
documents with the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder; however, no plat for
subdivided land shall be recorded unless prior to the time of recording, the
subdivider provides the town with a certification from the Eagle County
Treasurer’s office indicating that all ad valorem taxes applicable to such
subdivided land, for years prior to that year in which approval is granted,
have been paid. Fees for recording shall be paid by the applicant. The
Department of Community Development will retain one Mylar copy of the plat for
their records.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 18(1993) § 1)
§ 13-3-13 SITE IMPROVEMENT PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   After final approval and acceptance of dedications (or payment in lieu
thereof), applicable site improvement permits may be issued by the Department
of Community Development and the Department of Public Works. The developer may
proceed with such additional requirements, permits or authorizations as may be
required by this title or regulations of the town. No permits shall be granted
or authorization to proceed in the event final approval is not granted or the
provisions of §
13-3-11 of this chapter are not satisfied. No permits shall be issued, or said
permits may be withdrawn, if any project proceeds or attempts to proceed not in
conformance with either the approved environmental impact report or the final
plat and associated material as approved.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 56)
§ 13-3-14 COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   A written agreement between the town and the subdivider shall be required in
order to guarantee the construction and maintenance of required improvements.
Said agreement shall cover 100% of the current estimated cost of the
improvements at the time they are to be installed as computed by the Town
Engineer and approved by the Town Manager. The agreement shall provide all
information necessary to allow the Town Engineer to formulate an estimate. The
guarantee shall be in the form of a cash escrow with the town, or a bank or
savings and loan association; or an irrevocable sight draft or letter of
commitment from a financially responsible lender; and shall give the town the
unconditional right, upon default by the subdivider to withdraw funds upon
demand to partially or fully complete and/or pay for any improvements or pay
any outstanding bills for work done thereon by any party. The subdivider shall
also agree to warranty all improvements for a period of one year after
acceptance by the town. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
issued within the subdivision if said agreement is in default until the
deficiencies are corrected. The agreement shall be recorded along with the
final plat.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-3-15 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
   As portions of the improvements to be dedicated to the town are completed,
the Town Engineer shall inspect them, and upon approval and acceptance, he or
she shall authorize the release of the agreed estimate for that portion of the
improvements except that 10% of the estimated cost shall be withheld until all
proposed improvements are completed and approved by the Town Engineer. The
subdivider shall in no way be relieved of any obligations to make the
improvements, nor is the town obligated to assume the responsibility for any
improvements by reason of the acceptance or any approval of any guarantee.
Improvements not to be dedicated to the town shall be inspected and accepted by
the appropriate governing body or district.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-3-16 AS BUILT PLANS.
   Finished plans of all public improvements as installed will be required
before the town will accept the improvements.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-3-17 FAILURE TO INSTALL IMPROVEMENTS; RIGHTS RELINQUISHED.
   If no improvements as outlined in §
13-3-8 of this chapter are installed within three years of the date of Planning
and Environmental Commission approval, the plat shall become instantly
nonexistent. All right to improve or develop the property on the part of the
owner or subdivider shall thereby be relinquished.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
CHAPTER 4: MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
Section
13-4-1 Exemptions in procedure and submittals
13-4-2 Procedure
13-4-3 Filing and recording
§ 13-4-1 EXEMPTIONS IN PROCEDURE AND SUBMITTALS.
   “Minor subdivisions”, as defined in §
13-2-2 of this title, shall be exempt from requirements related to preliminary
plan procedures and submittals. Minor subdivisions may be required to submit an
environmental impact report if required by Title 12, Chapter 12 of this code.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 57)
§ 13-4-2 PROCEDURE.
   The procedure for a minor subdivision shall be as follows.
   (A)   Submission of proposal; waiver of requirements. The subdivider shall
submit two copies of the proposal following the requirements for a final plat
in §
13-3-6(B) of this title, with the provision that certain of these requirements
may be waived by the Administrator and/or the Planning and Environmental
Commission if determined not applicable to the project.
   (B)   PEC public hearing. Within 30 days of receiving the complete and
correct submittal for a minor subdivision, the Planning and Environmental
Commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the final plat. The
Administrator shall cause a copy of a notice of the time, place and general
nature of the hearing and proposal to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town at least 15 days prior to said hearing. Also, adjacent
property owners to the proposed subdivision shall be notified in writing at
least seven days prior to the public hearing.
   (C)   Review and action on plat. The Planning and Environmental Commission
shall review the plat and associated materials and shall approve, approve with
modifications or disapprove the plat within 21 days of the first public hearing
on the minor subdivision or the minor subdivision will be deemed approved. A
longer time period for rendering a decision may be granted subject to mutual
agreement between the Planning and Environmental Commission and subdivider. The
review shall be based on the criteria and necessary findings in §
13-3-4 of this title.
   (D)   Appeal. Within 20 days the decision of the Planning and Environmental
Commission on the final plat shall be transmitted to the Council by the staff.
The Council may call up the decision of the Planning and Environmental
Commission within 20 days of the Planning and Environmental Commission’s
action. If Council appeals the Planning and Environmental Commission decision,
the Council shall hear substantially the same presentation by the applicant as
was heard at the Planning and Environmental Commission hearing(s). The Council
shall have 30 days to affirm, reverse or affirm with modifications the Planning
and Environmental Commission decision, and the Council shall conduct the appeal
at a regularly scheduled Council meeting.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 58)
§ 13-4-3 FILING AND RECORDING.
   The Department of Community Development will record the plat and any related
documents with the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder; however, no plat for
subdivided land shall be recorded unless prior to the time of recording, the
subdivider provides the town with a certification from the Eagle County
Treasurer’s office indicating that all ad valorem taxes applicable to such
subdivided land, for years prior to that year in which approval is granted,
have been paid. Fees for recording shall be paid by the applicant. The
Department of Community Development will retain one Mylar copy of the plat for
their records.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 18(1993) § 2)
CHAPTER 5: SCHOOL SITE DEDICATIONS
Section
13-5-1 Purpose
13-5-2 School land dedication or cash in lieu thereof
13-5-3 Town exempted
§ 13-5-1 PURPOSE.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the town that whenever there is a
major subdivision, which is subdivided for residential use or partial
residential use, the owner of the land shall provide land for school needs
generated by the proposed residential use. It is the purpose of this chapter to
require the dedication of land or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, or both,
to fulfill such needs.
(Ord. 1(1991) § 1)
§ 13-5-2 SCHOOL LAND DEDICATION OR CASH IN LIEU THEREOF.
   (A)   Dedication formula. The subdivider of land in each residential major
subdivision or portion of the subdivision which is intended for residential
use, shall allocate and convey sites in land areas for schools when such are
reasonably necessary to serve the proposed subdivision and future residents
thereof, by the application of the formulas set forth below:
      (1)   Single-family and duplex or primary secondary.
 
number of units x .014495 = dedication requirement in acres
 
      (2)   Multi-family.
 
number of units x .002676 = dedication requirement in acres
 
   (B)   Land held by town. When land is dedicated for the purpose of providing
a school site, it shall be that which is usable by the Eagle County School
District for such purpose, and shall be maintained by the School District in a
reasonable manner until developed. Said land shall be held by the town for the
School District until required by the School District. In the event that the
School District determines subsequent to dedication that the dedicated school
site is not reasonably necessary, the Town Council may, at the request of the
School District, sell the land.
   (C)   Cash in lieu of. When sites and land areas for schools are not
reasonably necessary to serve the proposed subdivision and future residents
thereof, the Town Council, with recommendations from the School District and
other affected entities, shall require, in lieu of such conveyance of land, the
payment in cash by the subdivider of an amount not to exceed the full market
value of such sites and land areas for schools.
   (D)   Full market value. The full market value shall mean the current market
value of unimproved land. This value shall be set annually by the Town Council
on an acre basis with recommendations from the School District. The same value
per acre shall be used throughout the town.
   (E)   Consensus on land value. If the subdivider does not agree with the
value per acre, the subdivider may submit the report by a qualified appraiser
who is M.A.I. designated, which establishes a new value. The Town Council shall
review the report and determine if the value is reasonable. Based upon their
review, the Town Council will determine the value of such land.
   (F)   In-lieu monies held by town. When money in lieu of land is required or
when monies have been paid to the Town Council from the sale of such dedicated
sites for schools, it shall be held by the Town Council for the acquisition of
reasonably necessary sites for the construction of school facilities, for the
construction of employee housing required by the School District, for the
purchase of employee housing units for the School District, or for the
development of such sites. If housing units are purchased, a deed restriction
restricting their use to School District employee housing shall be required and
ownership shall remain in the name of the School District. A subdivision school
dedication shall apply only once to the same land area. Dedication shall not be
required of resubdivisions of the same land on a dedication that has previously
been made.
(Ord. 1(1991) § 1)
§ 13-5-3 TOWN EXEMPTED.
   The town is specifically exempted from the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1(1991) § 1)
CHAPTER 6: CONDOMINIUM AND TOWNHOUSE PLATS
Section
13-6-1 Plat approval procedure
13-6-2 Dedications
13-6-3 Administrator decision; appeal
13-6-4 Filing and recording
§ 13-6-1 PLAT APPROVAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   General qualifications. Condominium and townhouse plats which do not
constitute “conversions” from rental as defined in §
13-7-2 of this title may be approved by the Administrator, subject to
Department of Public Works review. The plat will be reviewed under two general
criteria.
      (1)   Per approved plan. The Administrator will check to make sure the
buildings and other improvements were built as per approved plan by the Design
Review Board of the town for consistency with the zoning code and other
applicable regulations.
      (2)   Compliance. The Administrator will review the survey data for
compliance with requirements found in subsection (B) of this section.
   (B)   Plat submittal requirements. The condominium or townhouse plat and
supplementary material shall contain the following:
      (1)   The final plat shall be drawn in India ink, or other substantial
solution, on a reproducible medium (preferably Mylar) with dimensions of 24
inches by 36 inches and shall be at a scale of 100 feet to one inch or larger
with margins of one and one-half inches to two inches on the left and one-half
inch on all other sides;
      (2)   Accurate dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot for all
lines, angles and curves used to describe boundaries, streets, setbacks,
alleys, easements, structures, areas to be reserved or dedicated for public or
common uses and other important features. All curves shall be circular arcs and
shall be defined by the radius, central angle, arc chord distances and
bearings. All dimensions, both linear and angular, are to be determined by an
accurate control survey in the field which must balance and close within a
limit of one in 10,000;
      (3)   North arrow and graphic scale;
      (4)   A systematic identification of all existing and proposed buildings,
units, lots, blocks and names for all streets;
      (5)   An identification of the streets, alleys, parks and other public
areas or facilities as shown on the plat, and a dedication thereof to the
public use. An identification of the easements as shown on the plat and a grant
thereof to the public use. Areas reserved for future public acquisition shall
also be shown on the plat;
      (6)   A written survey description of the area including the total
acreage to the nearest appropriate significant figure. The acreage of each lot
or parcel shall be shown in this manner as well;
      (7)   A description of all survey monuments, both found and set, which
mark the boundaries of the subdivision, and a description of all monuments used
in conducting the survey. Monument perimeter per Colorado statutes. Two
perimeter monuments shall be established as major control monuments, the
materials which shall be determined by the Town Engineer;
      (8)   A statement by the land surveyor explaining how bearing base was
determined;
      (9)   The proper plat title format for filing a plat in the town, as
outlined in §
13-11-1 of this title;
      (10)   A certificate by the registered land surveyor as outlined in
Chapter 11 of this title as to the accuracy of the survey and plat, and that
the survey was performed by him or her in accordance with C.R.S. Title 38,
Article 51;
      (11)   A certificate by an attorney admitted to practice in the state, or
corporate title insurer, that the owner(s) of record dedicating to the public
the public rights-of-way, areas or facilities as shown thereon are the owners
thereof in fee simple, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances except as
noted. (See example in Chapter 11 of this title.)
      (12)   The proper form for filing of the plat with the Eagle County Clerk
and Recorder as per example in Chapter 11 of this title;
      (13)   Certificate of dedication and ownership as per example in Chapter
11 of this title. Should the certificate of dedication and ownership provide
for a dedication of land or improvement to the public, all beneficiaries of
deeds of trust and mortgage holders on said real property will be required to
sign the certificate of dedication and ownership in addition to the fee simple
owner thereof;
      (14)   A certificate by the Treasurer of Eagle County as outlined in §
13-11-10 of this title that will certify that the entire amount of taxes due
and payable upon all parcels of real estate described on the plat are paid in
full;
      (15)   Floor plans, elevations and cross sections as necessary to
accurately determine individual air spaces and/or other ownerships and if the
project was built substantially the same as the approved plans;
      (16)   A copy of the condominium documents for staff review to assure
that there are maintenance provisions included for all commonly owned areas;
and
      (17)   Building locations must be included and tied to property corners
with distances and angles. All property pins must be found or set and stated as
such on map.
   (C)   Plat procedure. Upon receiving two copies of a complete submittal
along with payment of the appropriate fee, the Administrator shall route one
copy of the site map to the Town Engineer for his or her review. The
Administrator shall then conduct his or her review concurrently. The Town
Engineer shall review the submittal and return comments and notifications to
the Administrator who shall transmit the approval, disapproval or approval with
modifications of the plat within 14 days to the applicant. The Administrator
shall sign the plat if approved or require modifications on the plat for
approval or deny approval due to inconsistencies with the originally approved
plan or failure to make other required modifications on the plat.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 12(1996) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 59)
§ 13-6-2 DEDICATIONS.
   If a condominium or townhouse plat proposes dedications to the town, the
matter shall be brought in front of the Council for a decision on acceptance.
If accepted, there shall be a certificate (example in Chapter 11 of this title)
for acceptance of the dedicated property by the Mayor.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-6-3 ADMINISTRATOR DECISION; APPEAL.
   The decision of the Administrator may be appealed following the procedures
of §
12-3-3 of this code.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-6-4 FILING AND RECORDING.
   The Administrator shall be the final signature required on the plat so that
the Department of Community Development will record the plat and any related
documents with the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder; however, no plat for
subdivided land shall be recorded unless prior to the time of recording, the
subdivider provides the town with a certification from the Eagle County
Treasurer’s office indicating that all ad valorem taxes applicable to such
subdivided land, for years prior to that year in which approval is granted,
have been paid. Fees for recording shall be paid by the applicant. The
Department of Community Development will retain one Mylar copy of the plat for
their records.
(Ord. 18(1993) § 3)
CHAPTER 7: CONDOMINIUMS AND CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
Section
13-7-1 Purpose
13-7-2 Definitions
13-7-3 Preliminary map
13-7-4 Final map
13-7-5 Review procedure
13-7-6 Additional requirements for condominium conversions to employee housing
units
13-7-7 Condominium conversion of lodge or accommodation units; no new
conversions allowed; exception
13-7-8 Restrictions on units converted prior to February 7, 1995
13-7-9 Action on preliminary map
13-7-10 Final map; certification and approval
13-7-11 Improvement security
13-7-12 Exemptions
13-7-13 Applicability
13-7-14 Filing and recording
§ 13-7-1 PURPOSE.
   This chapter has been adopted in accordance with the provision of the Local
Government Land Use Control Enabling Act of 1974, as found in C.R.S. §§ 29-20-
101 et seq., as more particularly spelled out in C.R.S. § 29-20-104, to
regulate condominium developments which may result in significant changes in
the population of the town and to control the impact thereof on the town and
the surrounding areas. The town finds that this chapter is necessary for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare to accomplish the following
purposes:
   (A)   To ensure the performance of maintenance responsibilities in
condominiums and converted condominiums, and to promote the public health,
safety and welfare;
   (B)   To ensure that rental units being converted to condominiums meet
reasonable physical standards as required by subdivision and building codes
adopted by the town;
   (C)   To protect from unnecessary eviction the residents of rental units
being converted to condominiums, and to assist these residents in meeting their
future housing needs;
   (D)   To preserve a reasonable balance in the owned versus rental housing
mix and to maintain the supply of low to moderate income units available in the
town;
   (E)   To monitor the supply of low to moderate income units so that the town
may take measures to avoid a worsening housing crisis; and
   (F)   To ensure the rental pool of accommodation units is not depleted by
the conversion of lodges and accommodation units to condominiums.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 1(1995) § 1; Ord. 5(2000) §1)
§ 13-7-2 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation of this chapter.
   BYLAWS. Shall refer to the bylaws of the unit owners’ association or
corporation.
   COMMUNITY APARTMENT. A development in which there is an undivided interest
in the land coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of an apartment
located therein. COMMUNITY APARTMENTS shall be subject to the same restrictions
and conditions set forth in this chapter for condominium units.
   CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION. The development or use of the land and existing
structures as a condominium project regardless of the present or prior use of
such lands and structures, and regardless of whether substantial improvements
have been made to such structures. It shall not be permitted to convert
existing lodges or accommodation units to a condominium project.
   CONDOMINIUM PROJECT. The entire parcel of real property, including all
structures thereon, to be divided into two or more units for the purpose of
constructing or converting existing structures to condominium units.
   CONDOMINIUM UNIT. An individual air space unit together with the interest in
the common elements appurtenant to such unit.
   DECLARATION. An instrument recorded pursuant to the statutes of the state
and which defines the character, duration, rights, obligations, and limitations
of condominium ownership. The declaration shall include all restrictions,
limitations and specifications which may be required by the Planning and
Environmental Commission or Town Council, including provisions relative to
timesharing estates, licenses or fractional fees; and the procedure for
amendments of the declaration which requires approval of the town.
   EMPLOYEE HOUSING UNIT. A dwelling unit occupied by at least one person who
is an employee in Eagle County.
   INDIVIDUAL AIR SPACE UNIT. Consists of any enclosed room or rooms occupying
all or part of a floor or floors of a building of one or more floors to be used
for residential, professional, commercial or industrial purposes, which has
access to a public street.
   MODERATE INCOME. Shall be as defined from time to time by the Council.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 1(1995) § 2; Ord. 5(2000) §1; Ord. 29(2005) § 60)
§ 13-7-3 PRELIMINARY MAP.
   All proposed condominium projects shall submit the preliminary map,
containing the information and requirements specified in Chapter 3 of this
title, as may be applicable to the proposed condominium project. In addition to
that information, the preliminary map for the condominium project shall
include:
   (A)   A map showing all common areas and usages of the building and grounds,
and plans for the interior division of the building showing horizontal and
vertical boundaries of all units;
   (B)   A copy of the declaration applicable to the condominium project; and
   (C)   A copy of the bylaws. The bylaws shall contain the information
required by the condominium ownership act of the State of Colorado. All
condominium projects shall comply with this requirement.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 5(2000) § 1)
Statutory reference:
   Condominium Ownership Act, see C.R.S. § 38-33-106
§ 13-7-4 FINAL MAP.
   (A)   The final map for the condominium project shall contain all
information required by Chapter 3 of this title as the same may be applicable
to the condominium project.
   (B)   In addition, if there are any restrictive covenants, conditions or
restrictions other than specified in the declaration, they shall be filed
concurrently with the final map.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 5(2000) § 1)
§ 13-7-5 REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   The review procedure for condominium projects and condominium conversions
shall be in accordance with the procedures for subdivisions as specified in
this title.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 1(1995) § 3; Ord. 5(2000) §1)
§ 13-7-6 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS TO EMPLOYEE
HOUSING UNITS.
   The applicant proposing to make a condominium conversion to employee housing
units shall provide the following documentation with the preliminary map.
   (A)   Conversion report listing building conditions. A condominium
conversion report from the Town Building Official on the condition of the
building, listing all Building Code violations, Fire Code violations and
related violations which are detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of
the public, the owners and the occupants of the building.
   (B)   Required information. As part of the Planning and Environmental
Commission’s review of a conditional use permit request for conversion to
employee housing units, the following submittal information shall be required:
a report of the proposed conversion that includes a summary of the proposed
ownership of the units; the approximate proposed sale price of units and
financing arrangements to be provided by the applicant; a written statement
demonstrating compliance with the objectives outlined in the Vail Land Use
Plan, with specific reference to goal statements 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3; a draft set
of condominium declarations demonstrating compliance with the provisions of
this title. These declarations will be reviewed again by the town during the
condominium platting process.
   (C)   Plans and descriptions. Plans and descriptions showing how the
following will be performed:
      (1)   All site work shall be brought up to current town standards unless
a variance from those standards is granted to the applicant by the Planning and
Environmental Commission in accordance with the variance procedures of Title 12
of this code. The Planning and Environmental Commission may, if it deems
necessary, require additional parking facilities to meet requirements of owners
and guests of the condominium units;
      (2)   Corrections of violations cited in the condominium conversion
report by the building official; and
      (3)   Condominium projects shall meet current adopted building code
requirements.
   (D)   Maximum sales price.
      (1)   Condominium declarations. The provisions of this subsection (D)
shall be incorporated directly into the condominium declarations for any units
converted pursuant to this chapter. The town shall review and administer these
documents to ensure compliance with these provisions.
      (2)   Listing; deposit; sale. In the event that an owner desires to sell
the unit, the owner shall execute a standard listing contract on forms approved
by the Colorado Real Estate Commission with the town providing for a 180-day
listing period, or such other time period as required by the Town of Vail
affordable housing guidelines in effect at the time of listing. At this time,
the owner shall deposit with the town an amount equal to 0.5% of the estimated
value of the unit. The town shall promptly advertise the unit for sale by
competitive bid to qualified buyers. At the time of closing, the owner shall
pay to the town an additional 1.5%.
      (3)   Restriction.
         (a)   In no event shall a unit be sold for an amount (“maximum sales
price”) in excess of the owner’s purchase price, plus an increase of 3% of such
price per year from the date of purchase to the date of owner’s notice of
intent to sell (prorated at the rate of 0.25% for each whole month for any part
of a year).
         (b)   Nothing herein shall be construed to constitute a representation
or guarantee by the town that on sale the owner shall obtain the maximum sales
price.
      (4)   Determining maximum sales price.
         (a)   For the purpose of determining the maximum sales price in
accordance with this section, the owner may add to the amount specified in
subsection (D)(3) of this section, the cost of “permitted capital improvements”
(as defined in this section). The amount shall not exceed 10% of the initial
listed purchase price set forth in subsection (D)(3) of this section. For every
ten-year period from the date of original purchase and deed restriction, up to
another 10% of the purchase price may be added to the value of the property for
capital improvements. In calculating such amount, only permitted capital
improvements shall qualify for inclusion. All such permitted capital
improvements installed or constructed over the life of the unit shall qualify.
         (b)   Permitted capital improvements shall not include any changes or
additions to the property made by the owner during construction or thereafter,
except in accordance with subsection (D)(4)(a) of this section. Permitted
capital improvements shall not increase the base price, even if made or
installed during original construction.
         (c)   In order to qualify as permitted capital improvements, the owner
must furnish to the town the following information with respect to the
improvements which the owner seeks to include in the calculation of maximum
sales price:
            1.   Original or duplicate receipts to verify the actual costs
expended by the owner for the permitted capital improvements;
            2.   Owner’s affidavit verifying that the receipts are valid and
correct receipts tendered at the time of purchase; and
            3.   True and correct copies of any building permit or certificate
of occupancy required to be issued by the Town Building Department with respect
to the permitted capital improvements.
         (d)   For the purpose of determining the maximum sales price in
accordance with this section, the owner may also add to the amount specified in
subsections (D)(3) and (D)(4)(a) of this section, the cost of any permanent
improvements constructed or installed as a result of any requirement imposed by
any governmental agency, or homeowners’ association, provided that written
certification is provided to the town of both the applicable requirement and
the information required by subsections (D)(4)(c)1. through (D)(4)(c)3. of this
section.
         (e)   In calculating the costs under subsections (D)(4)(a) and (D)(4)
(d) of this section, only the owner’s actual out of pocket costs and expenses
shall be eligible for inclusion. Such amount shall not include an amount
attributable to owner’s “sweat equity” or to any appreciation in the value of
the improvements.
      (5)   Permitted capital improvements.
         (a)   The term “permitted capital improvements” as used in this
section shall only include the following:
            1.   Improvements or fixtures erected, installed or attached as
permanent, functional, nondecorative improvements to real property, excluding
repair, replacement and/or maintenance improvements;
            2.   Improvements for energy and water conservation;
            3.   Improvements for health and safety protection devices;
            4.   Improvements to add and/or finish permanent/fixed storage
space; and/or
            5.   Improvements to finish unfinished space.
         (b)   Permitted capital improvements as used in this section shall not
include the following:
            1.   Upgrades/replacements of appliances, plumbing and mechanical
fixtures, carpets and other similar items included as part of the original
construction of the unit;
            2.   The cost of adding decks and balconies, and any extension
thereto;
            3.   Jacuzzis, saunas, steam showers and other similar items;
            4.   Improvements required to repair, replace and maintain existing
fixtures, appliances, plumbing and mechanical fixtures, painting, carpeting and
other similar items; and/or
            5.   Upgrades or addition of decorative items, including lights,
window coverings and other similar items.
         (c)   All permitted capital improvement items and costs shall be
approved by the town staff prior to being added to the maximum resale price as
defined herein.
      (6)   Closing costs, other consideration. The owner shall not permit any
prospective buyer to assume any or all of the owner’s customary closing costs
nor accept any other consideration which would cause an increase in the
purchase price above the bid price so as to induce the owner to sell to such
prospective buyer.
      (7)   Procedure. In the event that one qualified bid is received equal to
the maximum sales price herein established, the property shall be sold to such
bidder at the maximum sales price; and in the event owner receives two or more
such bids equal to the maximum sales price, the qualified buyer shall be
selected according to the priority for sale units set forth in the Town of Vail
employee housing guidelines; and, in the event that all such qualified bidders
are of equal priority pursuant to the guidelines, the qualified buyer shall be
selected by lottery among the qualified buyers, whereupon the unit shall be
sold to the winner of such lottery at the maximum sales price. If the lottery
winner does not proceed to contract within five business days after
notification, the next in line will be notified and so on, until the unit is
under contract for purchase. Backup contracts in the priority order set forth
in the lottery will be accepted. Prospective purchasers must be prequalified by
a lender prior to submitting a bid for a unit at the subject property/project.
The seller may reject any and all bids, however, the owner is subject to the
provisions in the Town of Vail employee housing guidelines pertaining to the
listing fee. Bids in excess of the maximum sales price shall be rejected. If
all bids are below maximum sales price, owner may accept the highest qualified
bid. If all bids are below maximum sales price and two or more bids are for the
same price, the qualified buyer shall be selected by lottery from among the
highest qualified bidders.
      (8)   Nonqualified transferee. In the event that title to the unit vests
by descent in individuals and/or entities who are not qualified buyers as that
term is defined herein (hereinafter “nonqualified transferee(s)”), the unit
shall immediately be listed for sale as provided in subsection (D)(2) of this
section (including the payment of the specified fee to the town), and the
highest bid by a qualified buyer, for not less than 95% of the maximum sales
price or the appraised market value, whichever is less, shall be accepted; if
all bids are below 95% of the maximum sales price or the appraised market
value, the unit shall continue to be listed for sale until a bid in accordance
with this section is made, which bid must be accepted. The cost of the
appraisal shall be paid by the nonqualified transferee(s).
         (a)   Nonqualified transferee(s) shall join in any sale, conveyance or
transfer of the unit to a qualified buyer and shall execute any and all
documents necessary to do so; and
         (b)   Nonqualified transferee(s) agree not to:
            1.   Occupy the said unit;
            2.   Rent all or any part of the unit;
            3.   Engage in any other business activity on or in the unit;
            4.   Sell or otherwise transfer the unit except in accordance with
this section and the affordable housing guidelines; or
            5.   Sell or otherwise transfer the unit for use in a trade or
business.
         (c)   The town, or its respective successors, as applicable, shall
have the right and option to purchase the unit, exercisable within a period of
15 calendar days after receipt of any sales offer submitted to the town by a
nonqualified transferee(s), and in the event of exercising their right and
option, shall purchase the unit from the nonqualified transferee(s) for a price
of 95% of the maximum sales price, or the appraised market value, whichever is
less. The offer to purchase shall be made by the nonqualified transferee(s)
within 15 days of acquisition of the unit.
   (E)   Enforcement.
      (1)   In the event that the town has reasonable cause to believe the
owner is violating the provisions of this section, the town, by its authorized
representative, may inspect the unit between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, after providing the owner with no less than 24
hours’ written notice.
      (2)   (a)   The town, in the event a violation of this chapter is
discovered, shall send a notice of violation to the owner detailing the nature
of the violation and allowing the owner 15 days to cure. Said notice shall
state that the owner may request a hearing before the Vail Town Council within
15 days to determine the merits of the allegations. If no hearing is requested
and the violation is not cured within the 15-day period, the owner shall be
considered in violation of this section. If a hearing is held before the Vail
Town Council, the decision of the town based on the record of such hearing
shall be final for the purpose of determining if a violation has occurred.
         (b)   If the town determines that there has been a violation of the
occupancy standards, the owner of the restricted employee housing unit shall be
found to be in noncompliance. Penalties the town may assess against the owner
include eliminating resale gain (see subsection (D)(3) of this section), and/or
penalties found in §
1-4-1 of this code.
      (3)   There is hereby reserved to the parties hereto any and all remedies
provided by law for breach of this section or any of its terms. In the event
the parties resort to litigation with respect to any or all provisions of this
section, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover damages and costs,
including reasonable attorney fees.
      (4)   In the event the unit is sold and/or conveyed without compliance
herewith, such sale and/or conveyance shall be wholly null and void and shall
confer no title whatsoever upon the purported buyer. Each and every conveyance
of the unit, for all purposes, shall be deemed to include and incorporate by
this reference, the covenants herein contained, even without reference therein
to this section.
      (5)   (a)   In the event that the owner fails to cure any breach, the
town may resort to any and all available legal action, including, but not
limited to, specific performance of the requirements of this section or a
mandatory injunction requiring sale of the unit by owner.
         (b)   The costs of such sale shall be taxed against the proceeds of
the sale with the balance being paid to the owner.
      (6)   In the event of a breach of any of the terms or conditions
contained herein by the owner, his or her heirs, successors or assigns, the
town’s initial listed purchase price of the unit as set forth in this section
shall, upon the date of such breach as determined by the town, automatically
cease to increase as set forth in this section, and shall remain fixed until
the date of cure of said breach.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(1983) § 1; Ord. 5(2000) § 1; Ord. 31(2001) § 13;
Ord. 29(2005) § 61)
§ 13-7-7 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION OF LODGE OR ACCOMMODATION UNITS; NO NEW
CONVERSIONS ALLOWED; EXCEPTION.
   There shall not be permitted any conversion of a lodge or accommodation unit
within the town to a condominium, except as provided for the provision of
employee housing units. Employee housing units created pursuant to this chapter
are subject to the definitions, requirements and provisions of Title 12,
Chapters 13 and 16 of this code, as amended.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 21(1987) §§ 1 - 3; Ord. 1(1995) § 4; Ord. 15(1995) § 1;
Ord. 5(2000) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 62)
§ 13-7-8 RESTRICTIONS ON UNITS CONVERTED PRIOR TO FEBRUARY 7, 1995.
   (A)   Compliance. Any accommodation unit within the town which has been
converted to a condominium or has received approval for a conversion prior to
the effective date of February 7, 1995, shall comply with the requirements of
this section. The requirements contained in this section shall not apply to
structures or buildings which contain two units or less.
   (B)   Use by owner/renter. The requirements and restrictions herein
contained shall be included in the condominium declaration for the project, and
filed of record with the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder. The condominium units
created shall remain in the short term rental market to be used as temporary
accommodations available to the general public.
      (1)   An owner’s personal use of his or her unit shall be restricted to
28 days during the seasonal periods of December 24 through January 1 and
February 1 through March 20. This seasonal period is hereinafter referred to as
“high season”. OWNER’S PERSONAL USE shall be defined as owner occupancy of a
unit or nonpaying guest of the owner or taking the unit off the rental market
during the seasonal periods referred to herein for any reason other than
necessary repairs which cannot be postponed or which make the unit unrentable.
Occupancy of a unit by a lodge manager or staff employed by the lodge, however,
shall not be restricted by this section.
      (2)   A violation of the owner’s use restriction by a unit owner shall
subject the owner to a daily assessment rate by the condominium association of
three times a rate considered to be a reasonable daily rental rate for the unit
at the time of the violation, which assessment when paid shall be common
elements of the condominiums. All sums assessed against the owner for violation
of the owner’s personal use restriction and unpaid shall constitute a lien for
the benefit of the condominium association on that owner’s unit, which lien
shall be evidenced by written notice placed of record in the office of the
Clerk and Recorder of Eagle County, and which may be collected by foreclosure
on an owner’s condominium unit by the association in like manner as a mortgage
or deed of trust on real property. The condominium association’s failure to
enforce the owner’s personal use restriction shall give the town the right to
enforce the restriction by the assessment and the lien provided for hereunder.
If the town enforces the restriction, the town shall receive the funds
collected as a result of such enforcement. In the event litigation results from
the enforcement of the restriction, and the town prevails in such litigation,
the court shall award the town its court costs together with reasonable
attorney fees incurred.
      (3)   The town shall have the right to require from the condominium
association an annual report of owner’s personal use during the high seasons
for all converted condominium units.
      (4)   The converted lodge units shall not be used as permanent
residences. For the purposes of this section, a person shall be presumed to be
a permanent resident if such person has resided in the unit for six consecutive
months notwithstanding from time to time during such six-month period the
person may briefly dwell in other places.
   (C)   Converted lodge retains customary facilities. Any lodge located within
the town which has converted accommodation units to condominiums shall continue
to provide customary lodge facilities and services including a customary
marketing program.
   (D)   Unsold condominiums rented. The converted condominium units shall
remain available to the general tourist market. If unsold 30 days after
recording of the condominium map, the unsold converted condominiums shall be
required to be furnished and made available to the general tourist market
within 90 days after the date of recording of the condominium map. This
requirement may be met by inclusion of the units of the condominium project at
comparable rates in any local reservation system for the rental of lodge or
condominium units in the town.
   (E)   Common areas remain. The common areas of any lodge with converted
units shall remain common areas and be maintained in a manner consistent with
its previous character. Any changes, alterations or renovations made to common
areas shall not diminish the size or quality of the common areas.
   (F)   Employee housing. Any accommodation units that were utilized to
provide housing for employees at any time during the three years previous to
the date of the application shall remain as employee units for such duration as
may be required by the Planning and Environmental Commission or the Town
Council.
   (G)   Applicability. All conditions set forth within this section shall be
made binding on the applicant, the applicant’s successors, heirs, personal
representatives and assigns and shall govern the property which is the subject
of the application for the life of the survivor of the present Town Council
plus 21 years.
      (1)   Conversion of accommodation units located within a lodge pursuant
to this section, shall be modified only by the written agreement of the Town
Council and the owner or owners of the units which have been converted into
condominiums.
      (2)   The documents creating and governing any accommodation unit which
has been converted into a condominium shall be modified by the owners of such
units only with the prior written approval of the Town Council.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 21(1987) §§ 1 - 3; Ord. 1(1995) § 4; Ord. 15(1995) § 1;
Ord. 5(2000) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 62; Ord. 16(2013) § 1)
§ 13-7-9 ACTION ON PRELIMINARY MAP.
   (A)   Criteria considered. At the hearing on the preliminary map, the
Planning and Environmental Commission shall consider whether the proposed
conversion is consistent with the following housing goals of the town:
      (1)   To encourage continuation of social and economic diversity in the
town through a variety of housing types;
      (2)   To expand the supply of decent housing for low and moderate income
families; and
      (3)   To achieve greater economic balance for the town by increasing the
number of jobs and the supply of housing for people who will hold them.
   (B)   Determine percentages for sale or rent. The Commission may require
that a reasonable percentage of the converted units be reserved for sale or
rental to persons of moderate income.
   (C)   Findings supporting denial. The Planning and Environmental Commission
may deny the tentative or preliminary map upon finding that:
      (1)   Based on the information required by §
13-7-6 of this chapter, and on the vacancy rate for rental housing, tenants
will have substantial difficulty in obtaining comparably priced rental housing.
A rental vacancy rate below 5% based on the most recent town survey constitutes
a housing emergency situation; and
      (2)   The ratio of multiple-family rental units would be reduced to less
than 25% of the total number of dwelling units in the Gore Valley, from Dowd
Junction east to the base of Vail Pass, with no replacement rental housing
being provided.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 5(2000) § 1)
§ 13-7-10 FINAL MAP; CERTIFICATION AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   Required information; certification. The final map to be filed by the
applicant shall contain the information required by §
13-3-6(B) of this title, relating to subdivisions as the same may be applicable
to the condominium project. In addition to that information, the applicant
shall obtain the following certification to be filed with the final map:
receipt of a condominium report from the Building Official of the town stating
that condominium structure and units are in conformance with the town Building
Codes, Fire Codes and other related codes adopted by the Town or the Vail Fire
Department.
   (B)   Final map approval. No final or partial map shall be approved until
the certification required in subsection (A) of this section is obtained.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 5(2000) § 1)
§ 13-7-11 IMPROVEMENT SECURITY.
   (A)   Acceptable form of security. The Planning and Environmental Commission
and the Town Council may require a security to be posted by the applicant which
shall consist of one or more arrangements which the Council shall accept to
secure the actual cost of construction of such public improvements as are
required by the ordinances of the town. The improvement security may include
any one or a combination of the types of security or collateral listed in this
subsection (A) and the applicant may substitute security in order to release
portions of the condominium project for sale. The types of collateral which may
be used as security are as follows:
      (1)   Restrictions on the conveyance, sale or transfer of any unit within
the condominium project as set forth on the final map;
      (2)   Performance of property bond;
      (3)   Private or public escrow agreement;
      (4)   Loan commitment;
      (5)   Assignments of receivables;
      (6)   Liens on property;
      (7)   Letters of credit; and
      (8)   Deposits of security funds; or other similar surety agreements.
   (B)   Amount determined. Security other than plat restrictions, required
under the improvement security, shall equal in value the cost of the
improvements to be completed but shall not be required on the portion of the
condominium project subject to plat restrictions. The Council shall not require
security with collateral arrangements in excess of the actual cost of
construction of the improvements. The amount of security may be incrementally
reduced as subdivision or condominium improvements are completed.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 5(2000) § 1)
§ 13-7-12 EXEMPTIONS.
   The terms of this chapter shall not apply to developments or structures of
two units.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 5(2000) § 1)
§ 13-7-13 APPLICABILITY.
   The terms of this chapter shall be applicable to projects that are commenced
or converted after the effective date hereof.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 5(2000) § 1)
§ 13-7-14 FILING AND RECORDING.
   The Department of Community Development will record the plat and any related
documents with the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder; however, no plat for
subdivided land shall be recorded unless prior to the time of recording, the
subdivider provides the town with a certification from the Eagle County
Treasurer’s office indicating that all ad valorem taxes applicable to such
subdivided land, for years prior to that year in which approval is granted,
have been paid. Fees for recording shall be paid by the applicant. The
Department of Community Development will retain one Mylar copy of the plat for
their records.
(Ord. 18(1993) § 6; Ord. 5(2000) § 1)
CHAPTER 8: DUPLEX SUBDIVISIONS
Section
13-8-1 Approval and submittal requirements
13-8-2 Criteria and necessary findings
13-8-3 Appeal of Administrator’s decision
13-8-4 Filing and recording
§ 13-8-1 APPROVAL AND SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Required approval.
      (1)   A resubdivision of an improved duplex lot and structure will
require town approval through the Administrator.
      (2)   No duplex subdivision shall be approved unless the lots are
improved with at least foundations for both units existing at the time of
submittal.
   (B)   Submittal requirements.
      (1)   Site map; statement.
         (a)   Two Mylar copies of the duplex subdivision plat shall be
submitted to the Department of Community Development. The plat must contain the
following statement:
For zoning purposes, the two lots created by this subdivision are to be treated
as one entity with no more than one two-family residence allowed on the
combined area of the two lots.
         (b)   The statement must be modified as to the number of parcels
proposed.
      (2)   Plat submittal requirements. The duplex subdivision plat shall
contain the following:
         (a)   The final plat shall be drawn in India ink, or other substantial
solution, on a reproducible medium (preferably Mylar) with dimensions of 24
inches by 36 inches and shall be at a scale of 100 feet to one inch or larger
with margins of one and one-half inches to two inches on the left and one-half
inch on all other sides;
         (b)   Accurate dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot for
all lines, angles and curves used to describe boundaries, streets, setbacks,
alleys, easements, structures, areas to be reserved or dedicated for public or
common uses and other important features. All curves shall be circular arcs and
shall be defined by the radius, central angle, arc chord distances and
bearings. All dimensions, both linear and angular, are to be determined by an
accurate control survey in the field which must balance and close within a
limit of one in 10,000;
         (c)   North arrow and graphic scale;
         (d)   A systematic identification of all existing and proposed
buildings, units, lots, blocks and names for all streets;
         (e)   An identification of the streets, alleys, parks and other public
areas or facilities as shown on the plat, and a dedication thereof to the
public use. An identification of the easements as shown on the plat and a grant
thereof to the public use. Areas reserved for future public acquisition shall
also be shown on the plat;
         (f)   A written survey description of the area including the total
acreage to the nearest appropriate significant figure. The acreage of each lot
or parcel shall be shown in this manner as well;
         (g)   A description of all survey monuments, both found and set, which
mark the boundaries of the subdivision, and a description of all monuments used
in conducting the survey. Monument perimeter per Colorado statutes. Two
perimeter monuments shall be established as major control monuments, the
materials which shall be determined by the Town Engineer;
         (h)   A statement by the land surveyor explaining how bearing base was
determined;
         (i)   The proper plat title format for filing a plat in the town, as
outlined in §
13-11-1 of this title.
         (j)   A certificate by the registered land surveyor as outlined in
Chapter 11 of this title as to the accuracy of the survey and plat, and that
the survey was performed by him or her in accordance with C.R.S. Title 38,
Article 51;
         (k)   A certificate by an attorney admitted to practice in the state,
or corporate title insurer, that the owner(s) of record dedicating to the
public the public rights-of-way, areas or facilities as shown thereon are the
owners thereof in fee simple, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances
except as noted. (See example in Chapter 11 of this title.)
         (l)   The proper form for filing of the plat with the Eagle County
Clerk and Recorder as per example in Chapter 11 of this title;
         (m)   Certificate of dedication and ownership as per example in
Chapter 11 of this title. Should the certificate of dedication and ownership
provide for a dedication of land or improvement to the public, all
beneficiaries of deeds of trust and mortgage holders on said real property will
be required to sign the certificate of dedication and ownership in addition to
the fee simple owner thereof;
         (n)   A certificate by the Treasurer of Eagle County as outlined in §
13-11-10 of this title that will certify that the entire amount of taxes due
and payable upon all parcels of real estate described on the plat are paid in
full; and
         (o)   A copy of the declarations and/or covenants attached to the
subdivision to assure the maintenance of any common areas which are being
created.
   (C)   Procedure. Upon receiving two copies of a complete submittal along
with payment of the appropriate fee, the Administrator shall route one copy of
the site map to the Town Engineer for his or her review. The Administrator
shall then conduct his or her review concurrently. The Town Engineer shall
review the submittal and return comments and notifications to the Administrator
who shall transmit the approval, disapproval or approval with modifications of
the plat within 14 days to the applicant. The Administrator shall sign the plat
if approved or require modifications on the plat for approval or deny approval
due to inconsistencies with the originally approved plan or failure to make
other required modifications on the plat.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 63; Ord. 2(2007) § 6)
§ 13-8-2 CRITERIA AND NECESSARY FINDINGS.
   (A)   Criteria. The following criteria shall be used by the Administrator in
evaluating the proposed subdivision. It shall be the burden of the applicant to
demonstrate that submittal material and the proposed subdivision comply with
each of the following standards, or demonstrate that one or more of them is not
applicable, or that a practical solution consistent with the public interest
has been achieved:
      (1)   Compliance with all requirements of Title 12, “Zoning Regulations”,
of this code;
      (2)   Conformity to Design Review Board approved plans; and
      (3)   Accurateness and integrity of the survey data found on the plat.
   (B)   Necessary findings. The Administrator shall find that the duplex
subdivision complies with the criteria in subsection (A) of this section and
that the plat conforms with the requirements of §
13-8-1(B)(2) of this chapter.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 64)
§ 13-8-3 APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATOR’S DECISION.
   The Administrator’s decision may be appealed to the Planning and
Environmental Commission and such appeal shall follow procedures set forth in §
12-3-3 of this code.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-8-4 FILING AND RECORDING.
   The Department of Community Development will record the plat and any related
documents with the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder; however, no plat for
subdivided land shall be recorded unless prior to the time of recording, the
subdivider provides the town with a certification from the Eagle County
Treasurer’s office indicating that all ad valorem taxes applicable to such
subdivided land, for years prior to that year in which approval is granted,
have been paid. Fees for recording shall be paid by the applicant. The
Department of Community Development will retain one Mylar copy of the plat for
their records.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 18(1993) § 4)
CHAPTER 9: SINGLE-FAMILY SUBDIVISIONS
Section
13-9-1 Approval and submittal requirements
13-9-2 Completion and maintenance of improvements
13-9-3 Criteria and necessary findings
13-9-4 Appeal of Administrator’s decision
13-9-5 Filing and recording
§ 13-9-1 APPROVAL AND SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Required approval. A single-family subdivision shall only be permitted
on property that is recognized by the town as a legally subdivided lot. No
single-family subdivision shall be approved unless the lots to be contained
within the subdivision have foundations constructed thereon at the time of the
submittal.
   (B)   Submittal requirements.
      (1)   Site map; statement.
         (a)   Two Mylar copies of the subdivision plat shall be submitted to
the Department of Community Development. The plat must contain the following
statement:
For zoning purposes, the lots created by this subdivision are to be treated as
one lot with no more than two dwelling units allowed on the combined area of
the two lots.
         (b)   The statement shall be modified to indicate the number of units
and parcels proposed.
      (2)   Plat submittal requirements. The subdivision plat shall contain the
following:
         (a)   The final plat shall be drawn in India ink, or other substantial
solution, on a reproducible medium (preferably Mylar) with dimensions of 24
inches by 36 inches and shall be at a scale of 100 feet to one inch or larger
with margins of one and one-half inches to two inches on the left and one-half
inch on all other sides;
         (b)   Accurate dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot for
all lines, angles and curves used to describe boundaries, streets, setbacks,
alleys, easements, structures, areas to be reserved or dedicated for public or
common uses and other important features. All curves shall be circular arcs and
shall be defined by the radius, central angle, arc chord distances and
bearings. All dimensions, both linear and angular, are to be determined by an
accurate control survey in the field which must balance and close within a
limit of one in 10,000;
         (c)   North arrow and graphic scale;
         (d)   A systematic identification of all existing and proposed
buildings, units, lots, blocks and names for all streets;
         (e)   An identification of the streets, alleys, parks and other public
areas or facilities as shown on the plat, and a dedication thereof to the
public use. An identification of the easements as shown on the plat and a grant
thereof to the public use. Areas reserved for future public acquisition shall
also be shown on the plat;
         (f)   A written survey description of the area including the total
acreage to the nearest appropriate significant figure. The acreage of each lot
or parcel shall be shown in this manner as well;
         (g)   A description of all survey monuments, both found and set, which
mark the boundaries of the subdivision, and a description of all monuments used
in conducting the survey. Monument perimeter per Colorado statutes. Two
perimeter monuments shall be established as major control monuments, the
materials which shall be determined by the Town Engineer;
         (h)   A statement by the land surveyor explaining how bearing base was
determined;
         (i)   The proper plat title format for filing a plat in the town, as
outlined in §
13-11-1 of this title;
         (j)   A certificate by the registered land surveyor as outlined in
Chapter 11 of this title as to the accuracy of the survey and plat, and that
the survey was performed by him or her in accordance with C.R.S. Title 38,
Article 51;
         (k)   A certificate by an attorney admitted to practice in the state,
or corporate title insurer, that the owner(s) of record dedicating to the
public the public rights-of-way, areas or facilities as shown thereon are the
owners thereof in fee simple, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances
except as noted. (See example in Chapter 11 of this title.)
         (l)   The proper form for filing of the plat with the Eagle County
Clerk and Recorder as per example in Chapter 11 of this title;
         (m)   Certificate of dedication and ownership as per example in
Chapter 11 of this title should the certificate of dedication and ownership
provide for a dedication of land or improvement to the public, all
beneficiaries of deeds of trust and mortgage holders on said real property will
be required to sign the certificate of dedication and ownership in addition to
the fee simple owner thereof;
         (n)   A certificate by the Treasurer of Eagle County as outlined in §
13-11-10 of this title that will certify that the entire amount of taxes due
and payable upon all parcels of real estate described on the plat are paid in
full; and
         (o)   A copy of declarations and/or covenants relating to the
subdivision which shall assure the maintenance of any common areas which may be
created. The covenants shall run with the land and shall be in a form suitable
for recordation with the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder.
   (C)   Procedure. Upon receiving two copies of a complete submittal along
with payment of the appropriate fee, the Administrator shall route one copy of
the site map to the Town Engineer for his or her review. The Administrator
shall then conduct his or her review concurrently. The Town Engineer shall
review the submittal and return comments and notifications to the Administrator
who shall transmit the approval, disapproval or approval with modifications of
the plat within 14 days to the applicant. The Administrator shall sign the plat
if approved or require modifications on the plat for approval or deny approval
due to inconsistencies with the originally approved plan or failure to make
other required modifications on the plat.
(Ord. 25(1989) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 65; Ord. 2(2007) § 7)
§ 13-9-2 COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   The requirement for the guarantee for completion and maintenance of
improvements shall comply with §
13-3-14 of this title.
(Ord. 25(1989) § 2)
§ 13-9-3 CRITERIA AND NECESSARY FINDINGS.
   (A)   Criteria. The following criteria shall be used by the Administrator in
evaluating the proposed subdivision. It shall be the burden of the applicant to
demonstrate that submittal material and the proposed subdivision comply with
each of the following standards, or demonstrate that one or more of them is not
applicable, or that a practical solution consistent with the public interest
has been achieved:
      (1)   Compliance with all requirements of Title 12, “Zoning Regulations”,
of this code;
      (2)   Conformity to approved plans; and
      (3)   Accurateness and integrity of the survey data found on the plat.
   (B)   Necessary findings. The Administrator shall find that the single-
family subdivision complies with the criteria in subsection (A) of this section
and that the plat conforms with the requirements of §
13-9-1(B)(2) of this chapter.
(Ord. 25(1989) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 66)
§ 13-9-4 APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATOR’S DECISION.
   The Administrator’s decision may be appealed to the Planning and
Environmental Commission in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
12-3-3 of this code.
(Ord. 25(1989) § 2)
§ 13-9-5 FILING AND RECORDING.
   The Department of Community Development will record the plat and any related
covenants with the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder; however, no plat for
subdivided land shall be recorded unless prior to the time of recording, the
subdivider provides the town with a certification from the Eagle County
Treasurer’s office indicating that all ad valorem taxes applicable to such
subdivided land, for years prior to that year in which approval is granted,
have been paid. Fees for recording shall be paid by the applicant. The
Department of Community Development will retain one Mylar copy of the plat for
their records.
(Ord. 25(1989) § 2; Ord. 18(1993) § 5)
CHAPTER 10: CONSTRUCTION DESIGN STANDARDS, METHODS AND DETAILS
Section
13-10-1 General conditions
13-10-1-1 Scope
13-10-1-2 Terms
13-10-1-3 Definitions
13-10-1-4 Abbreviations
13-10-2 Plans and specifications
13-10-3 Plan revisions
13-10-4 As built plans
13-10-5 Construction regulations
13-10-5-1 General construction criteria
13-10-5-2 Permits
13-10-5-3 Excavations
13-10-5-4 Backfilling and restoration
13-10-5-5 Underground warning tape
13-10-6 Protection of existing improvements
13-10-7 Inspection and testing
13-10-8 Streets
13-10-8-1 General
13-10-8-2 Classification
13-10-9 Design Criteria
13-10-10 Construction materials
13-10-11 Construction methods
13-10-12 Bike paths
§ 13-10-1 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
   Provisions pertaining to scope, terms, definitions, plan specifications and
plan revisions shall be as set forth in the following sections.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-1-1 SCOPE.
   The stipulations which follow are general in scope and may refer to
conditions which will not be encountered in performance of the work, and which
are not applicable thereto.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-1-2 TERMS.
   Unless otherwise stated, the words “directed, required, permitted, ordered,
instructed, designated, considered, necessary, prescribed, approved,
acceptable, satisfactory” or words of like import, refer to actions,
expressions, and prerogatives of the Town Engineer.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-1-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING CONNECTION SEWER. A sewer within a public street or right-of-way,
proposed to connect any parcel, lot or part of a lot with a main line sewer.
   BUILDING SEWER. A sewer, wholly within private property, proposed to connect
any building to a building connection sewer.
   CONTRACTOR. The individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture or other
legal entity performing the work. In the case of work being performed under
permit issued by the town, the permittee shall be construed to be the
contractor.
   DAYS. Consecutive calendar days, unless otherwise specified.
   ENGINEER. The Town Engineer or his or her authorized representative.
   INSPECTOR. An authorized representative of the Public Works Director,
assigned to make any or all necessary inspections of materials furnished and
work performed by the contractor.
   PLANS. The drawings, profiles, cross sections, working drawings, and
supplemental drawings, or reproductions thereof, approved by the Town Engineer
or Building Official, which show the location, character, dimensions or details
of the work.
   PRIVATE CONTRACT. Work subject to town inspection, control, and approval,
involving private funds, not administered by the town.
   REFERENCE SPECIFICATIONS. Those bulletins, standards, rules, methods of
analysis or tests, codes and specifications of other agencies, engineering
societies or industrial associations referred to in the contract documents.
These refer to the latest edition, including amendments in effect and published
at the time of advertising the project or issuing the permit, unless
specifically referred to by edition, volume or date.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. All or any portion of the conduit, cable or duct,
including meter, between a utility distribution line and an individual
consumer.
   SEWER. Any conduit intended for the reception and transmission of sewage and
fluid industrial waste.
   SPECIAL PROVISIONS. Any written provisions which supplement or modify these
specifications.
   SPECIFICATIONS. Standard specifications, reference specifications, special
provisions and specifications in supplemental agreements between the contractor
and the town.
   STANDARD PLANS. Details of standard structures, devices or instructions
referred to on the plans or in specifications by title or number.
   STREETS. “Arterial”, “collector”, “local” and “minor streets” shall mean
those defined in §
13-2-2 of this title.
   STORM SEWER. Any conduit and appurtenances intended for the reception and
transfer of storm water.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The executive representative for the contractor present on
the work at all times, authorized to receive and fulfill instructions from the
engineer and capable of superintending the work efficiently.
   SUPERVISION. Where used to indicate supervision by the engineer, shall mean
the performance of obligations, and the exercise of rights, specifically
imposed upon and granted to the town in becoming a party to the contract.
Except as specifically stated herein, supervision by the town shall not mean
active and direct superintendence of details of the work.
   SURETY. Any individual, firm or corporation, bound with and for the
contractor for the acceptable performance, execution and completion of the
work, and for the satisfaction of all obligations incurred.
   TOWN. The Town of Vail, County of Eagle, State of Colorado.
   UTILITY. Tracks, overhead or underground wires, pipe lines, conduits,
ditches, ducts or structures, sewers or storm drains owned, operated or
maintained in or across a public right-of-way or private easement.
   WORK. That which is proposed to be constructed or done under the contract or
permit, including the furnishing of all labor materials, supervision, tools and
equipment.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-1-4 ABBREVIATIONS.
AASHO     American Association of State Highway Officials
AASHTO    American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials
ABC       Aggregate base course
AC        Asphalt concrete
ACI       American Concrete Institute
AIA       American Institute of Architects
AIEE      American Institute of Electrical Engineers
AISC      American Institute of Steel Construction
ANSI      American National Standards Institute
APA       American Plywood Association
API       American Petroleum Institute
APWA      American Public Works Association
AREA      American Railway Engineering Association
ASCF      American Society of Civil Engineers
ASME      American Society of Mechanical Engineers
ASTM      American Society for Testing and Materials
AWG       American wire gauge (nonferrous wire)
AWPA      American Wood Preservers Association
AWSC      American Welding Society Code
AWWA      American Water Works Association
BC        Beginning of curve
BCR       Beginning of curve return
BM        Bench mark
BVC       Beginning of vertical curve
CC or C/C Center to center
CE        Town Engineer
CB        Catch basin
cfs       Cubic feet per second
CIP       Cast iron pipe
CL or £  Centerline
CMP       Corrugated metal pipe
CO        Cleanout
CSP       Corrugated steel pipe
CMP       Corrugated metal pipe
CN        Curve number (runoff)
DIP       Ductile iron pipe
EC        End of curve
ECR       End of curve return
EVC       End of vertical curve
FH        Fire hydrant
FL        Flow line
fps       Feet per second
FS        Finished surface
ft        Foot or feet
gpm       Gallons per minute
IEEE      Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers
Inv       Invert
MH        manhole
NBS       National Bureau of Standards
NCPI      National Clay Pipe Institute
NEC       National Electrical Code
NEMA      National Electrical Manufacturer’s Association
NFPA      National Fire Protection Association
NSF       National Safety Foundation
OD        Outside diameter
PC        Point of curve
PCC       Point of compound curve or portland cement concrete
PI        Point of intersection
PL        Property line
PRC       Point of reverse curve
psi       Pounds per square inch
psf       Pounds per square foot
PT        Point of tangency
PVC       Poly-vinyl chloride
R         Radius or rate of grade (percent)
RCP       Reinforced concrete pipe
rpm       Revolutions per minute
R/W       Right-of-way
S         Slope (foot per foot)
Spec      Specifications
Sta       Station
T         Tangent distance
Tel       Telephone
UL        Underwriter’s Laboratory
USASI     United States of America Standards Institute
USC&GS    United States Coast and Geodetic Survey
USGS      United States Geological Survey
V         Velocity of flow or depth of inlet
VC        Vertical curve
 
(1997 Code; Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-2 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   Plans and specifications are to be prepared based on appropriate traffic
studies, planning criteria, applicable standards and requirements. All design
work is to be prepared and signed by a professional engineer registered in the
state. Plans are to be completed in sufficient detail to facilitate review.
Plans shall include:
   (A)   Profiles.
      (1)   Profiles for all roads, sewers and water lines, showing the grades,
length of vertical curves, stationing and elevations of BVCs, EVCs and PI, VCs,
existing grade or ground lines by dashed line, culverts, structures, and other
controls. The vertical scale is to be distorted ten to one (10:1), except in
those situations where other distortions can better convey the relationship
peculiar to the project between vertical and horizontal elements of the design;
and
      (2)   A description of at least one usable bench mark for each
subdivision shall be required.
   (B)   Layout.
      (1)   A road layout shall show length of tangents and curves, widths of
right-of-way, slope lines to prove that the right-of-way is of sufficient
width, stationing of ECs and BCs curve radii, delta angles, bearings,
distances, centerline stationing at 100-foot intervals, dimensions of all road
elements, curbs, gutters,
utilities, easements and other structures. Include the location and size of
culverts, designation of the type and gauge or strength classification and the
estimated flow, with all assumptions made in estimating the flow;
      (2)   Also show north arrow, scale, street names, drainage patterns, and
the typical road cross section;
      (3)   Provide construction plans for all structures, bridges, box
culverts and the like; and
      (4)   A letter of intent stating the scope and time element of each stage
of construction will be provided with a statement indicating party or parties
responsible for the construction.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-3 PLAN REVISIONS.
   Should circumstances warrant changes to the approved plans or
specifications, the proposed revision must be submitted and written approval
must be obtained from the Town Engineer. No work shall proceed on that portion
of the project being revised until said revisions are submitted, approved and
distributed. Minor deviations from the plans or specifications may be by
written permission from the Town Engineer or his or her representative on the
job. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to have his or her
engineer provide the Town Engineer with a set of as built plans at the
completion of the project verifying all elevations, utility locations and any
other change that has taken place.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-4 AS BUILT PLANS.
   Before final acceptance by the town, complete as built plans shall be
submitted by the developer, and shall be prepared by a professional engineer
registered in the state.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-5 CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS.
   Construction regulations shall be as set forth in the following sections.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-5-1 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION CRITERIA.
   Construction within the town shall be done in accordance with sound
construction practices and in conformity with the specifications as listed in
these standards, in Title 8, Chapter 1 of this code, the street cut ordinance
and other applicable codes.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-5-2 PERMITS.
   (A)   Public ways.
      (1)   (a)   A public way permit must be obtained from the Town Public
Works Department prior to any construction or excavation within any public or
private right-of-way, easement or bike path, except when emergency
circumstances demand the work be done immediately and the permit cannot
reasonably and practically be obtained beforehand.
         (b)   In such a case the person digging must apply for a permit on the
first regular business day, on which the town offices are open for business.
      (2)   Public way permits shall be required for, but not limited to,
sidewalk construction, reconstruction, sewer and water line construction and
repair, curb cuts, underground utility line construction or repair, curb,
gutter, street or alley construction or reconstruction, and service line work
within a right- of-way, easement or bike path.
   (B)   New subdivisions. Before any excavation work can be started on streets
or utilities in any new or proposed subdivision, a public way permit shall be
obtained.
   (C)   Permit conformance. Permittees shall conform to all requirements of
the design standards and street cut ordinance, as well as any specifications
that may be required for special cases.
   (D)   Streets. Street resurfacing on street cuts shall be done in accordance
to methods stated on the permit as issued and as specified in Title 8, Chapter
1 of this code.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-5-3 EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   Safety conditions. The Town Engineer may attach such conditions or
stipulations as may be reasonably necessary to facilitate the work, prevent
damage to public or private property, or to prevent the work from being
conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner likely to
create a dangerous or unsafe condition.
   (B)   Trench cuts. Open trench cuts shall not exceed 12 feet beyond backfill
and cleanup operations within an established residential area and/or paved
street, except by special permission of the Town Engineer.
   (C)   Existing utilities. All existing utility lines, pipes and structures
shall be located sufficiently ahead of the work to avoid damage to these
facilities and permit their relocation, if necessary.
   (D)   Monuments. Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set
for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property
subdivision, or a precise survey reference point or a permanent survey bench
mark within the town, shall not be removed or disturbed unless permission to do
so is first obtained in writing from the Town Engineer. Permission shall be
granted only upon condition that the permittee shall pay all expenses incident
to the proper replacement of the monument. The town reserves the right to
reestablish lost monuments and such costs incurred shall be paid by the
permittee or deducted from his or her bond.
   (E)   Drainage. When work performed by the permittee interferes with the
existing drainage system of any street, provision shall be made by the
permittee to provide proper drainage to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer,
including the improvement, enlargement or replacement of downstream facilities
impacted by the proposed project.
   (F)   Street cleaning. When any earth, gravel or other excavated material is
caused to roll, flow or wash upon any street, the permittee shall cause the
debris to be removed from the street by the end of the workday. In the event
the earth, gravel or other excavated material so deposited is not removed, the
engineer shall cause such removal and the cost incurred shall be paid by the
permittee or deducted from his or her bond.
   (G)   Traffic warning.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of every person cutting or making an
excavation in or upon any public place, to place and maintain barriers and
warning devices necessary for safety of the general public. The contractor
shall be responsible for the furnishing of barriers and warning devices through
his or her own means.
      (2)   Barriers, warning signs, lights and the like shall conform to the
requirements of the Town Engineer. Warning lights, electrical markers or
flashers shall be used to indicate a hazard to traffic from one hour before
sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day.
      (3)   The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during
the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as near normal as
possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to
the occupants of the adjoining property and to the general public.
      (4)   When traffic conditions permit, the Town Engineer may, by written
approval, permit the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time
prescribed by the Town Engineer. The written approval of the Town Engineer may
require that the permittee give notification to various public agencies and to
the general public. In such cases, such written approval shall not be valid
until such notice is given.
      (5)   Warning signs shall be placed far enough in advance of the
construction operation to alert traffic within a public street, and cones or
other approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic, in accordance with
the instructions of the Town Engineer.
   (H)   Access to existing structures. The excavation work shall be performed
and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire
stations, fire escapes, water gates, underground vaults, valve housing
structures and all other vital equipment as designated by the Town Engineer.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 2(2007) § 8)
§ 13-10-5-4 BACKFILLING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   General. All pavement cuts, openings and excavations shall be properly
made, backfilled, and a temporary surface installed by the permittee according
to town regulations, design standards and construction specifications.
   (B)   Backfilling. Backfilling shall be done in accordance with the
specifications as listed in these design standards. The permittee shall
backfill all cuts as soon as possible to allow normal traffic usage. See also §
13-10-11(B) of this chapter and the street cut ordinance.
   (C)   Street resurfacing. If the area to be resurfaced exceeds 50% of the
total pavement surfacing in any block, the Town Engineer may require the
permittee to resurface the block. Fifty percent or greater damage shall be
deemed to require 100% restoration. This damage may be caused where trenches
are laid in close proximity to one another, or where the equipment or method
used causes damage. RESTORATION is defined as the complete removal and
replacement of surface pavement and preparation of base material.
   (D)   Inspections. The Town Engineer shall make such inspections as he or
she may deem necessary. For street improvements, the permittee shall work
closely with the Engineer and give at least one working day’s notice of
inspections and not less than one day’s notice whenever possible. For
underground installation, the town recognizes that other agencies require
inspections and the town’s concern is that the surface is properly restored.
Inspections may be requested by calling the Public Works Department during
normal working hours.
   (E)   Liability. In no case shall any opening made by a permittee be
considered in the charge or care of the town or any of its officers or
employees, and no officer or employee is authorized in any way to take or
assume any jurisdiction over any such opening, except in the exercise of the
police power, or when it is necessary to protect life and property. If any
failure in the restored area occurs within a period of one year from the
acceptance date, the permittee shall be notified and necessary corrections made
and required expenses deducted from the bond.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; 1997 Code)
Cross-reference:
   Street cuts, see Title 8, Chapter 1 of this code
§ 13-10-5-5 UNDERGROUND WARNING TAPE.
   (A)   Requirements. Underground warning tape shall be required in all
utility trenches within town rights-of-way (ROWs) and easements. When replacing
or repairing existing lines, warning tape shall be added during backfill.
Service lines also require warning tape within the ROW.
   (B)   Location. The tape shall be placed approximately half way between the
top of the pipe and the surface. The town will inspect placement at this time.
   (C)   Type of warning tape. The underground warning tape shall be six inches
wide, four one-hundredths inch thick, and have the type of utility printed on
the tape. Each utility shall use a specific color as listed below:
 
Blue     Water lines
Green    Sewer lines
Yellow   Gas lines
Red      Power lines
Orange   Telephone lines
Hot pink Cable TV
 
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; 1997 Code)
§ 13-10-6 PROTECTION OF EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Utility locations. Existing utilities are to be located by the
respective utility company or acknowledgment that no utility is located in the
construction area. This process shall be accomplished as the permittee procures
a public way permit by signing of the permit by each utility listed on the
permit.
   (B)   Existing utilities.
      (1)   Reasonable care shall be exercised in showing the location of
existing utilities on the plans. The exact location of such utilities may not
be known in all cases. The contractor shall explore the area ahead of the
ditching operation by observation and/or electronic devices to locate such
utilities in advance of trenching operations, and shall conduct his or her work
so as to minimize damage to the existing structures.
      (2)   Existing utilities shall be properly supported as required by the
owner and protected from damage during the progress of the work. All pipe
lines, utilities or structures which are broken or damaged shall be
reconstructed of the same material, to the satisfaction of the owner. Where it
was reasonably possible for the contractor to have located the utilities, he or
she shall assume the responsibility for proper repair or replacement to them.
The contractor shall immediately report any damaged utilities.
      (3)   The contractor shall contact the owners of all irrigation ditches,
and make arrangements for necessary construction clearances and/or dry-up
periods.
      (4)   All irrigation ditches, culverts, catch basins, headgates, pipe,
valves, checks and the like, damaged or removed by the contractor, shall be
restored to their original condition or better, at the contractor’s expense.
   (C)   Protection of existing structures.
      (1)   Where trenches are located closely adjacent to buildings,
foundations and structures, the contractor shall take all necessary precaution
against damage to them. The contractor shall be liable for any damage caused by
the construction.
      (2)   Trees, fences, mailboxes, poles and all other property shall be
protected unless their removal is authorized by the Town Engineer, and property
damaged or removed shall be satisfactorily restored by the contractor at his or
her cost, in no more than 30 calendar days.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-7 INSPECTION AND TESTING.
   (A)   Inspections.
      (1)   It is the responsibility of the contractor or the developer to
contact the Town Building Official one day in advance of the required
inspections. In-progress inspections of all elements of work will eliminate the
need for extensive post-testing.
      (2)   Any work or material which does not conform to town standards will
be brought to the attention of the contractor or developer and, if immediate
corrections are not made, construction may be stopped.
      (3)   The general types of inspections required are as follows:
         (a)   Culverts, storm sewer lines and appurtenances. Trenching, grade
bedding, installation of pipe, backfill, and compaction. Inspection to be
requested when backfill is completed to one-half the depth of culvert, or storm
sewer line;
         (b)   Structures, including manholes. Finished excavation, grade,
forming, reinforcing steel, concrete pour, finish and test cylinders.
Inspections required:
            1.   Prior to placing steel; and
            2.   Prior to the concrete pour.
         (c)   Roadway. Subgrade, subbase, base course, prime, and paving to be
called for at each completed stage. Locations of required field tests will be
determined by the construction inspector;
         (d)   Final. A request for the final inspection and acceptance for
maintenance or release from bond must be made in writing to the Town Engineer
after all other inspections have been passed; and
         (e)   Water and sewer lines. All water and sewer lines shall be
inspected by the appropriate district. All designs shall be submitted to the
appropriate district and to the Town Engineer for review and approval.
   (B)   Testing. When required by the Town Engineer, a recognized testing firm
shall certify to the quality of materials or construction. All testing shall be
by recognized methods and shall be at the contractor’s, developer’s or owner’s
expense.
   (C)   Developer’s warranty. The developer or owner shall be fully
responsible for the maintenance and correction of any faulty construction,
including unsuitable street cuts, chuckholes and storm sewer line blockages for
a period of one year after the roads are accepted by the town.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-8 STREETS.
   Provisions providing for street classification, design criteria and
construction provisions shall be as set forth in the following sections.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-8-1 GENERAL.
   Road layout shall bear a logical relationship to existing or platted roads
in adjacent properties and thoroughfare plan.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-8-2 CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   Arterial. Arterial streets (frontage roads) are those which permit the
relatively rapid and unimpeded movement of large volumes of traffic from one
part of the community to another.
   (B)   Collector. Collector streets are those which collect traffic from
minor or local streets and carry it to arterial streets or to local traffic
generators. Collector streets include the principal entrance streets to a
residential development, those linking such adjacent developments, and those
streets providing circulation within such developments.
   (C)   Local. Local streets are those used primarily for direct access to
properties abutting the right-of-way. Local streets carry traffic having an
origin or destination within the development and do not carry through traffic.
   (D)   Minor. Minor streets (includes private) are those used primarily for
direct access to properties abutting the right-of-way. Minor streets carry
fewer vehicles than local streets. They do not carry through traffic.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1)
§ 13-10-9 DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Major points.
      (1)   Local and minor. Local and minor streets shall be designed in such
a manner that through traffic within the subdivision will be discouraged.
      (2)   Intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as
nearly as possible at right angles.
      (3)   Street names. Street names shall not duplicate an existing street
name, unless the said street is an extension of the existing street. Street
names shall be subject to the approval of the Town Council.
      (4)   Curves. The minimum curve radius shall be as designated in
subsection (A)(9) of this section.
      (5)   Alleys. Alleys shall be provided if required by the Planning and
Environmental Commission. The minimum width of the alley shall be 20 feet.
Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted. All alleys shall be paved.
      (6)   Easements. Easements shall be provided for all utilities,
drainageways, channels or streams which traverse across the subdivision.
      (7)   Block lengths. The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be
determined by the type of use, zoning requirements, needs for convenient
access, circulation and safety of street traffic, and limitations and
opportunities of topography.
      (8)   Culs-de-sac. Cul-de-sac streets, however, shall be designed as
minor or local with a right-of-way bulb of 50-foot radius and pavement radius
of 40 feet.
      (9)   Street width. Street width shall conform to the following:
 
Class      ROW Width Paved    Shoulder Design Max. Grade Min. Curve Future ADT
                     Width             Speed  %          Radius
Arterial   70        12 ft.   8        50     6          650        750 and
(Frontage)           per lane                                       over
Collector  50        24       4        40     7          250        300—750
Local      50        22       3        30     8          60         150—300
Minor      40        22       2        30     9          50         0—150
(Private)
 
   (B)   Horizontal alignment.
      (1)   The major considerations in horizontal alignment design are:
safety; grade profile; road type; design speed; sight distance; and topography.
All these factors must be balanced to produce an alignment that is safest, most
economical, and adequate for the type of road proposed.
      (2)   Horizontal alignment must provide at least the minimum stopping
sight distance for the design speed at all points. This includes visibility at
intersections, as well as around curves and roadside encroachments.
   (C)   Vertical alignment.
      (1)   Reference. The grade line is the reference line by which the
elevation of the pavement and other features of the road are established. It is
controlled mainly by topography, the factors of horizontal alignment, safety,
sight distance, design speed, drainage and construction costs. The
configuration of heavy duty vehicles must also be considered.
      (2)   Grade line. The grade line should be positioned with relation to
the cross section as follows.
         (a)   It should coincide with the road centerline on two lane and
multi-lane undivided roads.
         (b)   Separate grade lines may be required on divided multi-lane
roads.
   (D)   Vertical curve.
      (1)   Properly designed vertical curves should provide adequate stopping
and passing sight distance, headlight sight distance, driver comfort, good
drainage and pleasing appearance.
      (2)   Long, flat vertical curves should be avoided as they may develop
poor drainage at the level section and tend to create driver insecurity in
passing maneuvers.
      (3)   Lengths of vertical curves shall be determined by the site distance
requirements.
   (E)   Sight distance.
      (1)   All portions of the grade line must meet sight distance
requirements for the design speed.
      (2)   The minimum stopping sight distance is the distance required by the
driver of a vehicle, traveling at a given speed, to bring his or her vehicle to
a stop after an object on the road becomes visible. Stopping sight distance is
measured from the driver’s eyes, which are assumed to be three and three-
fourths feet above the pavement surface to an object six inches high on the
road. The required stopping sight distance for a given design speed shall be
designed by the engineer.
   (F)   Crown slopes.
 
Type Of Surface          Min. Crown Max. Slope
Portland cement concrete 1.5%       4.0%
Bituminous mix pavements 2.0%       4.0%
 
   (G)   Clearances. The following are minimum clearances to structures or
other roadside obstructions. Additional clearance must be provided for sight
distance and other requirements. Where streets or highways under the
jurisdiction of other agencies are involved the clearance, as required by said
agency, if more restrictive than town standards, shall apply.
      (1)   Horizontal clearance. The minimum horizontal clearance from the
edge of traveled way shall be ten feet to the right and four feet to the left
when facing in the direction of travel.
      (2)   Vertical clearance. The minimum vertical clearance to major
overhead structures shall be 15 feet above the traveled way and 14 feet above
the shoulders. For minor overhead structures, such as signs, cables and the
like, the minimum vertical clearance shall be 18 feet.
   (H)   Structural design.
      (1)   Design formula. The design of pavements is based upon the American
Association of State Highway Officials group index rating, which is obtained by
the use of a group index formula based upon the gradation, liquid limit and
plasticity index of the soil. The group index formula is as follows:
 
Group Index = 0.2a + 0.005 ac + 0.01bd
 
      Where:
      a = that portion of the gradation percentage passing the No. 200 sieve
greater than 35% and not exceeding 75%, expressed as a positive whole number (1
to 40);
      b = that portion of the gradation percentage passing the No. 200 sieve
greater than 15% and not exceeding 55%, expressed as a positive whole number (1
to 40);
      c = that portion of the numerical liquid limit greater than 40 and not
exceeding 60, expressed as a positive whole number (1 to 20); and
      d = that portion of the numerical plasticity index greater than ten and
not exceeding 30, expressed as a positive whole number (1 to 20).
      (2)   Pavement thickness. The group index shall be computed for each soil
sample taken and then applied to the proper design curve to obtain the minimum
total pavement thickness required to the nearest one-half inch. That total
thickness shall be used for pavements where the soil sample is representative.
(See Figure 3.1.*)
   (I)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks are not generally required but may be required by
the planning staff, Planning and Environmental Commission, or Town Engineer if
deemed appropriate. (See Figure 3.2.*)
   (J)   Curbs and gutters. Approved types of concrete curb and gutter are not
generally required but may be required by the planning staff, Planning and
Environmental Commission or Town Engineer if deemed appropriate. (See Figures
3.2 and 3.3*, and §
13-10-11(E) of this chapter.)
   (K)   Drainage.
      (1)   The primary objective of drainage design shall be the protection of
town streets and property while minimizing the possible flood damage to
surrounding properties and structures. It should be emphasized that good
drainage is one of the most important factors in road design. It preserves the
good appearance as well as the level of service of the street while at the same
time minimizing the cost of maintenance.
      (2)   Culverts under collector and arterial streets are to be designed to
accommodate a 50-year frequency storm runoff, utilizing the maximum available
head. The maximum available head shall be determined by the uppermost ponding
elevation, so chosen as not to cause flood damage to upstream properties.
      (3)   On-site facilities and culverts under minor streets shall be
designed to accommodate the 25-year frequency storm runoff.
      (4)   Inlets and other facilities draining the street surface shall be
designed to accommodate the ten-year frequency storm runoff.
      (5)   All drainage installations shall also be designed to permit free
unobstructed passage of debris and silt, or provide for their deflection and/or
collection at a point upstream in such a manner as not to create an expensive
maintenance problem.
      (6)   Storm runoff estimates: unless approved by the Town Engineer, the
Soil Conservation Service method shall be utilized for drainage calculations.
The appropriate design manual shall be Procedures for Determining Peak Flows in
Colorado.
         (a)   Precipitation and snowmelt rates to be used are itemized below:
 
Frequency (years) Precipitation (inches) Snow Melt (cfs/acre)
2                 1.0                    0.040
5                 1.4                    0.048
6                 1.6                    0.060
25                1.9                    0.067
50                2.2                    0.072
100               2.4                    0.080
 
         (b)   1.   Unless an extensive drainage report is prepared by a
registered professional engineer with supporting data on soil types, vegetation
and historic flows, the following design procedures shall be used:
 
Calculation Of Runoff Curve Numbers
Impervious surface    CN = 98
Lawn areas            CN = 60
Wood or forest land   CN = 70
 
            2.   A weighted CN shall be calculated for the immediate area
proposed for development. Open space areas will be lumped in separate tributary
basins and a CN of 70 assigned to them independent of the developed area.
   SAMPLE:
    Total drainage shed = 5.0 acres
    Immediate developed areas = 0.5 acres
    Open space area = 4.5 acres
    Impervious surface = 70% of developed area
   Apply CN = 70 to 4.5 acres and calculate runoff
   Weighted CN for developed area:
    Weighted CN =    .7 x 0.5 x 98+.3 x 0.5 x 60 = 86.6 = 87
                     .5
         (c)   Calculation of runoff depth.
            1.   Open space: From CN = 70 and 25-year precipitation of 1.9
inches; runoff depth = 0.20 inches.
            2.   Developed area: From CN = 87 and 25-year precipitation of 1.9
inches; runoff depth = 0.83 inches
         (d)   Calculation of flow (cubic feet/second).
            Open space: Use Figure SI-A, flat slope (16%)
            peak discharge (cfs/inch of runoff) = 8.3
            Q = 8.3 x 0.2 = 1.7 cfs
            Developed area: use Figure SI-A, flat slope (1%)
            peak discharge = 1.6
            Q:= 1.6 x.83 = 1.3 cfs
      For piped systems, tributary areas for each inlet should be calculated
and the flows calculated as above.
      (7)   Culverts. Culverts are to be located at each natural draw or
watercourse as conditions warrant to prevent excessive accumulation of flow in
street-side ditches or along the toe of slopes. Draws and watercourses are to
be cleared of debris for a distance of 100 feet upstream from all culvert
inlets.
         (a)   Inverts at the inlet should be slightly elevated above the
normal flow line in steep natural draws to avoid plugging by debris. Excessive
ponding shall be avoided.
         (b)   The culvert should slope downward in the direction of natural
flow and designed to be self-cleaning wherever possible. The outlet should be
designed so as not to discharge on unprotected fills or unstable material or at
adverse angles to streams or open channels. Headwalls, riprap or other means of
protection are required at inlets or outlets where erosion may occur.
         (c)   Minimum diameter for round pipe shall be 12 inches. The minimum
rise of arch pipes and box culverts shall be 12 inches.
         (d)   Cleanout access shall be provided at least every 200 feet for
pipes 24 inches in diameter or less, and at least every 400 feet for larger
pipes. Cleanout accesses shall also be required at each angle point and at each
change in grade.
      (8)   Subsurface drainage. Subgrades subject to poor drainage,
underground seepage or a high water table must be adequately drained for
roadbed stabilization. Drains must be installed to control or prevent the high
ground water level from coming to within four feet of the roadway pavement.
Surface drainage will be considered as an alternate.
      (9)   Inlet structures. Acceptable designs for inlet structures will be
permitted on approval by the Town Engineer. Curb openings with protection bars
are preferred. Special grates are permitted where pedestrians, bicycles, or
debris laden flows are anticipated. (See Figures 3.4 and 3.5.*)
   (L)   Traffic control devices.
      (1)   All signs, striping, marking, delineators, signals and other
traffic control devices are to conform to the requirements of the state as
outlined in uniform traffic control devices.
      (2)   In new developments, all required street name signs are to be
installed and paid for by the developer. Nonstandard signs or other traffic
control devices are subject to rigid state control and approval by the Town
Engineer must be obtained for their use. Requests for using nonstandard signs
or other devices must be submitted to the Town Engineer along with all data
required to support the request.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 22(1999) § 2)
Editor’s note:
   *Figures 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5 are available in the Town Engineer’s
office.
§ 13-10-10 CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS.
   (A)   Base.
      (1)   Material shall be granular, consisting essentially of sand, gravel,
rock slag, disintegrated granite or a combination of such materials. It shall
be a well graded mixture containing sufficient soil mortar, crusher dust or
other binding material which, when placed and compacted, will result in a firm,
stable foundation. Material composed of uniformly sized particles or which
contains pockets of excessively fine or excessively coarse material will not be
acceptable. The material shall meet the following gradation:
 
Sieve Designation Percent By Weight Passing
2.5 inch          100
2 inch            95—100
No. 40            30—60
No. 200           5—15
 
      (2)   All material passing the No. 40 sieve shall have a liquid limit of
not over 35 and a plasticity index of not over six. Test for liquid limit and
plasticity index shall be in accordance with AASHO designations T-89 and T-91
respectively.
   (B)   Concrete.
      (1)   Cement. Cement shall conform to ASTM-C-150, C-175 or C-595. The
cement supplier shall submit to the engineer a certification that the cement
used on the project conforms to the applicable specifications with complete
mill analysis for every 200 tons used.
      (2)   Aggregate. Aggregate shall conform to ASTM-C-33 (see American
Concrete Paving Association technical bulletin no. 15) for optimum size course
aggregate.
      (3)   Admixtures. Air entraining admixtures shall conform to ASTM-C-260.
Type A water reducing admixtures (normal setting) shall conform to ASTM-C-494.
Type D water reducing admixtures (retarders) shall conform to ASTM-C-494. Type
E water reducing admixtures (accelerating) shall conform to ASTM-C-494. Fly ash
shall conform to ASTM-C-618 type F with the following restriction: sulfur
trioxide shall not exceed 5%, and loss of ignition shall not exceed 5%.
      (4)   Materials for curing concrete. Membrane curing compounds for
concrete shall be the pigmented type conforming to the requirements of AASHTO-
M-148 and/or ASTM-C-309. Membrane curing compounds for concrete may be
transparent with a fugitive dye.
      (5)   Joint filling compound. Where joints are required to be filled,
filling material for filling pavement joints shall be hot poured rubber asphalt
joint filling compound conforming to AASHTO-M-173 or federal specifications SS-
S-164 or SS-S-1401a.
      (6)   Water. If the water is of questionable quality, it shall be tested
in accordance with AASHTO-T-26, Standard Method Of Test For Quality Of Water To
Be Used In Concrete.
      (7)   Strength required. All concrete shall have a specified compressive
strength of 4,000 psi and shall be determined by ACI standard 318-71, §§ 4.3.3
and 4.3.4. In nonfrost areas, lower fc’ values may be used in conformity with
local practice and performance. For design charts using lower fc’ values,
contact ACPA.
      (8)   Air content. The air content of the plastic concrete shall be
uniform and shall be 5.5% plus or minus 1.5% (5.5% ± 1.5%).
      (9)   Slump. The mixture shall contain no more water than is necessary to
produce concrete which is workable and plastic. The minimum slump necessary to
place the concrete satisfactorily shall be used. Slumps should be maintained so
as not to exceed four and one-half inches for nonvibrated placement and three
inches for vibrated placement.
   (C)   Asphalt. All materials shall conform to the latest Colorado Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction prepared by the State
Department of Highways.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 29(2005) § 67)
§ 13-10-11 CONSTRUCTION METHODS.
   (A)   Clearing and grubbing.
      (1)   General. Clearing and grubbing shall consist of removing trees,
stumps, brush, roots, rubbish, headgates and other objectionable matter from
the right-of-way and such other areas as may be designated. Clearing and
grubbing shall be performed in advance of grading operations and in accordance
with the requirements herein specified, subject to erosion control
requirements.
      (2)   Preservation of property. Existing improvements, adjacent property,
utility and other facilities, and trees and plants that are not to be removed
shall be protected from injury or defacement or damage resulting from the
contractor’s operation.
      (3)   Clearing and grubbing operation. Within the right-of-way or limits
established by the engineer all stumps, large roots, buried logs and all other
objectionable material shall be removed 18 inches below subgrade or slope of
embankments, or as directed by the Town Engineer. Tree branches extending over
the roadway which hang within 20 feet of the profile grade or that restrict
sight distance, shall be cut off close to the trunk or stem of the tree in a
neat and workmanlike manner and in accordance with good tree surgery practices.
Scars resulting from the removal of branches shall be treated with an approved
asphaltum base paint prepared especially for tree surgery.
      (4)   Removal and disposal of materials. All materials shall be disposed
of outside of the right-of- way. The roadway and adjacent areas shall be left
with a neat and finished appearance.
      (5)   Removing and salvaging structures. The contractor may remove
existing fences, pipes, aprons, curbs and/or gutters, sidewalks and other
similar items, the removal of which is necessary in connection with
construction of the project. The contractor shall dispose of the removed
material, except that, as ordered by the Town Engineer, culvert pipe, castings
and items suitable for reuse shall be protected from damage and be salvaged,
and except that suitable material may be salvaged for riprap or bank
protection. All salvaged items within the public right- of-way shall be the
property of the town.
   (B)   Excavation and grading.
      (1)   General. This item shall consist of all excavation and grading of
whatever nature, above or below subgrade elevation, required to bring the
street, alley, curb, gutters, sidewalks, ditches or other areas to be
constructed to the proper subgrade elevation, construction of embankments,
excavation and proper sloping of all cuts, and other items of excavation not
separately designated.
      (2)   Excavations. All excavations shall be made to subgrade elevations
and shall be true to grade. Material below subgrade elevation in cuts shall not
be loosened by plowing, ripping or other methods during the progress of the
work except with the approval of the Town Engineer. No excavation shall be made
below subgrade elevation except to remove unsuitable material as ordered by the
Engineer. In the event the contractor does excavate any other area below
subgrade elevation, he or she shall replace the excavated material with
satisfactory material and shall thoroughly compact the same.
      (3)   Unsuitable material. Material that is unsuitable for the planned
use shall be excavated and disposed of as directed by the Town Engineer.
      (4)   Excavation below subgrade. Whenever excavation below subgrade
elevation to remove unsuitable material is ordered by the Town Engineer, the
contractor shall remove the same to the satisfaction of the Engineer and shall
replace it with satisfactory material in layers not to exceed six inches in
thickness, or as designated by the Engineer, and shall thoroughly compact each
layer to 90% compaction standard Proctor before the next layer is placed.
      (5)   Surplus material. Unless otherwise shown on the plans or specified
in the special provisions, no surplus excavated material may be disposed of
within the right-of-way unless approved by the Town Engineer.
      (6)   Embankments. Embankments shall be constructed up to subgrade
elevation in layers not to exceed six inches in thickness and for the full
width of the embankment. Each layer shall be thoroughly compacted to 90%
standard Proctor up to the last 12 inches of subgrade before the next layer is
placed and the upper 12 inches to be compacted to 95% standard Proctor. When
borrow is required, it shall be taken from a source approved by the Engineer.
      (7)   Compaction of upgrade. After excavation (for new construction) has
been completed to approximate grade, upon direction of the Engineer, the
subgrade shall be scarified to a depth of six inches, wetted or aerated as
needed, and compacted until a density equal to 95% of the density determined by
the Proctor Method (AASHO designation: T99) is obtained in the upper 18 inches.
      (8)   Subgrade for curbs and gutters. Subgrade areas occupied by curbs
and gutters shall be excavated, backfilled, and compacted to established grade.
This work shall be done with particular care in accordance with all
requirements herein.
      (9)   Subgrade for sidewalks. Subgrade under sidewalks shall be compacted
to 95% standard Proctor.
      (10)   Slopes. Excavation slopes shall be finished in conformance with
the lines and grades shown on the plans. All debris and loose material shall be
removed.
      (11)   Dust control. The contractor shall provide and maintain adequate
dust control at all times during construction operations. Dust control may be
accomplished by water sprinkling or by other means approved by the Town
Engineer.
   (C)   Pavement and surface replacement.
      (1)   General. All excavations that are made in a public right-of-way
must be completely restored within seven days subsequent to acceptance of
backfill by the Town Engineer.
      (2)   Bases.
         (a)   A minimum of six inches of select base material shall be
installed and thoroughly compacted immediately beneath the paving or concrete
patch to be installed, and no less than the base course immediately adjacent to
such cut will be acceptable.
         (b)   In the event that asphaltic concrete base, soil cement base or
other base course materials be encountered by excavation, restoration shall be
made in kind subject to the approval of the Town Engineer.
      (3)   Bituminous pavement. Permanent hot mix asphalt cement patches shall
in no instance be less than two inches in thickness nor less than the hot mix
asphalt cement adjacent to the excavation, and shall be installed in accordance
with good construction practices and these specifications. Prior to replacement
of the pavement the exposed edges of the existing pavement and base course
shall be neatly trimmed to a neat straight line by a spade, bit or hammer.
      (4)   Concrete patch replacement. When a concrete patch is used, the
width shall be extended six inches on each side of the undisturbed trench
shoulders. The pavement edges shall be trimmed to form a uniform edge to allow
better adherence between material. Due care should be taken to assure that no
voids or air pockets are left in the concrete or along the edge between
concrete and asphaltic material. The patch shall be a minimum of six-inch thick
concrete with a minimum of 4,000 psi crushing strength. The top is then to be
sealed with asphalt oil and sand.
      (5)   Gravel surfaced streets. In areas where existing gravel surfacing
is removed from the streets, the contractor shall replace the graveled
surfacing with material at least equal in depth and quality to that removed,
but in no case shall the surfacing be less than six inches in thickness. The
existing graveled surfacing may be salvaged and reused if handled so as to
prevent mixing with other excavated materials.
      (6)   Driveways and entrances. Resurfacing of driveways and entrances
crossed by the construction shall be performed as outlined above for bituminous
surfaced streets and granular surfaced streets for the particular driveway and
entrance involved.
      (7)   Other surface improvements. Driveways, sidewalks or other surface
improvements shall be replaced with a base course, six inches minimum, and
materials equal in depth and quality, as that removed.
      (8)   Cleanup. All paved streets wherein excavation has been performed
will be thoroughly cleaned and completely policed from all debris and
extraneous material created by the work.
      (9)   Grassed areas. The upper six inches of the trench shall be
backfilled with topsoil, fertilized and seeded. The seed shall be applied at
the rate of one pound per 500 square feet, and the area so seeded shall then be
mulched with peat to retard evaporation of water. The seeding shall be done at
a time approved by the Town Engineer. In lieu of seeding, the Town Engineer may
require removing and replacing the existing sod or sodding the backfilled area.
   (D)   Adjusting frames, covers, and valve boxes.
      (1)   General. The contractor shall notify the owner to make necessary
adjustments. The frames shall be set to grades approved by the Town Engineer,
or one-fourth inch below finished pavement grade, in a manner hereinafter
specified. The contractor may elect to remove old frames, covers and valve
boxes and to install new frames and/or boxes.
      (2)   Adjusting frames. The contractor shall loosen frames in such a
manner that existing monuments, cleanouts or valve boxes will not be disturbed
or manholes damaged. Should the frame or cover become damaged as a result of
mishandling by the contractor, it shall be replaced by the contractor with a
ring and cover of comparable weight, size and quality at no cost to the town.
Debris shall not be permitted to enter sanitary or storm drain conduits. All
loose material and debris shall be removed from the excavation and the
interiors of structures prior to resetting frames.
         (a)   Manhole sidewalls that require adjustment shall be constructed
at least eight inches thick by the use of common brick and mortar or class A
concrete.
         (b)   Additional manhole steps shall be added for each 15-inch
increase in the height of the manhole sidewalls.
         (c)   Manhole frames shall not be finally set until the pavement
adjacent thereto has been completed. The manholes shall be left or lowered
sufficiently below grade so as not to interfere with or form an obstruction to
the preparation of the subbase, base, and pavement. The manhole openings shall
be temporarily covered by suitable means and the work constructed thereover.
Due care shall be exercised to prevent foreign material from entering the
manholes. After the pavement has been constructed, the necessary portions of
the subbase, base and pavement shall be neatly cut away, the manholes built up,
and the cover frames set to grade, following which any surrounding area from
which the pavement base or subbase has been so removed shall be backfilled with
concrete.
      (3)   Adjusting valve boxes. Adjustable cast iron boxes shall, if
possible, be brought to grade by adjustment of the upper movable section. It
may be necessary to provide an extension to lengthen the box enough to match
the required grade. An excavated area shall be filled with six inch concrete to
the level of the existing pavement, or as directed by the Town Engineer.
   (E)   Concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks.
      (1)   General. The work covered by this section consists of portland
cement concrete curb and gutter, curbwalk and driveways complete in accordance
with the following specifications and the dimensions shown on the plans.
      (2)   Concrete. Unless otherwise specified, concrete shall be 4,000 psi
minimum crushing strength and approved mix design.
      (3)   Subgrade. The subgrade shall be constructed true to grades and
lines shown on the plans. All debris, roots, vegetable matter, deleterious,
soft or other unsuitable material shall be removed to a depth of not less than
six inches below subgrade or, when necessary in the opinion of the Town
Engineer, to a greater depth and replaced with material satisfactory to the
Engineer. The finished subgrade under curb and gutter shall be compacted to 95%
of maximum density as determined by standard Proctor test.
      (4)   Placement. Concrete shall be placed on a compacted subgrade or
base. The concrete shall be properly graded with the forms securely set to
provide the section and surface elevations shown on the plans.
      (5)   Joints. Expansion joints and block joints shall be constructed
straight, plumb, and shall extend through the curb and gutter or curbwalk
section from top to bottom and from front to back. Expansion joint filler one-
half inch thick, preformed bituminous- treated fiberboard, conforming to AASHO
specification M59, shall be used to form transverse expansion joints. Expansion
joints shall be constructed at the intersection with the existing curb and
gutter, curbwalk and sidewalk, at all radius points and at 150 foot intervals
and/or as directed by the Town Engineer.
   (F)   Bituminous macadam surface.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Areas. Areas to be allowed:
            1.   Streets in grandfather subdivisions;
            2.   Parking lots (double chip-seal allowed); and
            3.   Alleys.
         (b)   How it may be used:
            1.   In residential areas only;
            2.   Can be used only with curb and gutter; and
            3.   Request for use must be made in writing to the Town Manager
for a determination.
      (2)   Description. This item shall consist of a crushed stone surface
with a bituminous binder constructed in accordance with details on plans and
the specifications and shall conform to the construction design standards.
      (3)   Materials.
         (a)   Mineral aggregates. Mineral aggregates for bituminous macadam
shall consist of clean, tough, durable fragments of broken stone, free from an
excess of flat, elongated, soft or disintegrated pieces, and free from stone
coated with dirt or other objectionable matter. The mineral aggregate shall be
uniformly graded within the limits specified below for stone chips.
         (b)   Stone chips. Stone chips shall be of such size that not less
than 90% shall pass a sieve having three-fourths inch square openings, and be
retained on a sieve having three-eighths inch square openings. Stone chips for
use in the seal coat shall be of such size that not less than 90% shall pass a
sieve having three-eighths inch square openings and be retained on a No. 4
sieve.
         (c)   Bituminous binder. Such binder shall be RC-800 or an approved
emulsified oil.
      (4)   Construction methods.
         (a)   Base. Finished base shall be one-half inch below the gutter edge
and thoroughly rolled with a steel wheel roller prior to the first application
of bituminous binder.
         (b)   First application of bituminous binder (with three-fourths inch
chips). The first application of bituminous binder shall be spread at the rate
of five-tenths to one gallon per square yard of surface. The bituminous binder
shall be allowed to penetrate into the roadway for not more than 24 hours and
the macadam covered by a layer of three-fourths inch chips and rolled. Care
must be exercised during the rolling to cover the bituminous surface in all
places so that the material will not adhere to the roller. Before the second
coat of bituminous binder is applied, all excess material shall be removed.
         (c)   Second application of bituminous binder (with three-fourths inch
chips). The second application of bituminous binder shall be spread at the rate
of one-fourth to one-half gallon per square yard of surface area, the quantity
between the limits mentioned to be determined by the Town Engineer. Three-
fourths inch chips shall then be uniformly spread over the entire surface in
quantity sufficient to prevent the asphaltic surface from adhering to the
rollers, after which the roadway shall be thoroughly rolled. The rolling shall
continue sufficiently to give a hard, smooth, finished surface. If the
bituminous binder shows through the surface, additional chips shall be spread
and rolled into the affected area.
         (d)   Final application of bituminous binder (with three-eighths inch
chips). After the road has been open to traffic for a period of two and not
more than four weeks, a final application of bituminous binder shall be spread
at the rate of from one-fourth to one-half gallons per square yards of the
surface area covered, as the Town Engineer shall determine. The area to be
covered shall be the entire area of finished surface course and portion of
shoulders as indicated on plans. Before applying this coat of bituminous
binder, the surface of the pavement and shoulders shall be thoroughly swept.
This coat of bituminous binder shall be covered with chips in sufficient
quantity to take up the bituminous binder. Every portion of the surface shall
then be rolled thoroughly.
         (e)   General requirements for rolling. All rolling shall be done with
self-propelled road rollers, steel wheel and rubber tire, weighing not less
than ten tons. All rolling shall commence at the outer edges and continue
toward the center. Under no circumstances shall the center of the road be
rolled first. Otherwise the time, extent and manner of rolling shall be subject
to the direction of the Town Engineer.
         (f)   General requirements for bituminous work.
            1.   Bituminous work shall be done only when the atmospheric
temperature is above 65°F and even then only during such periods as the sun is
shining. This rule may be suspended by the Town Engineer, when in his or her
opinion the same may not be detrimental to the work. No bituminous work will be
permitted when the surface to be covered is wet.
            2.   Bituminous binder shall be spread only after May 1 and before
October 1 except upon written consent of the Town Engineer, and no surfacing
shall be spread preparatory to oiling which cannot be completed before October
1.
            3.   Bituminous binder shall be sprayed upon the roadbed by means
of pressure spraying machines. The use of gravity distributors will not be
permitted. The distributors shall apply a uniform spread of oil over the width
covered by the sprayer. In order to ensure a uniform distribution of oil at the
junction of any two applications the distribution shall be promptly stopped
when a uniform flow of oil decreases, indicating that the tank is about empty.
If, in the application of oil, any spots are missed, oil shall be applied to
those spots by means which will ensure the application being made at the
specified rates. The uniform application of oil will be required and
distributors equipped with improperly spraying valves will not be allowed to
operate on the work.
            4.   The bituminous binder must be delivered at the point required
for spraying at a temperature not less than 300°F except for emulsion oil.
      (g)   Maintaining roadway. The contractor shall maintain the roadway
after it is opened to traffic until the final application of bituminous binder
is spread. All bituminous binder coming to the surface during that period shall
immediately be covered with chips. The pavement, when ready for final
acceptance, shall be thoroughly swept, compacted and the surface of the
pavement shall present a uniform bituminized appearance.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; 1997 Code; Ord. 29(2005) § 68)
§ 13-10-12 BIKE PATHS.
   (A)   General. This item shall consist of the construction of bituminous or
concrete bike paths in accordance with these specifications and the dimensions
shown on the plans.
   (B)   Materials.
      (1)   Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following
subsections:
         (a)   Joint fillers; §
13-10-10(B)(5) of this chapter;
         (b)   Bed course material; §
13-10-10(A) of this chapter;
         (c)   Concrete for bike paths; §
13-10-10(B) of this chapter; and
         (d)   Bituminous material for sidewalks; §
13-10-10(C) of this chapter.
      (2)   Concrete and bituminous mixes will be subject to inspection and
tests as required to assure compliance with quality requirements.
   (C)   Construction methods; concrete bike paths.
      (1)   Excavation. Excavation shall be made to the required depth and to a
width that will permit the installation and bracing of the forms. The
foundation shall be shaped and compacted to a firm, even surface conforming to
the section shown in Figure 3.617*. When the Engineer determines that material
is unsuitable, the material shall be removed and replaced in accordance with §
13-10-11(E) of this chapter.
      (2)   Forms. Forms shall be of wood, metal or other suitable material,
and shall extend for the full depth of the concrete. All forms shall be
straight, free from warp and of sufficient strength to resist the pressure of
the concrete without springing. Bracing and staking of the forms shall be such
that the forms remain in both horizontal and vertical alignment until their
removal. A satisfactory slip form method may be used.
      (3)   Placing concrete. The foundation shall be thoroughly moistened
immediately prior to the placing of the concrete. The proportioning, mixing and
placing of the concrete shall be in accordance with the requirements specified
in §
13-10-10 of this chapter.
      (4)   Finishing. The surface shall be floated with a wooden or magnesium
float and given a transverse broom finish. No plastering of the surface will be
permitted.
      (5)   Joints.
         (a)   Expansion joints and intervals shall be of the dimensions
specified, and shall be filled with the type of premolded expansion joint
filler noted. The bike path shall be divided into sections by dummy joints
formed by a jointing tool or other acceptable means as directed. These dummy
joints shall extend into the concrete for at least one-third of the depth and
shall be approximately one-fourth inch wide. Dummy joints shall be spaced at
intervals approximately equal to the width of the bike path.
         (b)   Construction joints shall be formed around all appurtenances
such as manholes, utility poles and the like, extending into and through the
sidewalk. Premolded expansion joint filler one-fourth inch thick shall be
installed in these joints. Expansion joint filler of the thickness indicated
shall be installed between concrete sidewalks and any fixed structure such as a
building or bridge. This expansion joint material shall extend for the full
depth of the path.
      (6)   Curing.
         (a)   Immediately upon completion of the finishing, bike paths shall
be moistened and kept moist for two days, or sidewalks, shall be cured by the
use of membrane forming curing compound. The method and details of curing shall
be subject to the approval of the Engineer.
         (b)   During the curing period all traffic, both pedestrian and
vehicular, will be excluded. Vehicular traffic will be excluded for such
additional time as the Engineer may direct.
   (D)   Bituminous bike paths.
      (1)   Excavation and forms. Excavation and forms shall meet the
requirements of subsection (C) of this section.
      (2)   Bed course. Bed course material shall be placed in layers not
exceeding four inches in depth and each layer shall be thoroughly compacted.
      (3)   Placing bituminous bike path material.
         (a)   Bituminous bike path material shall be placed on the compacted
bed course in one or more courses as indicated so as to give the required depth
when rolled.
         (b)   Compaction shall be accomplished by means of a hand operated or
power roller of a type and weight acceptable to the engineer. In areas
inaccessible to the roller, hand tamping will be permitted.
         (c)   Bituminous bike paths shall be uniformly compacted.
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 69)
Editor’s note:
   *Figure 3.617 is available at the Town Engineer’s office.
CHAPTER 11: SAMPLE CERTIFICATES AND PLAT NOTES
Section
13-11-1 Plat title formats
13-11-2 Certificate of dedication and ownership
13-11-3 Certificate of dedication for mortgage holder or deed of trust holder
13-11-4 Surveyor’s certificate
13-11-5 Title certificate
13-11-6 Clerk and Recorder certificate
13-11-7 Town Council certificate
13-11-8 Planning and Environmental Commission certificate
13-11-9 Administrator certificate
13-11-10 Certificate of taxes paid
13-11-11 Certificate of ownership
13-11-12 Plat notes
Editor’s note:
   The following figures are available at the Town Engineer’s office:
      3.1 Pavement design
      3.2 Concrete details
      3.3 Curb and gutter
      3.4 Catch basins
      3.5 Storm drain manhole
      3.6 Bike path design
§ 13-11-1 PLAT TITLE FORMATS.
   The title format as required on all plats is as follows:
   Type of Plat
   SUBDIVISION NAME, FILING OR PHASE NUMBER
   LOT, BLOCK, TRACT
   Town of Vail, County of Eagle, State of Colorado
   The type of plat should appear first in the Title; Final or Amended Final,
Single-Family, Duplex, Condominium Plat. The font size should be small.
   The main title is the next line or lines of the title and will be in a large
font. The main title is in two parts: the first part will have the name of the
subdivision, townhome(s) or condominiums(s); the second part of the main title
is the lot, block and tract information as shown in the order above. Plats of
existing platted parcels require the Lot, Block and/or Tract information; on
original plats the Lot, Block and Tract information are omitted from the title.
When resubdivisions occur, the first part of the main title is identical to the
parent subdivision and the second part identifying the replatted parcel(s),
except when the intent of the plat is to create a new and separate subdivision,
townhome or condominium with a new name.
   The sub-title comes after the main title, and it contains the Section,
Township, Range and/or county and state information. The font size should be
smaller than that of the main title.
   The Certificate of Dedication and Ownership, as well as the Surveyor’s
certificate should match the above formatted main title.
   The following are examples for each type of plat and the exact format for
each:
Minor Subdivision
   Final Plat
   Meadow Mauriello Subdivision
   A Resubdivision of Lot 32
   Town of Vail, County of Eagle, State of Colorado
Condominium Plat
   Condominium Plat
   Connelly Bridge Condominiums
   Vail Village, First Filing
   Lot c, Lot d and the south four feet of Lot b, Block 5-B
   Town of Vail, County of Eagle, State of Colorado
Townhouse Plat
   Townhouse Plat
   Mollica Mountain Townhomes
   Vail Potato Patch
   A Resubdivision of Parcel A, Lot 34, Block 1
   Town of Vail, County of Eagle, State of Colorado
Amended Final Plat/Single Family Subdivision
   Amended Final Plat
   Glen Lyon Subdivision, 2nd Amendment to the 1st Filing
   Lot 15, Block 2
   Town of Vail, County of Eagle, State of Colorado
Duplex Plat
   Duplex Plat
   Ruther Ridge Estates Subdivision, Filing No. 1
   A Resubdivision of Lot 29, Block 1
   Town of Vail, County of Eagle, State of Colorado
Final Plat
   Final Plat
   Curnutte Creek Gulch Subdivision
   Filing No. 1
   Town of Vail, County of Eagle, State of Colorado
Exemption Plat
   Wilson Willows Exemption Plat
   A portion of the SW 1/4 of the SW 1/4 of Section 9, Township 5 South,
   Range 80 West of the 6th P.M.
   Town of Vail, County of Eagle, State of Colorado
Correction Plat
   Corrected Final Plat
   Ochs Orchards Subdivision
   Filing No. 1
   Town of Vail, County of Eagle, State of Colorado
(Ord. 12(1996) § 3; Ord. 2(2001) § 3)
§ 13-11-2 CERTIFICATE OF DEDICATION AND OWNERSHIP.
   CERTIFICATION OF DEDICATION AND OWNERSHIP
   KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS that being sole owner(s) in fee simple of all
that real property situated at (insert property location) in the Town of Vail,
Eagle County, Colorado, described as follows: containing (insert number here)
acres, more or less: have by these presents laid out, platted and subdivided
the same into (insert number here) lots and (insert number here) blocks as
shown on this final plat under the name and style of a subdivision in the Town
of Vail, Eagle County, Colorado; and does hereby accept the responsibility for
the completion of required improvements; and does hereby dedicate and set apart
all of the public roads and other public improvements and places as shown on
the accompanying plat to the use of the public forever; and does hereby
dedicate those portions of said real property which are indicated as easement
on the accompanying plat as easements for the purpose shown hereon; and does
hereby grant the right to install and maintain necessary structures to the
entity responsible for providing the services for which the easements are
established.
Executed this day of (insert date here), A.D. 20     .
Owner:   (If corporation)
                              Corporation name
                              Address
                              by (signature)
                              (type individual’s name)
                              Title
                              (If individual)
                              (signature)
                              (type name)
                              Address
State of (Insert State name)
County of (Insert county name)
The foregoing Certificate of Dedication and Ownership was acknowledged before
me this day of (insert date here), A.D. 20      by (insert name here).
My commission expires:
Witness my hand and seal.
                              Notary Public
   Address:
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 70)
§ 13-11-3 CERTIFICATE OF DEDICATION FOR MORTGAGE HOLDER OR DEED OF TRUST
HOLDER.
   CERTIFICATION OF DEDICATION FOR MORTGAGE HOLDER OR DEED OF TRUST HOLDER
   KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS that being the holder of a mortgage or deed
of trust on the real property situated at (insert property location) in the
Town of Vail, Eagle County, Colorado, described as follows: containing (insert
number here) acres, more or less; as shown on this final plat under the name
and style of a subdivision in the Town of Vail, Eagle County, Colorado; agrees
to the dedication and setting apart all of the public roads and other public
improvements and places as shown on the accompanying plat to the use of the
public forever; and does hereby agree to the dedication of these portions of
said real property which are indicated as easement on the accompanying plat as
easements for the purpose shown hereon; and does hereby agree to the granting
of the right to install and maintain necessary structures to the entity
responsible for providing the services for which the easements are established.
Executed this day of (insert date here), A.D. 20     .
Owner:   (If corporation)
                              Corporation name
                              Address
                              by (signature)
                              (type individual’s name)
                              Title
                              (If individual)
                              (signature)
                              (type name)
                              Address
State of (Insert State name)
County of (Insert county name)
The foregoing Certificate of Dedication and Ownership was acknowledged before
me this day of (insert date here), A.D. 20      by (insert name here).
My commission expires:
Witness my hand and seal.
                              Notary Public
   Address:
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 70)
§ 13-11-4 SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE.
   SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
(For all plats except condominium maps)
   I do hereby certify that I am a registered Land Surveyor licensed under the
laws of the State of Colorado, that this plat is true, correct and complete as
laid out, platted, dedicated and shown hereon, that such plat was made from an
accurate survey of said property by me and under my supervision and correctly
shows the location and dimensions of the lots, easements and streets of said
subdivision as the same are staked upon the ground in compliance with
applicable regulations governing the subdivision of land.
In witness thereof l have set my hand and seal this day of (insert date here),
A.D., 20     .
                              (NAME)
                              COLORADO LAND SURVEYOR NO.
(For condominium maps)
   I do hereby certify that I am a registered Land Surveyor licensed under the
laws of the State of Colorado, that this condominium map is true, correct and
complete as laid out, platted, dedicated and shown hereon, that such
condominium map was made from an accurate survey of said property by me and
under my supervision and correctly shows the horizontal and vertical location
and dimensions of the condominiums, parcels, easements and streets of said
condominium map as the same are staked upon the ground in compliance with
applicable regulations governing the subdivision of land.
In witness thereof l have set my hand and seal this day of (insert date here),
A.D. 20     .
COLORADO LAND SURVEYOR NO. (Name)
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 70)
§ 13-11-5 TITLE CERTIFICATE.
   TITLE CERTIFICATE
(Name of title company) does hereby certify that the title to all lands shown
upon this plat have been examined and is vested in
____________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________   
   
and that title to such lands is free and clear of all liens and encumbrances,
except as follows:
(Insert text here)
Dated this day of (insert date here), A.D. 20     .
Title Company or Attorney’s Name Address
            By                  (Signature)
(printed name and title of officer or attorney)
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 6(1986) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 70)
§ 13-11-6 CLERK AND RECORDER CERTIFICATE.
   CLERK AND RECORDER CERTIFICATE
This plat was filed for record in the office of the Clerk and Recorder on this
day of (insert date), A.D. 20     , at (insert number) o’clock (insert A.M or
P.M). Recorded under Reception No. (insert number) in Book (insert text) at
Page (insert number).
   Clerk and Recorder
   Eagle County, Colorado
   By
   Deputy
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 70)
§ 13-11-7 TOWN COUNCIL CERTIFICATE.
   TOWN COUNCIL CERTIFICATE
   This plat approved by the Town Council of the Town of Vail, Colorado this
day of (insert date here) A.D., 20     , for filing with the Clerk and Recorder
of Eagle County, Colorado and for the conveyance to the Town of Vail of the
public dedications shown hereon; subject to the provision that approval in no
way obligates the Town of Vail for maintenance of roads dedicated to the public
until construction of improvements thereon shall have been completed in
accordance with Town of Vail specifications, and the Town Council of the Town
of Vail has by a subsequent resolution agreed to undertake maintenance of the
same. This approval does not guarantee that soil conditions, subsurface
geology, ground water conditions, or flooding conditions of any lot shown
hereon are such that a building permit or any other required permit will be
issued. This approval is with the understanding that all expenses involving all
improvements required shall be the responsibility of the subdivider and not the
Town of Vail.
ATTEST:
Town Clerk                              Mayor
Town of Vail,                           Town Council
Colorado                              Town of Vail, Colorado
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 70)
§ 13-11-8 PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION CERTIFICATE.
   PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
This final plat was approved by the Town of Vail Planning and Environmental
Commission this day of (insert date here), A.D. 20     .
ATTEST:
Town Clerk                           Chairman
Town of Vail,                        Town of Vail Planning and
Colorado                           Environmental Commission
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 70)
§ 13-11-9 ADMINISTRATOR CERTIFICATE.
   ADMINISTRATOR CERTIFICATE
   This final plat is hereby approved by the Town of Vail Administrator this
day of (insert date here), A.D.
20    .
ATTEST:
Town Clerk                              Administrator
Town of Vail                              Town of Vail
(Ord. 2(1983) § 1; Ord. 29(2005) § 70)
§ 13-11-10 CERTIFICATE OF TAXES PAID.
   CERTIFICATE OF TAXES PAID
I, the undersigned, do hereby certify that the entire amount of taxes due and
payable as of the       day of      , A.D. 20      upon all parcels of real
estate described on this plat are paid in full.
Dated this day of (insert date here), A.D., 20     .
                                    Treasurer of Eagle County
(Ord. 11(1986) § 2; Ord. 18(1993) § 7; Ord. 29(2005) § 70)
§ 13-11-11 CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP.
   CERTIFICATION OF OWNERSHIP
   KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS that being sole owner(s) in fee simple of all
that real property situated in the Town of Vail, Eagle County, Colorado,
described as follows: containing (insert number) acres, more or less: have by
these presents laid out, platted and subdivided the same into lots and blocks
as shown on this final plat under the name and style of a subdivision in the
Town of Vail, Eagle County, Colorado; and does hereby accept the responsibility
for the completion of required improvements.
Executed this day of (insert date here), A.D. 20     .
Owner:   (If corporation)
                                 Corporation name
                                 Address
                                 by (signature)
                                 (type individual’s name)
                                 Title
                                 (If individual)
                                 (signature)
                                 (type name)
                                 Address
State of (Insert State name)
County of ) ss (Insert county name)
   The foregoing Certificate of Ownership was acknowledged before me this day
of (insert date here), A.D. 20      by (insert name here).
My commission expires:
Witness my hand and seal.
                                 Notary
                                 Public
         Address:
(Ord. 29(2005) § 71)
§ 13-11-12 PLAT NOTES.
   Floodplain plat note: the following plat note shall be added to plats that
delineate 100-year floodplain data:
   The 100 Year Floodplain line as shown hereon is based on the Town of Vail
adopted FEMA Floodplain Study or the best available Floodplain data as approved
by the Town of Vail Floodplain Administrator. For future reference, the 100
Year Floodplain line as shown shall be verified for consistency with the
currently adopted version of the FEMA Floodplain Study.
(Ord. 2(2007) § 9)
CHAPTER 12: EXEMPTION PLAT REVIEW PROCEDURES
Section
13-12-1 Purpose and intent
13-12-2 Exemptions in procedure and submittals
13-12-3 Plat procedure and criteria for review
13-12-4 Filing and recording
§ 13-12-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish criteria and an appropriate
review process whereby the Planning and Environmental Commission may grant
exemptions from the definition of the term “subdivision” for properties that
are determined to fall outside the purpose, purview and intent of Chapters 3
and 4 of this title. This process is intended to allow for the platting of
property where no additional parcels are created and conformance with
applicable provisions of this code has been demonstrated.
(Ord. 29(2005) § 72)
§ 13-12-2 EXEMPTIONS IN PROCEDURE AND SUBMITTALS.
   “Exemption plats”, as defined in §
13-2-2 of this title, shall be exempt from requirements related to preliminary
plan procedures and submittals. Exemption plat applicants may be required to
submit an environmental impact report if required by Title 12, Chapter 12 of
this code.
(Ord. 29(2005) § 73)
§ 13-12-3 PLAT PROCEDURE AND CRITERIA FOR REVIEW.
   The procedure for an exemption plat review shall be as follows.
   (A)   Submission of proposal; waiver of requirements. The applicant shall
submit two copies of the proposal following the requirements for a final plat
in §
13-3-6(B) of this title, with the provision that certain of these requirements
may be waived by the Administrator and/or the Planning and Environmental
Commission if determined not applicable to the project.
   (B)   Public hearing. The Administrator will schedule a public hearing
before the Planning and Environmental Commission and follow notification
requirements for adjacent property owners and public notice for the hearing as
found in §
13-3-6(B)(1) of this title.
   (C)   Review and action on plat.
      (1)   The Planning and Environmental Commission shall review the plat and
associated materials and shall approve, approve with modifications or
disapprove the plat within 21 days of the first public hearing on the exemption
plat application or the exemption plat application will be deemed approved.
      (2)   A longer time period for rendering a decision may be granted
subject to mutual agreement between the Planning and Environmental Commission
and the applicant. The criteria for reviewing the plat shall be as contained in
§
13-3-4 of this title.
   (D)   Appeal. An appeal of the Planning and Environmental Commission’s
decision by the Town Council, the applicant, or an “aggrieved or adversely
affected person” shall follow the procedures outlined in §
13-3-5(C) of this title.
(Ord. 29(2005) § 74)
§ 13-12-4 FILING AND RECORDING.
   The Department of Community Development will record the plat and any related
documents with the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder; however, no plat shall be
recorded unless prior to the time of recording, the applicant provides the town
with a certification from the Eagle County Treasurer’s office indicating that
all ad valorem taxes applicable to such subdivided land, for years prior to
that year in which approval is granted, have been paid. Fees for recording
shall be paid by the applicant. The Department of Community Development will
retain one Mylar copy of the plat for their records. An exemption plat may not
be recorded until applicable appeals periods have expired in accordance with
the provisions of §
13-3-5(C) of this title.
(Ord. 29(2005) § 75)
CHAPTER 13: ADMINISTRATIVE PLAT CORRECTION PROCEDURES
Section
13-13-1 Purpose and intent
13-13-2 Consultation required; preliminary review
13-13-3 Plat procedure and criteria for review
13-13-4 Filing and recording
§ 13-13-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish criteria and an appropriate
review process whereby the Administrator may review corrections to previously
approved plats where the character and intent of the original plat is not
altered. Examples include address changes, plat note amendments, plat title
corrections, easement vacations and other minor corrections. This process is
intended to allow for the correction of plat errors and minor plat amendments
where no “subdivision” occurs and conformance with applicable provisions of
this code has been demonstrated.
(Ord. 2(2001) § 2)
§ 13-13-2 CONSULTATION REQUIRED; PRELIMINARY REVIEW.
   Prior to the submittal of a plat correction request, the applicant shall
meet with the Administrator to determine if the request is consistent with the
correction plat criteria outlined in §
13-13-3 of this chapter. If the Administrator determines the subject
application would circumvent significant and relevant elements of the
subdivision review process and/or the character and intent of the originally
approved plat, the application shall be reviewed pursuant to the “subdivision”
or “exemption plat” review processes outlined in this title.
(Ord. 2(2001) § 2)
§ 13-13-3 PLAT PROCEDURE AND CRITERIA FOR REVIEW.
   (A)   Plat procedure. Upon receiving two copies of a complete submittal
along with payment of the appropriate fee, the Administrator shall route one
copy of the proposed plat to the Town Engineer for his or her review. The
Administrator shall then conduct his or her review concurrently. The Town
Engineer shall review the submittal and return comments and notifications to
the Administrator who shall transmit the approval, disapproval or approval with
modifications of the plat within 14 days to the applicant. The Administrator
shall sign the plat if approved or require modifications on the plat for
approval or deny approval due to inconsistencies with the originally approved
plat or failure to make other required modifications on the plat. Plat format
and content shall be as outlined under §
13-3-6 of this title. Correction plats must contain the following statement:
   The sole purpose of this plat is to correct an error (or amend a plat note
or an easement) filed with an approved plat. This plat correction does not
alter the character, intent or development standards imposed under previous
plat approvals.
   (B)   Criteria for review. A plat correction or minor plat amendment may be
approved upon the findings that:
      (1)   The plat correction is in accordance with all applicable town
ordinances, standards and the original conditions of plat approval;
      (2)   Nonconformities are not created. In the case of preexisting
nonconforming lots, the nonconformity is not increased with the approval of the
correction plat;
      (3)   The approval will not adversely affect the public health, safety
and welfare; and
      (4)   Provisions for adequate access and infrastructure have been
demonstrated by the applicant and are indicated on the proposed correction
plat.
(Ord. 29(2005) § 76)
§ 13-13-4 FILING AND RECORDING.
   The Department of Community Development will record the plat and any related
covenants with the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder; however, no plat for
subdivided land shall be recorded unless prior to the time of recording, the
subdivider provides the town with a certification from the Eagle County
Treasurer’s office indicating that all ad valorem taxes applicable to such
subdivided land, for years prior to that year in which approval is granted,
have been paid. Fees for recording shall be paid by the applicant. The
Department of Community Development will retain one Mylar copy of the plat for
their records. A correction plat may not be recorded until applicable appeals
periods have expired in accordance with the provisions of §
13-3-5(C) of this title.
(Ord. 2(2001) § 2; Ord. 29(2005) § 77)
CHAPTER 14: ADMINISTRATIVE LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS AND ELIMINATIONS
Section
13-14-1 Purpose and intent
13-14-2 Consultation required; preliminary review
13-14-3 Submittal requirements, plat procedure and criteria for review
13-14-4 Appeal of Administrator’s decision
13-14-5 Filing and recording
§ 13-14-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish criteria and an appropriate
review process whereby the Administrator may approve lot line adjustments and/
or eliminations to previously approved plats. This process is intended to allow
for the administrative review of adjustments or eliminations of existing lot
lines where no “subdivision” occurs and conformance with applicable provisions
of this code has been demonstrated.
(Ord. 14(2020) § 1)
§ 13-14-2 CONSULTATION REQUIRED; PRELIMINARY REVIEW.
   Prior to the submittal of a lot line adjustments and/or elimination
requests, the applicant shall meet with the Administrator to determine if the
request is consistent with the lot line adjustments and/or eliminations
criteria outlined in §
13-14-3 of this chapter. If the Administrator determines the subject
application would circumvent significant and relevant elements of the
subdivision review process and/or is inconsistent with relevant standards of
Title 12, Zoning Regulations, the application shall be reviewed pursuant to the
“subdivision” or “exemption plat” review processes outlined in this title.
(Ord. 14(2020) § 1)
§ 13-14-3 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS, PLAT PROCEDURE AND CRITERIA FOR REVIEW.
   (A)   Submission of proposal; waiver of requirements. The applicant shall
submit the proposal following the requirements for a final plat in §
13-3-6(B) of this title, with the provision that certain requirements may be
waived by the Administrator if determined to be not applicable to the project.
   (B)   Plat procedure. Upon receiving a complete submittal with payment of
applicable fee, the Administrator shall route the proposed plat to appropriate
town staff and outside agencies. The Administrator shall sign the plat if
approved, require modifications on the plat for approval, or deny approval due
to inconsistencies with the required findings for approval, or failure to make
other required modifications. Lot line adjustments and/or eliminations plats
must contain a statement accurately describing the purpose of the lot line
adjustments and/or eliminations.
   (C)   Criteria for review. A lot line adjustment and/or elimination plat may
be approved upon the findings that:
      (1)   The lot line adjustment and/or elimination plat is in accordance
with all applicable town ordinances, standards and the original conditions of
plat approval;
      (2)   Nonconformities are not created. In the case of preexisting
nonconforming lots, the nonconformity is not increased with the approval of the
lot line adjustments and/or eliminations plat;
      (3)   The approval will not adversely affect the public health, safety
and welfare; and
      (4)   Provisions for adequate access and infrastructure have been
demonstrated by the applicant and are indicated on the proposed lot line
adjustments and/or eliminations plat.
(Ord. 14(2020) § 1)
§ 13-14-4 APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATOR’S DECISION.
   The Administrator’s decision may be appealed to the Planning and
Environmental Commission and such appeal shall follow procedures set forth in §
12-3-3 of this code.
(Ord. 14(2020) § 1)
§ 13-14-5 FILING AND RECORDING.
   The Department of Community Development or applicant will record the plat
and any related covenants with the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder; however, no
plat shall be recorded unless prior to the time of recording, the applicant
provides the town with a certification from the Eagle County Treasurer’s office
indicating that all ad valorem taxes applicable to such property(s), for years
prior to that year in which approval is granted, have been paid. Fees for
recording shall be paid by the applicant. A lot line adjustments and/or
eliminations plat may not be recorded until applicable appeals periods have
expired in accordance with the provisions of §
13-3-5(C) of this title.
(Ord. 14(2020) § 1)
TITLE 14: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
CHAPTER 1: ADMINISTRATION
Section
14-1-1 Purpose and intent
14-1-2 Applicability
14-1-3 Administration of standards
14-1-4 Nonconformities
14-1-5 Variances
14-1-6 Appeals
14-1-7 Adoption
§ 14-1-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose of these rules, regulations and standards to ensure the
general health, safety and welfare of the community. These rules, regulations
and standards are intended to ensure safe and efficient development within the
Town of Vail for pedestrians, vehicular traffic, emergency response traffic and
the community at large. The development standards will help protect property
values, ensure the aesthetic quality of the community and ensure adequate
development of property within the Town of Vail.
(Ord. 29(2005) § 78)
§ 14-1-2 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Unless specifically exempted, the provisions of this title shall
supplement any and all existing laws and shall apply to all persons, without
restriction, and to conditions arising after the adoption thereof, to
conditions not legally in existence at the time of adoption of this title, and
to conditions which, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, the Building Official or
the Town Engineer, constitute a distinct hazard to life or property.
   (B)   The development standards shall apply to new development, as well as
to modifications and additions to existing developments, unless specifically
exempted herein.
(Ord. 29(2005) § 78)
§ 14-1-3 ADMINISTRATION OF STANDARDS.
   The Town Manager, or Town Manager’s designee, is authorized to make and
enforce the rules and regulations contained herein in order to carry out the
intent of the development standards. These rules, regulations and standards
shall be initially adopted by ordinance by the Vail Town Council. Any
amendments to the development standards shall require adoption by Town Council
prior to their enforcement. A copy of the approved development standards shall
be filed with the Town Clerk’s office. Where no specific or applicable rules,
regulations or standards appear to be set forth in this code, other rules,
regulations, standards, guidelines and recommended practices, as published by
professional associations, technical organizations, model code groups, and
similar entities, may be used by the town for guidance.
(Ord. 29(2005) § 78)
§ 14-1-4 NONCONFORMITIES.
   Nonconforming sites and site improvements lawfully established prior to the
effective date hereof may continue, subject to the limitations prescribed by
Title 12, Chapter 18 of this code. To encourage redevelopment, there shall be
some flexibility granted to existing nonconforming sites and structures.
However, wherever possible, compliance with the development standards shall be
achieved. The paving of existing legal nonconforming, i.e., unpaved, driveways
shall be allowed without strict compliance with the development standards.
However, a reasonable attempt shall be made to adhere as closely as possible to
the development standards when paving existing driveways. A structure, which is
substantially demolished or reconstructed, as defined by “demo/rebuild” in the
zoning regulations, shall be required to adhere to the development standards.
(Ord. 29(2005) § 78)
§ 14-1-5 VARIANCES.
   Variances to the development standards may be allowed when practical
difficulties and unnecessary physical hardships inconsistent with the purpose
and intent of the development standards exist. Variances from the development
standards shall be in accordance with Title 12, Chapter 17 of this code. The
issuance of a variance shall not compromise the safety of a site or structure.
(Ord. 29(2005) § 78)
§ 14-1-6 APPEALS.
   Appeals from decisions made concerning the development standards shall be in
accordance with Title 12, Chapter 3 of this code.
(Ord. 29(2005) § 78)
§ 14-1-7 ADOPTION.
   This title was adopted by Town Council on September 21, 1999.
(Ord. 29(2005) § 78)
CHAPTER 2: DEFINITIONS
Section
14-2-1 Definitions of words and terms
§ 14-2-1 DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS.
   Definitions not provided herein shall be as defined in Title 12, “Zoning
Regulations”, and Title 13, “Subdivision Regulations”, of this code.
   AASHTO. American Association Of State Highway And Transportation Officials.
   ACCESS GRADE. The slope of a road, street, driveway, or other means of
access, as measured from the back side of pan along the centerline of the means
of access. Grade shall be measured in increments of 20 horizontal feet.
   ACCESS GRADE CHANGE. The algebraic sum of the difference of two separate
grades.
   ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION INTO SETBACK. Distance which an architectural
projection (i.e., roof eave) may encroach into setback.
   BMPs. Best management practices, which are accepted industry standards.
   BACKOUT/TURNAROUND AREA. An area appropriately designed for a vehicle to
back out and turn around in a driveway or feeder road so that the vehicle can
enter the public street facing forward.
   BATTER. The slope of the face of a retaining wall measured in units
horizontal to units vertical.
   BOULDER RETAINING WALLS. Retaining walls that use boulders as the means to
structurally retain the earth.
   BUILDING CODE. The Building Code, as published by the International Code
Council, 4051 West Flossmor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The distance measured vertically from any point on a
proposed or existing roof or eave to the existing (natural) or finished grade
(whichever is more restrictive) located directly below said point of the roof
or eave. Within any building footprint, height shall be measured vertically
from any point on a proposed or existing roof to the existing grade directly
below said point on a proposed or existing roof.
   BUILDING SETBACKS. A line or location within a lot or site which establishes
the permitted location of uses, structures, or buildings on a lot.
   CPESC. Certified professional in erosion and sediment control.
   COLORADO DISCHARGE PERMIT SYSTEM (CDPS). State of Colorado regulation (5
C.C.R. § 1002-61) and as amended which covers discharges from specific types of
industries including construction sites, and storm sewer systems for
municipalities as part of the water quality control division (division) under
the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE).
   COMBINATION RETAINING WALL. A series of multiple retaining walls acting as
one wall structurally.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Includes clearing, grading and excavation activities.
CONSTRUCTION does not include routine maintenance performed by public agencies,
or their agents to maintain original line and grade, historical hydraulic
capacity, or original purpose of the facility.
   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE. Area critical to existing vegetation to ensure its
existence.
   CROSSOVER (SWITCHBACK OR 90 DEGREE TURN). The area on a driveway where the
turning angle of the centerline of the driveway curvature is 90 degrees or
greater.
   CROSSOVER AISLE. The drive aisle where a 90 degree or greater turn is
required by a vehicle to change drive aisles.
   CURB CUT. The location where a driveway, parking area or feeder road
connects to a public street or feeder road.
   DECK SETBACK (GROUND LEVEL). A line or location within a lot or site which
establishes the permitted location of an at grade (within five feet of grade)
deck or patio on a lot.
   DECK SETBACK (NOT GROUND LEVEL). A line or location within a lot or site
which establishes the permitted location of an above grade (greater than five
feet above grade) deck or balcony on a lot.
   DEFENSIBLE SPACE. An area around structures where non-fire wise plant
material capable of causing a fire to spread have been modified, cleared or
reduced to act as a barrier between an advancing fire and resources or lives at
risk.
   DEMO/REBUILD. The destruction, demolition or removal of 50% or more of the
gross residential floor area of an existing dwelling unit or structure. The
determination of the 50% shall be calculated upon “gross residential floor
area” as defined in Title 12, “Zoning Regulations”, of this code.
   DENSITY. The number of dwelling units allowed per lot or the number of
dwelling units allowed per acre.
   DESIGN REVIEW BOARD (DRB). The Board established pursuant to Title 3,
Chapter 4 of this code.
   DEVELOPMENT. Defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code.
   DISTURBED AREA. That area of the land’s surface disturbed by any work or
activity upon the property by means including, but not limited to: grading;
excavating; stockpiling soil, fill or other materials; clearing; vegetation
removal; removal or deposit of any rock, soil or other materials; or other
activities which expose soil. DISTURBED AREA does not include the tillage of
land that is zoned for agricultural use. It also does not include performance
of emergency work necessary to prevent or ameliorate an immediate threat to
life, property, or the environment. Any person performing such emergency work
shall immediately notify the Town Engineer of the situation and the actions
taken. The Town Engineer may, however, require such person to obtain a
stormwater quality permit to implement remedial measures to minimize erosion
resulting from the emergency.
   DRAINAGE. Surface water runoff or the removal of surface water or
groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means, which include runoff
controls to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development.
   DRAINAGEWAY. Any natural or artificial stream, swale, creek, river, ditch,
channel, canal or other open intermittent watercourse.
   DRIVEWAY. A paved all weather driving surface on private property which
provides access to three or fewer dwelling units (including EHUs). DRIVEWAYS
generally provide access to individual dwelling units.
   DRIVEWAY PAN. A concrete drainage structure which conveys water; located
where a driveway or feeder road connects with the public street.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. Defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. Defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. Defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code.
   DWELLING UNIT. Defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code.
   EHU. Defined under “Employee Housing Unit (EHU)” in Title 12, Chapter 2 of
this code.
   ENTRY ANGLE. The angle created at the intersection of the centerline of the
public roadway and the centerline of the first 30 feet of feeder road or
driveway.
   EROSION. The process by which the ground surface is worn away by action of
wind, water, gravity or a combination thereof.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. A plan to minimize erosion and on site
sedimentation resulting from construction activities. The plan should include
detailed information about the site; planned construction activities and best
management practices (BMPs) to implement that can minimize on site erosion and
transport of sediment off site during construction.
   EXPOSED FACE. The area of a wall exposed from the finished grade line to the
top of the wall. The cumulative exposed bench face of combination walls.
   FEEDER ROAD. A paved all weather road or driveway on private property which
accesses four or more dwelling units (including EHUs). Driveways to individual
dwelling units generally connect to the FEEDER ROAD.
   FENESTRATION. The design and placement of windows in a building.
   FINAL STABILIZATION. When all soil disturbing activities at the site have
been completed, and uniform vegetative cover has been established with a
density of at least 70% of predisturbance levels, or equivalent permanent,
physical erosion reduction methods have been employed. For purposes of this
section, establishment of a vegetative cover capable of providing erosion
control equivalent to preexisting conditions at the site is considered final
stabilization.
   FIRE CODE. The Fire Code, as published by the International Code Council,
4051 West Flossmor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795.
   FIRE WISE PLANT MATERIALS. As outlined in the latest version of Colorado
State Forest Service Publication #6.305, Fire Wise Plant Materials.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS.
      (1)   The total floor area within the enclosing walls of a structure
including without limitation the following:
         (a)   Areas specifically designed and used for mechanical equipment to
operate the building;
         (b)   Stairways;
         (c)   Elevators;
         (d)   Common hallways;
         (e)   Common lobbies;
         (f)   Common restrooms;
         (g)   Areas designed and used for parking;
         (h)   Areas designed and used as storage which do not have direct
access to an individual office or retail store, not to exceed 5% of the total
proposed net floor area for office and not to exceed 8% of the total proposed
net floor area for retail; and
         (i)   Areas that may be deducted from the gross residential floor area
per §
12-15-3 of this code.
      (2)   COMMON AREAS are spaces for which all occupants in the building
contribute toward the upkeep and maintenance thereof and are not used for
employee working areas.
   FRONTAGE. The portion of a lot which fronts on a public or private street.
   GUARDRAILS. A rail placed on the edge of a roadway, on bridges, driveways
and the like, as a safeguard against vehicular egress of said roadway.
   HEATED DRIVES. Driveways which have subterranean heat producing mechanisms
to aid in melting snow and ice.
   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITIES. Any mechanical activity which alters the surface
of the earth and exposes the same to the elements of wind, water or gravity.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITIES include grading, filling, excavating, and soil
storage. Agricultural activities are exempt from this definition.
   LANDSCAPE AREA. The area of a site not covered by buildings, driveways and
covered walkways. Core development (hardscape) such as walks, decks, patios,
terraces, water features and like features shall also be considered landscape
area as long as they do not exceed 20% of the landscape area.
   LANDSCAPING. Planted areas and plant materials, including trees, shrubs,
lawns, flowerbeds and ground cover, together with core development such as
walks, decks, patios, terraces, water features and like features not occupying
more than 20% of the landscaped area. For the purposes of this title, natural
or significant rock outcroppings, trees or native vegetation shall be deemed
landscaping in hillside residential, single-family residential, primary/
secondary residential, two-family residential, residential cluster, and low
density multi-family zone districts.
   LOT or SITE. Defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code.
   LOT SIZE. The required size of a buildable lot or site.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A system of conveyances owned
and operated by the Town of Vail used in the collection, treatment or
disposition of storm, flood or surface drainage waters, including human-made
structures and natural watercourses and/or floodplains for the conveyance of
runoff, such as detention or retention areas, berms, swales, improved
watercourses, channels, bridges, gulches, streams, rivers, gullies, flumes,
culverts, gutters, pumping stations, pipes, ditches, siphons, catch basins,
inlets, pumping plants and other equipment and appurtenances and all
extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alternations thereof; and
any and all rights or interests in such stormwater facilities, and which is not
used for collecting or conveying sewage.
   OSHA. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. A regulatory office of
the U.S. Department of Labor.
   ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN. The area adjoining a river, stream or
watercourse covered by water in the event of a flood, having a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in magnitude in any given year.
   OPERATOR. The individual who has day to day supervision and control of
activities occurring at the construction site. This can be the owner, the
developer, the general contractor or the agent of one of these parties, in some
circumstances. It is anticipated that at different phases of a construction
project, different types of parties will satisfy the definition of an OPERATOR
and the pertinent portions of any applicable State of Colorado permit will be
transferred as the roles change.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK. The line between upland and bottomland which
persists through successive changes in water levels, below which the presence
and action of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the
land is marked distinctly from the upland and is apparent in the soil itself,
the configuration of the surface of the soil and the vegetation. On an inland
lake which has a level established by law, it means the high established level.
Where water returns to its natural levels as the result of the permanent
removal or abandonment of a dam, it means the natural ordinary high water mark.
   PE STAMPED DESIGN. A design that is stamped, signed and dated by a
professional engineer.
   PERMANENT SLOPE PROTECTION MEASURES. Used on slopes to permanently stabilize
the slope and prevent erosion.
   PERMANENT SOIL EROSION CONTROL MEASURES. Those control measures which are
installed or constructed to control soil erosion and which are maintained after
completion of all grading and earth disturbance activities.
   PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION (PEC). The Commission established by
Title 3, Chapter 2 of this code.
   POINT SOURCE. Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance from which
pollutants are or may be discharged. POINT SOURCE discharges of stormwater
result from structures (e.g., roofs, roads, sidewalks, parking lots and the
like) which increase imperviousness of the ground which acts to collect runoff,
with runoff being conveyed along the resulting drainage or grading pattern.
   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER (PE). A current State of Colorado registered
professional engineer, practicing in their known expertise.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The record owner of the property or properties, who is the
responsible party for the Town of Vail stormwater quality permits.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any public street, easement, right-of-way, highway, alley, way,
place, road or bike path, and any nonexclusive utility easement.
   RECEIVING WATER. Any water of the State of Colorado into which stormwater
related to construction activities discharges.
   RETAINING WALL. Any slope greater than one to one (1:1).
   RIDGE. The uppermost, horizontal external angle formed by the intersection
of two sloping roof planes.
   RIPARIAN ZONE. The area located between the water’s edge of aquatic
ecosystems (rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, springs and seeps) and upland areas,
whose soils allow for or tolerate a high water table, and provide sufficient
moisture in excess of that otherwise available locally so as to provide a more
moist habitat than that of contiguous floodplains and uplands.
      (1)   RIPARIAN AREAS are composed of interacting assemblages of plants,
animals and aquatic communities whose presence is either directly or indirectly
attributed to water influenced or water related factors. RIPARIAN AREAS produce
a diversity of vegetative forms, sizes and species and a density of vegetation
that makes them among the most productive habitats for wildlife.
      (2)   Areas exempt from this definition are human-made agricultural
structures and devices such as irrigation ditches, sprinklers and artificial
ponds, except when mitigation requires creation or replacement of wetlands and/
or riparian areas.
   ROOF ASSEMBLY. A system designed to provide weather protection and
resistance to design loads. The system consists of a roof covering and roof
deck or a single component serving as both the roof covering and roof deck. A
ROOF ASSEMBLY includes the roof deck, vapor retarder, substrate or thermal
barrier, insulation, vapor retarder and roof covering.
   ROOF COVERING. The covering applied to the roof deck for weather resistance,
fire classification or appearance.
   SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA. Defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code.
   SETBACK. Defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code.
   SETBACK AREA. Defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code.
   SETBACK LINE. Defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code.
   SETBACK LINE, FRONT. Defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code.
   SETBACK LINE, REAR. Defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code.
   SETBACK LINE, SIDE. Defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code.
   SIGHT DISTANCE TRIANGLE. The line of sight to the right and left of a driver
sitting in a car three feet above the driveway or access road preparing to
enter the public road. The driver must be able to see 250 feet in either
direction to an object three feet above the asphalt of the public road in the
oncoming lane.
   SITE COVERAGE. Defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code.
   SLOPE. Defined in Title 12, Chapter 2 of this code. Shall be established by
measuring the maximum number of feet in elevation gained or lost over each ten
feet or fraction thereof measured horizontally in any direction between
opposing lot lines; the relationship of elevation or vertical measure as
divided by the horizontal measurement shall be expressed as a percentile as a
means of quantifying the term SLOPE. In determination of SLOPE as defined
herein, for use in establishing buildable area requirements and maximum floor
area ratio limitations on existing and proposed lots, a grid system based on
ten foot modules shall be superimposed on a topographic map of the subject
property and the lot slope determination established by the defined method for
each 100 square foot grid portion of the tract, lot or portion thereof.
      (1)   EXISTING, NATURAL. The gradient or configuration of the undisturbed
land surface prior to site improvement of a lot, site or parcel.
      (2)   GRADED, FINISHED. The gradient or configuration of the land surface
following improvement of a lot, site, or parcel.
   SOLAR ENERGY DEVICE. A solar collector or similar device or a structural
design feature of a structure, such as a roof shingle with integrated
photovoltaic cells, which collects sunlight and comprises part of a system for
the conversion of the sun’s radiant energy into thermal, chemical, mechanical
or electrical energy.
   SPILL. An unintentional release of solid or liquid material which may cause
pollution of the MS4 or waters of the state.
   SQUARE AREA. The area required to be accommodated completely within a lot’s
boundaries in order for the lot to be buildable; expressed as a square.
   STAGING AREA. A dedicated or designated space that is intended for use by
the Fire Department, sufficiently large enough to provide for adequate
operation.
   STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWMP). A written plan to minimize pollutants in
stormwater discharged from construction sites as required under the Colorado
discharge permit system (CDPS) general permit for stormwater discharges
associated with construction activity. This plan includes a site description
and map, identifies best management practices for implementation at the site
and identifies maintenance and inspection requirements for these best
management practices.
   STORMWATER QUALITY CONTROL PLAN. A plan to control pollutants transported in
stormwater prior to pollutants entering waterbodies. Stormwater quality control
plans in the context of these regulations refer to postdevelopment stormwater
flows, rather than stormwater flows under construction conditions. Stormwater
quality control plans should be based on best management practices (BMPs) such
as avoiding direct discharge into waterbodies, minimizing directly connected
impervious area, use of detention ponds and other BMPs.
   STREET, PRIVATE. Any street not dedicated to the public for purposes of
vehicular or pedestrian use.
   STREET, PUBLIC.
      (1)   The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular or pedestrian travel; and
      (2)   The entire width of every way declared to be a public highway by
any law of this state; and further classified and defined as follows.
         (a)   ARTERIAL STREETS. Those which permit the relatively rapid and
unimpeded movement of large volumes of traffic from one part of the community
to another.
         (b)   COLLECTOR STREETS. Those which collect traffic from minor
streets and carry it to arterial streets or to local traffic generators.
COLLECTOR STREETS include the principal entrance streets to a residential
development, those linking such adjacent developments, and those streets
providing circulation within such developments.
         (c)   MINOR STREETS. Those used primarily for direct access to
properties abutting the right-of-way. MINOR STREETS carry traffic having an
origin or destination within the development and do not carry through traffic.
   TEMPORARY GRADING. Grading performed to accommodate construction.
   TEMPORARY SLOPE PROTECTION MEASURES. Used on slopes to reduce erosion and
assist in reestablishing vegetation.
   TEMPORARY SOIL EROSION CONTROL MEASURES. Interim control measures which are
installed or constructed and maintained whenever grading or other earth
disturbance is to occur for the purpose of soil erosion control until permanent
soil erosion control is effected.
   THREE POINT TURN. The ability to completely turn a vehicle using a maximum
of four movements which creates the three points when the total turning
movement is laid out.
   TOPOGRAPHIC SURVEY. A study conducted that produces a map of a lot or lots
showing elevation from some fixed reference point.
   VALET PARKING. A service provided with or without a fee where vehicle is
dropped at a designated location and an employee drives said vehicle to a
parking space.
   VALLEY. The internal angle formed by the intersection of two sloping roof
planes.
   WETLANDS. As determined by the Army Corps of Engineers or qualified
environmental consultant, those areas that are inundated or saturated by
surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions.
      (1)   WETLANDS generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
      (2)   For purposes of these regulations WETLANDS do not include areas
that are saturated solely by the application of agricultural irrigation water.
Human-made lakes and ponds built for the purpose of detaining runoff are not
considered WETLANDS in the context of these regulations.
(Ord., 9-21-1999; Ord. 29(2005) § 79; Ord. 3(2007) § 2; Ord. 27(2007) § 2; Ord.
28(2007) § 11; Ord. 3(2008) § 2; Ord. 3(2010) § 2; Ord. 5(2011) § 1; Ord. 15
(2019) § 2; Ord. 19(2019) § 10; Ord. 14(2015) § 1)
CHAPTER 3: RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL ACCESS, DRIVEWAY AND PARKING STANDARDS
Section
14-3-1 Minimum standards
14-3-2 Other requirements
§ 14-3-1 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   This section (Tables 1 and 2) specifies the access, driveway and parking
standards for residential and commercial development. These standards are
subject to all conditions and exceptions described herein. These standards
shall be considered the minimum standards. When two or more standards conflict,
the more restrictive standard shall apply.
Table 1
Driveway/Feeder Road Standards
         Single-Family, Two-       Multiple-Family     Multiple-Family And
         Family, Primary/Secondary                     Commercial
         - Access to not more than
         3 dwelling units                              - Access to more than 11
Standard (including EHUs)          - Access to 4 to 11 dwelling units and/or
         - Structures and all      dwelling units      commercial properties
         portions thereof within   - Feeder road only  - Feeder road only
         150 ft. from edge of
         street pavement
Table 1
Driveway/Feeder Road Standards
                    Single-Family, Two-                     Multiple-Family And
                    Family, Primary/    Multiple-Family     Commercial
                    Secondary
                    - Access to not
                    more than 3                             - Access to more
Standard            dwelling units                          than 11 dwelling
                    (including EHUs)    - Access to 4 to 11 units and/or
                    - Structures and    dwelling units      commercial
                    all portions        - Feeder road only  properties
                    thereof within 150                      - Feeder road only
                    ft. from edge of
                    street pavement
Driveway/Feeder Road
                                           20 ft.           22 ft.
                                        - Access from       - Access from
Minimum width                           feeder road to      feeder road to
normal (detail 1)   12 ft.              units shall comply  units shall comply
                                        with single-family  with single-family
                                        requirements        requirements
                                        contained herein    contained herein
Minimum width 90
degree corner       15 ft.              24 ft.              24 ft.
(crossover) (detail
2)
Minimum width       16 ft. (flare to 16 24 ft. (flare to 24 28 ft. (flare to 28
entrance/curb cut   ft.)                ft. with 10 ft.     ft. with 15 ft.
(detail 1)                              curb return radius) curb return radius)
Maximum width       24 ft. head in
entrance/curb cut   48 ft. back out     36 ft.              36 ft.
(detail 3)
Minimum grade
centerline (detail  0.5%                0.5%                0.5%
4)
Maximum grade       10% unheated        9% unheated         9% unheated
centerline (detail  12% heated          12% heated          12% heated
4)
Maximum grade
centerline corner/  8% unheated         8% unheated         8% unheated
crossover (detail   12% heated          12% heated          10% heated
2)
Maximum cross slope 8%                  8%                  8%
grade (detail 1)
Entry angle minimum
deflection for
first 30 ft. of     45 degrees          70 degrees          70 degrees
driveway length
(detail 5)
Maximum centerline
breakover grade     14%                 6%                  4%
(detail 6)
Maximum grade at
edge of public road 8%                  6%                  4%
asphalt (detail 4)
Maximum length of
maximum grade at    10 ft.              15 ft.              30 ft.
edge of public road
asphalt (detail 4)
Minimum centerline
turning radius      20 ft.              30 ft.              40 ft.
(detail 7)
 
Table 2
Residential Access and Parking Standards
         Single-Family, Two-
         Family, Primary/Secondary
         - Access to not more than Multiple-Family     Multiple-Family
         3 dwelling units          - Access to 4 to 11 - Access to more than 11
Standard (including EHUs)          dwelling units      dwelling units
         - Structures and all      - Feeder road only  - Feeder road only
         portions thereof within
         150 ft. from edge of
         street pavement
Table 2
Residential Access and Parking Standards
                    Single-Family, Two-
                    Family, Primary/
                    Secondary
                    - Access to not                         Multiple-Family
                    more than 3         Multiple-Family     - Access to more
Standard            dwelling units      - Access to 4 to 11 than 11 dwelling
                    (including EHUs)    dwelling units      units
                    - Structures and    - Feeder road only  - Feeder road only
                    all portions
                    thereof within 150
                    ft. from edge of
                    street pavement
Curb Cuts
                    1 per street per
Curb cuts permitted unit                2 per parcel        Minimum necessary
(number)            Maximum of 2 curb                       for adequate access
                    cuts per lot
Parking Requirements
Minimum horizontal
clearance between
garage doors
(parallel to road)  24 ft.              N/A                 N/A
to edge of public
street pavement
(detail 3)
Minimum horizontal
clearance between
required parking
space and edge of   5 ft.               5 ft.               5 ft.
public street or
feeder road
pavement
Minimum horizontal
clearance from
feeder road to                          2 ft. from          5 ft. from
structures/                             obstructions        obstructions
obstructions (e.g., N/A                 5 ft. from          10 ft. from
guardrails, trees,                      buildings           buildings
retaining walls and
the like) (detail
8)
                                        See Table 5, §     See Table 5, §
                    9 ft. x 19 ft.      14-5-1 of this      14-5-1 of this
Parking space size  surface             title, commercial/  title, commercial/
                    9 ft. x 18 ft.      multipl e-family    multipl e-family
                    enclosed            parking lot         parking lot
                                        standards           standards
                    Forward movement:
                    10 ft.                                  10 ft.
                    perpendicular x 250 10 ft.              perpendicular x 250
                    ft. lateral         perpendicular x 250 ft. lateral or per
                    Backward movement:  ft. lateral or per  AASHTO intersection
Sight distance      15 ft.              AASHTO intersection sight distance
triangle (detail 3) perpendicular x 250 sight distance      standards if
                    ft. lateral or per  standards if        required by the
                    AASHTO intersection required by the     Administrator, or
                    sight distance      Administrator       by an approved
                    standards if                            mitigation device
                    required by the
                    Administrator
                    12 ft. wide
                    20 ft. centerline                       Backout into right-
                    radius                                  of-way prohibited
                    Designed for 3                          Car turnaround
                    point turn or less                      area:
                    Required when:                          - 12 ft. wide
                    - crossover angle   Backout into right- - 20 ft. centerline
                    is greater than 120 of-way prohibited   radius
                    ;                   Turnaround area:    - Designed for 3
Backout/turnaround  - entry angle is    - 12 ft. wide       point turn or less
area (detail 7)     less than 70 ;      - 20 ft. centerline Truck turnaround
                    - accessing a       radius              area: Shall be
                    collector,          - Designed for 3    designed so trucks
                    arterial, or        point turn or less  exit site forward
                    commercial street;                      as determined by
                    or                                      traffic engineer
                    - backout sight                         based on uses
                    triangle                                proposed
                    requirement is not
                    met
                    4 ft. wide concrete 4 ft. wide concrete 8 ft. wide concrete
Driveway pan        pan at edge of      pan at edge of      pan at edge of
(drainage) (detail  asphalt for the     asphalt for the     asphalt for the
1)                  full width driveway full width driveway full width driveway
                    pavement including  pavement including  pavement including
                    returns             returns             returns
 
(Ord., 9-21-1999; Ord. 14(2006) § 5; Ord. 28(2007) § 12)
Editor’s note:
   For diagrams depicting the requirements herein, see figures in Chapter 11 of
this title that correspond to the detail numbers given in parenthesis.
§ 14-3-2 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Vehicular maneuverability. Parking required for each dwelling unit
must be independently accessible (i.e., required parking for one unit cannot
block access for parking for another unit on site).
   (B)   Surfacing. All parking areas shall be an improved paved surface.
Double track driveways are permitted.
   (C)   Heated drives. Any heated portion of the drive located within the
right-of-way must be in a separate zone. The four-foot concrete pan cannot be
heated.
   (D)   Snow storage. All required parking and access areas shall be designed
to accommodate on site snow storage (i.e., within boundaries of lot and not
within the right-of-way). Turf areas and other areas without trees may be
utilized for this purpose.
      (1)   Unheated drives. A minimum functional area equaling 30% of the
paved area shall be provided contiguous to the paved area and designed to
accommodate snow storage.
      (2)   Heated drives. A minimum functional area equaling 10% of the paved
area shall be provided contiguous to the paved area and designed to accommodate
snow storage.
   (E)   Guardrails. Steep slopes adjacent to vehicular accessways and/or
driveways without a proper shoulder may require the installation of a vehicular
guardrail. The design and type of vehicular guardrail for private properties
shall be designed by a registered Colorado professional engineer. Vehicular
guardrails on public roadways or protecting the travelling public shall meet
the standard of the Town of Vail.
   (F)   Location. Parking spaces, aisles and turning areas shall be entirely
within lot lines and shall not encroach on any public right-of-way. No parked
vehicle shall overhang any public right-of-way.
   (G)   Landscape and other improvements within or adjacent to the right-of-
way. All improvements and landscaping within or adjacent to the right-of-way
shall be subject to Town of Vail approval and shall require a revocable right-
of-way permit to be recorded with Eagle County. The improvements shall adhere
to the following guidelines (Table 3) unless otherwise approved by the
Administrator:
Table 3
Improvements and the Right-of-Way
Improvement Minimum Offset from Edge of Minimum Offset from Edge of Public
            Public Road                 Walk/Path
Table 3
Improvements and the Right-of-Way
Improvement                Minimum Offset from Edge Minimum Offset from Edge of
                           of Public Road           Public Walk/Path
Trees                      10 ft.                   5 ft.
Shrubs/perennials/annuals/ 5 ft.                    2 ft.
and the like
Retaining walls and other  10 ft.                   5 ft.
permanent obstructions
Water features, decks,
patios, parking, private
signs, entry features,     Not allowed in right-of- Not allowed in right-of-
gates, fences, private     way                      way
lights, cobble lined
ditches
Irrigation and grass       2 ft.                    0 ft.
 
(Ord., 9-21-1999; Ord. 28(2007) § 13)
CHAPTER 4: RESIDENTIAL FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCESS STANDARDS
Section
14-4-1 Minimum standards
§ 14-4-1 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   This section (Table 4) specifies residential Fire Department access
standards for residential development. These standards are subject to all
conditions and exceptions described herein. These standards shall be considered
the minimum standards. When two or more standards conflict, the more
restrictive standard shall apply.
Table 4
Residential Fire Department Access Standards
         Single-Family, Two-Family, Primary/Secondary, And Multiple-Family
Standard - Requiring on site fire department access (structures or portions
         thereof greater than 150 ft. from edge of street pavement)
Table 4
Residential Fire Department Access Standards
                                        Single-Family, Two-Family, Primary/
                                        Secondary, And Multiple-Family
Standard                                - Requiring on site fire department
                                        access (structures or portions thereof
                                        greater than 150 ft. from edge of
                                        street pavement)
                                        A. For structures with the highest
                                        floor level 30 ft. or less in elevation
                                        from staging area:
                                         
                                        - 29 ft. inside radius
                                         
                                        - 44 ft. outside radius
                                         
                                        - 36 ft. centerline radius
                                         
                                        - 20 ft. crossover width
Minimum pavement radii for fire truck   B. For structures with the highest
access and minimum pavement crossover   floor level greater than 30 ft. in
width (including curb cut accessing     elevation from staging area:
site)                                    
                                        - 31 ft. inside radius
                                         
                                        - 48 ft. outside radius
                                         
                                        - 40 ft. centerline radius
                                         
                                        - 22 ft. crossover width
                                        Note: The Town of Vail reserves the
                                        right in unique circumstances to
                                        utilize a computer modeling technique
                                        to determine radii needed for access.
                                        Required if Fire Department staging
Turnaround area                         area is 150 ft. or more from edge of
                                        roadway pavement.
                                        A. For structures with the highest
                                        floor level 30 ft. or less in elevation
                                        from staging area:
                                         
                                        - 12 ft. wide and 35 ft. long pavement
                                        area
                                         
                                        - 32 ft. wide useable clear area
                                        inclusive of paved area
                                         
                                        The staging area must be located less
                                        than the minimum distance required to
                                        reach all areas of structures using a
Minimum on site Fire Department staging 150 ft. curvilinear line with a minimum
area (detail 9)                         radius of 8 ft.
                                        B. For structures with the highest
                                        floor level greater than 30 ft. in
                                        elevation from staging area:
                                         
                                        - 12 ft. wide and 50 ft. long pavement
                                        area
                                         
                                        - 32 ft. wide useable clear area
                                        inclusive of paved area
                                         
                                        - The staging area must commence a
                                        maximum of 20 ft. from the face of
                                        structure
If the Fire Department makes the determination that access standards cannot
physically be met, the structure must be sprinklered in accordance with fire
and building codes.
 
(Ord., 9-21-1999; Ord. 28(2007) § 14)
Editor’s note:
   For diagrams depicting the requirements herein, see figures in Chapter 11 of
this title that correspond to the detail numbers given in parenthesis.
CHAPTER 5: PARKING LOT AND PARKING STRUCTURE DESIGN STANDARDS FOR ALL USES
Section
14-5-1 Minimum standards
14-5-2 Other requirements
§ 14-5-1 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   This section (Table 5) specifies the parking lot standards for all uses
excluding residential uses under three units and including, but not limited to,
commercial, retail, office, restaurant, institutional, hotel, accommodation and
multiple-family development. These standards are subject to all conditions and
exceptions described herein. These standards shall be considered the minimum
standards. When two or more standards conflict the more restrictive standard
shall apply.
Table 5
Parking Lot Design Standards
Angle of Parking Minimum One-Way Minimum Two-Way Drive Minimum Parking Stall
Space            Drive Aisle     Aisle                 Size and Clearance
Table 5
Parking Lot Design Standards
Angle of Parking     Minimum One-Way Minimum Two-Way Minimum Parking Stall
Space                Drive Aisle     Drive Aisle     Size and Clearance
0 degrees (parallel) 12 ft.          22 ft.          9 ft. x 24 ft.
45 degrees           14 ft.          22 ft.          9 ft. x 19 ft.
                                                     surface
                                                     9 ft. x 18 ft.
                                                     enclosed
                                                     8 ft. x 16 ft.
                                                     compact (up to 25% of
                                                     required parking in
                                                     lots with more than
                                                     15 parking spaces and
                                                     clearly marked as
                                                     such)
                                                     7 ft. height
                                                     clearance for
                                                     enclosed parking
60 degrees           16 ft.          24 ft.          9 ft. x 19 ft.
                                                     surface
                                                     9 ft. x 18 ft.
                                                     enclosed
                                                     8 ft. x 16 ft.
                                                     compact (up to 25% of
                                                     required parking in
                                                     lots with more than
                                                     15 parking spaces and
                                                     clearly marked as
                                                     such)
                                                     7 ft. height
                                                     clearance for
                                                     enclosed parking
75 degrees           19 ft.          24 ft.          9 ft. x 19 ft.
                                                     surface
                                                     9 ft. x 18 ft.
                                                     enclosed
                                                     8 ft. x 16 ft.
                                                     compact (up to 25% of
                                                     required parking in
                                                     lots with more than
                                                     15 parking spaces and
                                                     clearly marked as
                                                     such)
                                                     7 ft. height
                                                     clearance for
                                                     enclosed parking
90 degrees           24 ft.          24 ft.          9 ft. x 19 ft.
                                                     surface
                                                     9 ft. x 18 ft.
                                                     enclosed
                                                     8 ft. x 16 ft.
                                                     compact (up to 25% of
                                                     required parking in
                                                     lots with more than
                                                     15 parking spaces and
                                                     clearly marked as
                                                     such)
                                                     7 ft. height
                                                     clearance for
                                                     enclosed parking
Crossover drive      17 ft.          30 ft.          N/A
aisle
Drive aisle with no  12 ft.          22 ft.          N/A
parking
Minimum opening for
a parking structure  12 ft.          20 ft.          N/A
entrance
 
(Ord., 9-21-1999; Ord. 28(2007) § 15)
§ 14-5-2 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Surfacing. All parking areas shall be an improved paved surface.
   (B)   On-street parking. On street parking is not permitted for private
developments. All public on street parking provided in the right-of-way shall
meet the standards included in this chapter (Table 5).
   (C)   Location. Parking spaces, aisles and turning areas shall be entirely
within lot lines and shall not encroach on any public right-of-way. No parked
vehicle shall overhang any public right-of-way.
   (D)   Grades. All driveway and parking lot grades shall meet the
requirements for “multiple-family developments of more than 11 units” per Table
1, “Driveway/Feeder Road Standards”, §
14-3-1 of this title.
   (E)   Fire lane. A fire lane shall be required and must be located within
150 feet of all areas of the parking lot.
   (F)   Drainage. Proper drainage and storm water management shall be provided
in all parking areas.
   (G)   Snow storage. All required parking and access areas shall be designed
to accommodate on site snow storage (i.e., within boundaries of lot and not
within the right-of-way). A minimum functional area equaling 30% of the paved
area shall be provided contiguous to the paved area and designed to accommodate
snow storage. Turf areas and other areas without trees may be utilized for this
purpose. If driveways are heated, then the minimum snow storage area may be
reduced to 10% of the required parking and access areas.
   (H)   Landscaping. Not less than 10% of the interior surface area of
unenclosed off-street parking areas containing 15 or more parking spaces shall
be devoted to landscaping. In addition, landscape borders not less than ten
feet in depth shall be provided at all edges of parking lots containing 30 or
more parking spaces. A landscape berm, wall, or fence of not less than four
feet in height, of the same architectural style as the building, in combination
with landscaping may be substituted for the landscape border. In developments
with cross access or shared parking facilities, the landscape border between
the developments shall not be required.
   (I)   Backing into the street/right-of-way. All parking for commercial and
multiple-family developments shall be designed to allow a vehicle forward
access to any street or right-of-way.
   (J)   Trailhead parking. Trailhead parking lots accommodating up to 15
parking spaces may be improved with gravel, but shall adhere to all other
requirements contained in this chapter.
   (K)   Valet parking. Valet parking shall be allowed, but shall not exceed
50% of the required parking on site. Valet parking shall be calculated
utilizing an eight-foot by 18-foot parking space for each car (parallel spaces
must be nine feet by 20 feet). Cars may be parked up to four cars deep in a
valet lot stacked in a manner in which any vehicles that may have to be
temporarily moved by a valet to gain access to another vehicle can be
temporarily parked in a location that does not block public drive/pedestrian
aisles or a designated parking space.
   (L)   Tandem parking. Tandem parking is not permitted for commercial uses
unless approved as valet parking.
   (M)   Parking structure ramp grade. Table 6 (below) outlines requirements
for cross slope, ramp grade and centerline grade break in parking structures.
 
Table 6
Parking Structure Ramp Grades
Parking Structure    Maximum Parking   Maximum Ramp Grades Maximum Centerline
Ramp Type            Space Cross Slope                     Grade Break
Passenger vehicle
only and internal to 6%                14%                 8%
structure
Passenger vehicle                      Unheated 9%; heated
only and external    6%                12%                 8%
(exposed to weather)
Commercial/loading   6%                Unheated 9%; heated 6%
and delivery                           12%
 
(Ord., 9-21-1999; Ord. 28(2007) § 16)
CHAPTER 6: GRADING STANDARDS
Section
14-6-1 General standards
14-6-2 Existing vegetation
14-6-3 Natural features
14-6-4 Construction fence
14-6-5 Erosion control
14-6-6 Floodplain standards
14-6-7 Retaining walls
14-6-8 Storm water quality permits
§ 14-6-1 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   This section provides a summary of grading standards within the Town
of Vail. All grading is subject to design review to determine compatibility
with existing topography, to review the extent of existing vegetation removal
and to preserve significant features on the site. The Administrator may require
grading plans to be stamped by a Colorado professional engineer (PE).
   (B)   All temporary grading shall be in compliance with currently adopted
OSHA standards. All permanent finished grades shall be at a maximum two to one
(2:1) (horizontal:vertical), unless otherwise approved by the Administrator and
providing that no grading exceeds one to one (1:1) and that any grading steeper
than two to one (2:1)(h:v) is designed and stamped by a Colorado professional
engineer.
(Ord. 27(2007) § 3)
§ 14-6-2 EXISTING VEGETATION.
   Grading around existing vegetation to be preserved on site shall be outside
the critical root zone, unless otherwise approved by the Design Review Board.
The critical root zone may be defined as a radius equal to one foot for each
inch of caliper measured one foot above the natural grade, or as defined by a
qualified arborist or landscape architect. A tree preservation plan developed
by a qualified arborist may be required by the Administrator.
(Ord. 27(2007) § 4)
§ 14-6-3 NATURAL FEATURES.
   Grading that is detrimental to existing natural features is discouraged.
Those areas of a site that are determined to remain in a natural state shall be
protected during construction. A site specific construction disturbance plan
shall be prepared, outlining the areas to be disturbed and the methods and
devices used to protect the remaining portions of the site.
(Ord., 9-21-1999)
§ 14-6-4 CONSTRUCTION FENCE.
   All areas to be protected shall have a nonremovable construction fence or
other approved device placed around the areas to be protected. Within the Vail
Village and Lionshead Core Areas, as defined by the Vail Village master plan
and Lionshead Redevelopment Master Plan, construction fence shall be six to
eight feet in height and constructed out of plywood (painted green) or
chainlink fence with green mesh windscreens. Decorative construction fences may
be allowed at the discretion of the Design Review Board.
(Ord., 9-21-1999; Ord. 29(2005) § 80)
§ 14-6-5 EROSION CONTROL.
   All sites with disturbances will need to provide erosion control measures
using best management practices. Sites greater than one acre or sites with
total disturbance greater than one-half acre shall provide an erosion control
plan prepared by a registered Colorado professional engineer.
(Ord., 9-21-1999)
§ 14-6-6 FLOODPLAIN STANDARDS.
   (A)   All modifications, grading or installation of proposed improvements
within the 100-year floodplain shall be in accordance with §
12-21-11 of this code.
   (B)   The floodplain line shall be determined by a registered professional
land surveyor by plotting the appropriate elevation of the floodplain on a
maximum one inch equals 20 feet topographic two foot-contour map using the
adopted Town of Vail flood profiles (the federal emergency management agency
flood insurance study). The topographic survey shall reveal the method for
determining the starting point and the starting elevation for the floodplain
delineation. A site specific study performed by a professional engineer per
FEMA guidelines and approved by the Town of Vail and FEMA may be required.
(Ord., 9-21-1999; Ord. 27(2007) § 5)
§ 14-6-7 RETAINING WALLS.
   (A)   General. All retaining walls are reviewed by the Design Review Board
or the Administrator to determine compatibility to the existing topography of
and the materials in use. Retaining walls shall not exceed an exposed face
height of six feet, except in the CH-1, CH-2, or CH-3 Districts, where
retaining walls shall not exceed an exposed face height of 15 feet. Within a
front setback, retaining walls shall not exceed an exposed face height of three
feet, unless related to access to or development of a structure on excessive
slopes (in excess of 30%). Retaining walls associated with a street located
within a public right-of-way or access to an underground covered parking
structure are exempt from these height limits but shall be approved by the
Design Review Board and shall meet the standards prescribed in §
14-10-3 .
   (B)   Height. 
      (1)   Retaining walls shall not exceed an exposed face height of six
feet, except in the H or H-2 Districts, where retaining walls shall not exceed
an exposed face height of 15 feet.
      (2)   In a front setback, retaining walls shall not exceed an exposed
face height of three feet, unless related to access to or development of a
structure on slopes in excess of 30%.
      (3)   Retaining walls associated with a street located in a public right-
of-way, or access to an underground covered parking structure are exempt from
these height limits.
      (4)   All retaining walls over four feet in height, measured from the
bottom of a footing to the top of wall as per the adopted Building Code, shall
be engineered and stamped by a licensed Colorado professional engineer, and
shall include engineered stamped plans, profiles, sections, details and
engineering analyses and calculations.
      (5)   All retaining walls in a public right-of-way over three feet in
height, measured from the bottom of a footing to the top of wall as per the
adopted Building Code, shall be engineered and stamped by a licensed Colorado
professional engineer, and shall include engineered stamped plans, profiles,
sections, details and engineering analyses and calculations.
      (6)   The height limit for retaining walls is based on the exposed height
of either a single or combined height of combination walls. If the batter
(slope of the face of the wall) is greater than one to one (1:1), the wall
shall be engineered and stamped by a licensed Colorado professional engineer,
and shall include engineered stamped plans, profiles, sections, details and
engineering analyses and calculations.
   (C)   Landscaping. To avoid excessive vertical expanses of retaining walls
and to provide visual relief in areas highly visible to the public, the Design
Review Board may require landscaping in front of walls and landscape benches
between walls.
   (D)   Location. Retaining walls shall be located at least two feet from
adjacent private property boundaries and at least ten feet from the edge of a
public street unless otherwise approved by the Design Review Board.
   (E)   Combination retaining walls. A retaining wall is considered a
combination wall if the upper wall falls within a prism defined as starting one
foot behind the face of the lower wall at the lowest finished grade line and
then back at a one and one-half to one (1.5:1) angle from the starting point.
The minimum bench of combination retaining walls shall be four feet. All
combination retaining walls shall be engineered and stamped by a licensed
Colorado professional engineer, and shall include engineered stamped plans,
profiles, sections, details and engineering analyses and calculations.
(Ord. 29(2023) § 3; amd. Ord. 6(2024) § 12)
§ 14-6-8 STORM WATER QUALITY PERMITS.
   (A)   Purpose, intent and liability.
      (1)   Purpose. The preservation of wetland and water areas serves to
prevent water quality degradation of Gore Creek and its tributaries the natural
and several human-made ponds in the Town of Vail. Protection of ecosystems,
aquatic habitats and wildlife habitats, especially habitats for state or
federally designated threatened or endangered species, to preserve ground water
recharge functions, and preserve natural floodplain control.
      (2)   Intent. The intent of this chapter is to enhance the quality of
water in the town’s drainageways and subsequent receiving waters by
establishing requirements for storm water quality permits for construction and
development, to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation from leaving
construction activities within the town in order to protect the vital,
beneficial functions and values of wetlands, streams, riparian zones or areas
and water bodies within the town.
      (3)   Liability. Any person who undertakes or causes to be undertaken any
activity which involves disturbance of the land’s surface shall ensure that
soil erosion, sedimentation, increased pollutant loads and changed water flow
characteristics resulting from the activity are controlled so as to minimize
pollution of receiving waters. The requirements of this section are minimum
standards and a person’s compliance with the same shall not relieve such person
from the duty of enacting all measures necessary to minimize pollution of
receiving waters.
   (B)   Permit required.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity
resulting in the disturbance of any land areas within the riparian zone, or
resulting in a total disturbed area of at least one-half acre, without first
obtaining a storm water quality permit from the town. Total disturbed area
includes any land within a project that meets the definition of “disturbed
area”, whether or not such parcels are contiguous.
      (2)   Regardless of total disturbed area, the town may also require a
storm water quality permit in conjunction with the approval of a final
subdivision plat, conditional use permit, or development plan.
      (3)   The town may also require a storm water quality permit for a
disturbed area of less than one-half acre that is part of a larger common plan
of development.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any such person to fail to obtain a storm
water quality permit. Issuance of a permit by the Town of Vail does not exempt
the parties from obtaining any permits required by the State of Colorado or the
federal government.
   (C)   Permit application. Persons required to obtain a storm water quality
permit shall complete and file with the town an application on a form
prescribed by the town, in accordance with the requirements of this section
with the building permit application prior to the beginning of construction
activities.
      (1)   In support of the application, the applicant shall submit all
information required on the town’s form and any additional information
requested by the town.
      (2)   A separate application shall be required for each storm water
quality permit along with plans, specifications and timing schedules for all
earth disturbances.
      (3)   Where the permittee fails to submit any relevant facts in a permit
application or report to the town, the permittee shall promptly submit the
relevant application information which was not submitted or any additional
information which was not submitted or any additional information needed to
correct any erroneous information previously submitted.
   (D)   Procedure for review of applications. Unless otherwise stated in this
regulation, the submission of an application for, determination of the
completeness of, staff review of, and notice and scheduling of public hearings
on all applications for storm water quality permits shall comply with the
procedures of this subsection (D).
      (1)   Initiation. Applications for a storm water quality permit shall be
submitted to the Community Development Director and Town Engineer by the owner,
or any other person having a recognized interest in the land for which the
development is proposed, or their authorized agent.
         (a)   Applicant is not the owner. If the applicant is not the owner of
the land, or is a contract purchaser of the land, the applicant shall submit a
letter signed by the owner consenting to the submission of the application.
         (b)   Applicant if not the sole owner. If the applicant is not the
sole owner of the land, the applicant shall submit a letter signed by the other
owners or an association representing the owners consenting to or joining in
the application for a storm water quality permit.
      (2)   Minimum contents of application. The application shall be submitted
in a form established by the Town of Vail and made available to the public:
         (a)   Determination of completeness. The Community Development
Director or Town Engineer shall determine if the application is complete and
includes data in sufficient detail to evaluate the application to determine
whether it complies with the appropriate substantive requirements of these
water quality protection standards;
         (b)   Applicant’s identity. The applicant’s name, mailing address,
telephone and fax number. If the applicant is to be represented by an agent, a
letter signed by the applicant granting power of attorney to the agent shall be
submitted, authorizing the agent to represent the applicant and stating the
representative’s name, mailing address, telephone and fax number;
         (c)   Legal description. The legal description and street address, if
such exists, of the parcel on which storm water quality controls are proposed
to occur;
         (d)   Disclosure of ownership. A disclosure of ownership of the
property upon which the storm water quality permit is proposed to occur,
listing the names of all owners of the property, and all mortgages, judgments,
liens, easements, contracts and agreements that run with the land. The
disclosure of ownership may be in the form of a current certificate from a
title insurance company, deed, ownership and encumbrance report, attorney’s
opinion or other documentation acceptable to the Town Attorney;
         (e)   Vicinity map. An eight and one-half inch by 11 inch vicinity
map, locating the subject parcel within the Town of Vail;
         (f)   Streamside zone setback delineation. A property which is shown
to include a stream and/or wetland shall be required to provide a survey or
dimensional site plan, drawn at an engineering scale of one to 20 (1:20),
showing property lines, buildings and any points of reference from the
streamside zone setback to the Town of Vail;
         (g)   Written description. A written description of the proposal and
an explanation in written, graphic or model form of how the proposed
development complies with the storm water quality standards regulation;
         (h)   Environmental impact report. Environmental impact report, when
applicable;
         (i)   Adjacent property owners. A list of all property owners,
compiled by the applicant using the most recent Eagle County tax rolls, is
required for all applications and shall be submitted to the Community
Development Director as part of the application for development. In addition to
submitting a written list, the applicant shall also submit the addresses on
adhesive labels or in the form of pre-addressed envelopes; and
         (j)   Determined incomplete. If the Community Development Director or
Town Engineer determines the application is incomplete, a written notice shall
be mailed to the applicant specifying the application’s deficiencies. No
further action shall be taken on the application until the deficiencies are
remedied. If the applicant fails to correct the deficiencies within 60 calendar
days, the application shall be considered withdrawn and returned to the
applicant. The applicant may appeal the Community Development Director’s
determination to the Planning and Environmental Commission (PEC) pursuant to
subsection (E) of this section.
   (E)   Permit issuance/denial.
      (1)   The town shall have up to ten working days after receipt of the
complete application to request additional information and/or deny the permit.
Upon receipt of the corrective information, the town shall have an additional
ten working days to issue or deny the permit.
      (2)   If a permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified of such in
writing. The notification shall set forth the grounds for denial and inform the
applicant of what corrective actions must be taken to obtain a permit. An
applicant may appeal the denial in writing to the PEC no later than 30 calendar
days from the date of issuance denial. The appeal must set forth the grounds
for the appeal and include any documents in support of the applicant’s appeal.
The PEC shall within 30 calendar days of receipt of an appeal rule on the
matter based solely upon review of the application, denial, appeal and all
documents related thereto. The parties shall receive written notice of the
PEC’s decision.
   (F)   Storm water management plan. A storm water management plan (SWMP) is
required to be submitted with the application and shall be prepared in
accordance with all of the requirements of the most recent SWMP guidance
document prepared by the CDPHE and good engineering, hydrologic and pollution
control practices. Prior to commencement of construction activities, the SWMP
shall be implemented for the construction site covered by the permit.
      (1)   Signatory requirements. All plans shall be signed and certified for
accuracy by the operator.
      (2)   SWMP review/changes. The operator shall amend the plan whenever
there is a significant change in design, construction, operation or
maintenance, which has a significant effect on the potential for discharge of
pollutants to the MS4 or receiving waters, or if the SWMP provides to be
ineffective in achieving the general objectives of controlling pollutants in
storm water discharges associated with construction activities.
   (G)   Responsibility of permittee. During construction activities the
permittee shall be responsible for:
      (1)   The prevention of damage to any public utilities or service within
the limits or grading and along any routes of travel of the equipment;
      (2)   The prevention of damage to adjacent property (no person shall
grade on land so close to the property line as to endanger any adjoining public
street, sidewalk, alley or any public or private property without supporting
and protecting such property from settling, cracking or other damage which
might result);
      (3)   Carrying out the proposed work in accordance with the approved SWMP
and in compliance with all the requirements of the permit and this section;
      (4)   The prompt removal of all soil, miscellaneous debris, materials
applied, dumped or otherwise deposited on public streets, highways, sidewalks
or other public thoroughfares or any other nonauthorized off site location,
during transit to and from the construction site, or otherwise, where such
spillage constitutes a public nuisance, trespass or hazard in the determination
of the Town Engineer or a court of competent jurisdiction; and
      (5)   In addition to the actual construction activities, the following
types of activities must be evaluated for the reasonable potential for
contributing pollutants to runoff: loading and unloading operations, outdoor
storage activities; vehicle and equipment maintenance and fueling; significant
dust or particulate generating processes; and on site waste disposal practices.
   (H)   General requirements.
      (1)   Storm water discharges from construction activities shall not cause
or threaten to cause pollution, contamination or degradation of water of the
state.
      (2)   Based on an assessment of the potential of various sources at the
site to contribute pollutants to storm water, the SWMP shall include a
description of reasonable and appropriate control measures that will be
implemented at the site.
      (3)   All temporary erosion control facilities intended to control
erosion and sediment of any earth disturbance operation shall be installed
before any construction activities take place.
      (4)   The selection, design and installation of appropriate structural
and nonstructural BMPs must be done in accordance with the latest version of
the urban drainage and flood control district’s Urban Storm Drainage Criteria
Manuals (vol. 3).
      (5)   Any earth disturbance shall be conducted in such a manner so as to
effectively reduce accelerated soil erosion and resulting sedimentation.
      (6)   All earth disturbances shall be designed, constructed and completed
in such a manner so that the exposed area of any disturbed land shall be
limited to the shortest possible period of time.
      (7)   Sediment caused by accelerated soil erosion shall be minimized from
runoff water before it leaves the site of the disturbed area.
      (8)   Any temporary or permanent facility designed and constructed for
the conveyance of water around, through, or from the earth disturbance area
shall be designed to limit the water flow to a nonerosive velocity.
      (9)   Construction site operators shall control waste such as, but not
limited to, discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals,
litter and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse
impacts to water quality.
      (10)   All discharges authorized by the town shall be composed entirely
of storm water and discharges of material other than storm water must be
addressed in a separate permit issued by the State of Colorado for that
discharge.
      (11)   Discharges exempt from discharge prohibitions (this area refers to
an illicit discharge ordinance) that are combined with storm water discharges
associated with construction activity are authorized:
         (a)   Landscaping irrigation;
         (b)   Lawn watering;
         (c)   Diverted stream flows;
         (d)   Irrigation return flow;
         (e)   Rising ground waters;
         (f)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined in 40
C.F.R. § 35.2005(20));
         (g)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
         (h)   Natural springs;
         (i)   Flow from riparian habitats and wetlands;
         (j)   Water line flushing;
         (k)   Discharges from potable water sources;
         (l)   Foundation drains;
         (m)   Air conditioning condensation;
         (n)   Water from crawl space pumps;
         (o)   Footing drains;
         (p)   Individual residential car washing;
         (q)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and
         (r)   Street wash water.
      (12)   Concrete wash water shall not be discharged to the MS4 or waters
of the state;
      (13)   Off site, vehicle tracking of sediments shall be minimized.
Vehicle tracking on town streets shall not be allowed to enter the MS4 or
waters of the state; all streets shall be scrapped and cleaned by the end of
each day;
      (14)   The bypass of treatment facilities is generally prohibited;
      (15)   Bulk storage structures for petroleum products and other chemicals
shall have protection so as to contain all spills and prevent any spilled
material from entering the MS4 or waters of the state;
      (16)   No chemicals are to be added to the discharge unless the State of
Colorado grants permissions for the use of a specific chemical and
documentation of which is presented to the town;
      (17)   Solids, sludge or other pollutants removed in the course of
treatment or control of wastewaters shall be properly disposed of in a manner
such as to prevent any pollutant from such materials from entering waters of
the state;
      (18)   All wastes composed of building materials must be removed from the
site for disposal in licensed disposal facilities. No building material wastes
or unused building materials shall be buried, dumped or discharged at the site;
      (19)   All discharges must comply with the lawful requirements of the
Town of Vail, and other agencies regarding any discharges of storm water to the
MS4 or waters of the state under their jurisdiction, including applicable
requirements; and
      (20)   Temporary soil erosion control facilities shall be removed upon
completion of all construction activities’ final stabilization, and earth
disturbance areas graded and stabilized with permanent soil erosion control
measures pursuant to the standards and specifications prescribed in the latest
revision of the storm water management plan guidance document prepared by the
CDPHE and in accordance with the permanent erosion control features shown on
the SWMP approved by the town.
   (I)   Site inspections. Inspections shall be completed on a form prescribed
by the town (e.g., CDOT’s inspection form as a template).
      (1)   Active sites. For sites where construction has not been completed,
the permittee and/or operator shall make a thorough inspection of their SWMP at
least every 14 days and after any precipitation or snowmelt event that causes
surface erosion.
         (a)   The construction site perimeter, disturbed areas and areas used
for material storage that are exposed to precipitation shall be inspected for
evidence of, or the potential for, pollutants entering the drainage system.
Erosion and sediment control measures identified in the SWMP shall be observed
to ensure that they are operating correctly.
         (b)   Based on the results of the inspection, the description of
potential pollutant sources, and the pollution prevention and control measures
that are identified in the site’s SWMP shall be revised and modified as
appropriate as soon as practicable after such inspection. Maintenance and/or
modifications to control measures shall be completed in a timely manner, but in
no case more than seven calendar days after the inspection.
         (c)   The permittee and/or operator shall keep a record of inspections
on the project site at all times. Any incidence of noncompliance, such as
uncontrolled releases of mud or muddy water or measurable quantities of
sediment found off the site, shall be recorded with a brief explanation as to
the measures taken to prevent future violations, as well as any measures taken
to clean up the sediment that has left the site. After adequate measures have
been taken to correct any problems, or where a report does not identify any
incidents of noncompliance, the report shall contain a signed certification
indicating the site is in compliance. This record shall be made available to
the Town of Vail or State of Colorado upon request.
      (2)   Completed sites. For sites where all construction activities are
completed but final stabilization has not been achieved due to a vegetative
cover that has been planted but has not become established, the permittee and/
or operator shall make a thorough inspection of the SWMP at least once every
month. When site conditions make this schedule impractical, the permittee and/
or operator may petition the town to grant an alternate inspection schedule.
These inspections must be conducted in accordance with subsections (I)(1)(a),
(I)(1)(b) and (I)(1)(c) of this section.
      (3)   Winter conditions. Inspections, as described in subsection (I)(1)
(a) and (I)(1)(b) of this section, are not required at sites where snow cover
exists over the entire site for an extended period, and melting conditions do
not exist. The exemption is applicable only during the period where melting
conditions do not exist. Regular inspections, as described above, are required
at all other times.
   (J)   Reporting. No regular reporting requirements are included in this
section; however, the town reserves the right to request that a copy of the
inspection reports be submitted.
   (K)   Final stabilization.
      (1)   Final stabilization is reached when all soil disturbing activities
at the site have been completed, and uniform vegetation cover has been
established with a density of at least 70% of predisturbance levels, or
equivalent permanent, physical erosion reduction methods have been employed.
For purposes of this requirement, establishment of a vegetative cover capable
of providing erosion control equivalent to preexisting conditions at the site
can be considered final stabilization. The town may, after consultation with
the permittee and/or operator and upon good cause, amend the final
stabilization criteria for specific operations.
      (2)   Permanent soil erosion control measures for all slopes, channels,
ditches or any disturbed land area shall be completed within 14 calendar days
after final grading or the final earth disturbance has been completed. When it
is not possible to permanently stabilize a disturbed area after an earth
disturbance has been completed or where significant earth disturbance activity
ceases, temporary soil erosion control measures shall be implemented within 14
calendar days. All temporary soil erosion control measures shall be maintained
until permanent soil erosion measures are implemented.
   (L)   Retention of records.
      (1)   The permittee shall retain copies of the SWMP and all reports
required by this permit and records of all data used to complete the
application to be covered by this permit, for a period of at least three years
from the date that the site is finally stabilized; and
      (2)   The permittee shall retain a copy of the SWMP required by this
permit at the construction site from the date of project initiation to the date
of final stabilization, unless the town approves another location, specified by
the permittee.
   (M)   Change in discharge. The permittee shall inform the Town Engineer
within two weeks in writing of any intent to significantly change the
activities from those indicated in the permit application (this does not
include changes to the SWMP). Upon request, the permittee shall furnish the
town with such plans and specifications, which the town deems reasonably
necessary to evaluate the effect on the discharge and receiving water. The SWMP
shall be updated within 30 days of the changes. Any discharge to the waters of
the state from a point source other than specifically authorized in this
section is prohibited.
   (N)   Operation and maintenance requirements. The owner shall be responsible
for the maintenance of all permanent quality measures enacted pursuant to this
chapter. All temporary storm water quality control measures shall be removed
after work on the site has been completed and the measures are no longer
needed. Should any property owner fail to adequately maintain the permanent
storm water quality measures or remove the temporary measures, the town may,
after notifying the owner of the required maintenance and/or removal and the
owner failing to perform such maintenance and/or removal, enter the affected
property and perform or cause to be performed the required work and assess the
charge for such work against the property owner, in accordance with the
procedure set forth in subsections (Q)(1), (Q)(2), (Q)(3) and (Q)(4) of this
section, remedies for noncompliance.
   (O)   Transfer of permit. When the responsibility for storm water discharges
at a construction site changes from one owner to another, the permittee shall
submit a completed notice of transfer and acceptance of terms of a storm water
quality permit certification on a form prescribed by the town that is signed in
accordance with subsection (D)(1) of this section. If the new responsible party
will not complete the transfer form the permit may be inactivated and the new
owner shall obtain permit coverage separately.
   (P)   Inspections and right of entry. The permittee shall allow the Town
Engineer and/or an authorized representative:
      (1)   To enter upon the permittee’s premises where a regulated facility
or activity is located or in which any records are required to be kept under
the terms and conditions of the permit;
      (2)   At reasonable times to have access to and copy any records required
to be kept under the terms and conditions of this permit and to inspect any
monitoring equipment or monitoring method required in the permit; and
      (3)   To enter upon the permittee’s premises to investigate, within
reason, any actual suspected, or potential source of water pollution, or any
violation of the Colorado Water Quality Control Act. The investigation may
include, but is not limited to, the following: sampling of any discharge and/or
process waters; the taking of photographs; interviewing permittee staff on
alleged violations; and access to any and all facilities or areas within the
permittee’s premises that may have any effect on the discharge, permit or
alleged violation.
   (Q)   Remedies for noncompliance.
      (1)   Compliance orders. Whenever the town determines that any activity
is occurring which is not in compliance with a storm water quality permit and/
or the requirements of this title, the town may issue a written noncompliance
order to such person or permittee. The person or permittee shall submit a
written compliance schedule to the Town Engineer within five days. The schedule
shall contain specific actions the permittee/operator must complete, including
dates for the completion of the actions. It shall be unlawful for any person to
fail to comply with any compliance order requirement.
      (2)   Suspension and revocation of permit. The town may suspend or revoke
a storm water quality permit for violation of any provision of this section,
violation of the permit and/or misrepresentations by the permittee or the
permittee’s agents, employees, or independent contractors.
      (3)   Stop work orders. Whenever the town determines that any activity is
occurring which is not in compliance with an approved permit and/or the
requirements of this title, the town may order such activity stopped upon
service of written notice upon the permittee and/or operator responsible for or
conducting such activity. Such permittee and/or operator shall immediately stop
all activity until authorized in writing by the town to proceed. If the
appropriate permittee and/or operator cannot be located, the notice to stop
shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the area where the activity is
occurring. The notice shall state the nature of the violation. The notice shall
not be removed until the violation has been cured or authorization to remove
the notice has been issued by the town. It shall be unlawful for any permittee
and/or operator to fail to comply with a stop work order.
      (4)   Civil proceedings. In case of any violation of any provision of
this title, or any amendment thereof, the Town of Vail may, at its discretion,
initiate civil proceedings, including injunction, mandamus, abatement,
declaratory judgment or other appropriate actions or proceedings, to prevent,
enjoin, abate, remove or otherwise correct any such unlawful condition. Civil
remedies provided for under this section are not exclusive and shall not
preclude prosecution for criminal violations under the provisions of this
section.
   (R)   Security requirements. As a condition for the issuance of a storm
water quality permit, applicants shall be required to provide security in the
form of cash escrow or an irrevocable letter of credit. The amount of the
security shall be based upon the estimated cost of the work required to ensure
compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit and requirements of this
section. In determining the cost of work, an administrative fee of 15% of the
escrow amount shall be included.
   (S)   Release of security. The security shall be released when the permit
has been inactivated upon the town’s determination that the permittee has
successfully completed all required work and met all other requirements of this
section.
   (T)   Assessment. If the permittee does not successfully complete all
required work or violates any requirement of the permit or this section, the
town may take corrective measures and charge the cost of such to the permittee.
Such costs shall include the actual cost of any work deemed necessary by the
town. If the total of such costs exceeds the security, the permittee shall be
responsible for payment of the remaining balance within 30 calendar days of
receipt of an accounting of such from the town.
   (U)   Establishment of fees. The Town Council shall, by resolution,
establish all fees and charges deemed necessary by the town to implement the
requirements of this section.
   (V)   Variances and exceptions. No permits shall be required for the
following:
      (1)   Agricultural use of land zoned rural residential;
      (2)   Grading or an excavation below finished grade for basements,
footings, retaining walls or other structures on plots of less than one-half
acre in size unless required otherwise under subsection (B)(3) of this section.
If ground water is encountered, the owner must contact the Town Engineer and
obtain a ground water discharge permit;
      (3)   Sites smaller than one-half acre which are not part of a larger
common plan of development or sale and which constitute an infill of an
established older development within the town;
      (4)   Where the applicant’s engineer or CPESC professional certifies in
writing that the planned work and the final structures or topographical changes
will not result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation and will not
interfere with any existing drainage course in such a manner as to cause damage
to any adjacent property or result in the deposition of debris or sediment on
any public way, will not present any hazard to any persons or property and will
have no detrimental influence upon the public welfare or upon the total
development of the watershed; and
      (5)   Even though permits are not required under subsections (V)(1), (V)
(2), (V)(3) and (V)(4) of this section, those operations and construction
activities which are exempted from obtaining permits must comply with the rules
and regulations concerning grading and erosion specified in this section, and
shall provide appropriate controls to retain soil erosion on the construction
site.
(Ord., 9-21-1999)
CHAPTER 7: GEOLOGIC/ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS
Section
14-7-1 Site specific hazard study
14-7-2 Other requirements
§ 14-7-1 SITE SPECIFIC HAZARD STUDY.
   This section (Table 7) provides a summary of the geologic hazards mapped by
the Town of Vail. This table describes at what point in the review process a
site specific hazard study is needed. Title 12, Chapter 21, “Hazard
Regulations”, of this code, should be reviewed for more specific requirements
and details.
 
Table 7
Geologic Hazards
Geologic Hazards                  Submittal Requirements
See hazard maps for the following See Title 12, Chapter 21 of this code for
hazards                           detailed requirements
Snow avalanche                    Submit a site specific study with DRB or
                                  PEC application.
                                  Submit site specific study with building
Debris flow                       permit application or with DRB
                                  application if multi-family or commercial
                                  Submit site specific study with building
Rockfall                          permit application or with DRB
                                  application if multi-family or commercial
                                  Submit site specific study with building
Unstable soils or slopes          permit application or with DRB
                                  application if multi-family or commercial
 
(Ord., 9-21-1999)
§ 14-7-2 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Wetlands. If staff determines that wetland vegetation exists on the
site, a report conducted by a qualified environmental consultant delineating
wetland areas must be submitted to the Town of Vail and the Army Corps of
Engineers in conjunction with a Design Review Board or Planning and
Environmental Commission application. Approval from the army corps of engineers
must be obtained prior to building permit issuance.
   (B)   Nonconforming sites. Nonconforming sites, structures, uses and site
improvements lawfully established prior to the effective date hereof may
continue, subject to the limitations prescribed by Title 12, Chapters 18 and 21
of this code. No existing nonconforming site or structure shall be issued a
building permit for an exterior
expansion, alteration or addition in a geologically sensitive area except for
windows, skylights and other similar minor alterations unless allowed by a site
specific hazard study in accordance with Title 12, Chapter 21 of this code.
   (C)   Hazard maps. The following is a list of hazard maps officially adopted
by the Town of Vail:
      (1)   Debris Flow And Debris Avalanche Hazard Analysis Map, prepared by
Arthur I. Mears, P.E., Inc. and dated November 1984;
      (2)   Rockfall Map, prepared by Schmueser and Associates, Inc. and dated
November 29, 1984; and
      (3)   Geological Hazard Map, figure 3, prepared by Lincoln DeVore
Engineers, Geologists and dated August 16, 1982.
(Ord., 9-21-1999)
CHAPTER 8: RESERVED
[Reserved by Ord. 6(2024) § 13.]
CHAPTER 9: GROSS RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA (GRFA)
Editor’s note:
   Refer to Title 12, Chapter 15 of this code for the complete regulation.
CHAPTER 10: DESIGN REVIEW STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES
Section
14-10-1 Purpose
14-10-2 General compatibility
14-10-3 Site planning
14-10-4 Architectural projections, decks, balconies, steps, bay windows and the
like
14-10-5 Building materials and design
14-10-6 Residential development
14-10-7 Outdoor lighting
14-10-8 Landscaping, drainage and erosion control
14-10-9 Fences, hedges, walls and screening
14-10-10 Accessory structures; utilities; service areas
14-10-11 Satellite dish antennas
14-10-12 Communications antennas and appurtenant equipment
§ 14-10-1 PURPOSE.
   This chapter provides the design review standards and guidelines for
development in the Town of Vail. Actions of the staff and the Design Review
Board shall be guided by the objectives prescribed herein, the Vail Village
Urban Design Considerations and Guide Plan and the Lionshead Redevelopment
Master Plan, and by all of the applicable ordinances of the town and by the
design guidelines in this chapter.
(Ord., 9-21-1999)
§ 14-10-2 GENERAL COMPATIBILITY.
   (A)   Structures shall be compatible with existing structures, their
surroundings, and with Vail’s environment. It is not to be inferred that
buildings must look alike to be compatible. Compatibility can be achieved
through the proper consideration of scale, proportions, site planning,
landscaping, materials and colors, and compliance with the guidelines herein
contained.
   (B)   Any building site in Vail is likely to have its own unique landforms
and features. Whenever possible, these existing features should be preserved
and reinforced by new construction. The objective is to fit the buildings to
their sites in a way that leaves the natural landforms and features intact,
treating the buildings as an integral part of the site, rather than as isolated
objects at odds with their surroundings.
(Ord., 9-21-1999)
§ 14-10-3 SITE PLANNING.
   (A)   The location and configuration of structures and accessways shall be
responsive to the existing topography of the site upon which they are to be
located. Grading requirements resulting from development shall be designed to
blend into the existing or natural landscape. Any cuts or fills shall be
sculptural in form and contoured to blend with the existing natural undisturbed
terrain within the property boundary.
   (B)   Building siting and access thereto shall be responsive to existing
features of terrain rock outcroppings, drainage patterns and vegetation.
   (C)   Removal of trees, shrubs and other native vegetation shall be limited
to removal of those essential for development of the site, those identified as
diseased, those essential for creating defensible space, and those found to
impact view corridors as further regulated by Title 12, Chapter 22 of this
code. Mitigation may be required for tree removal.
   (D)   All areas disturbed during construction shall be revegetated. All
landscaping within the identified limits of disturbance shall comply with §
14-10-8 of this code. If necessary, the Design Review Board may designate
allowable limits of construction activity and require physical barriers in
order to preserve significant natural features and vegetation upon a site and
adjacent sites during construction..
(Ord., 9-21-1999; Ord. 3(2007) § 3; Ord. 10(2012) § 3; Ord. 19(2019) § 11; Ord.
7(2022) § 2)
§ 14-10-4 ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTIONS, DECKS, BALCONIES, STEPS, BAY WINDOWS AND
THE LIKE.
   (A)   Architectural projections including eaves, roof overhangs, awnings,
louvers and similar shading features; sills, belt courses, cornices and similar
features; and flues and chimneys may project not more than four feet into a
required setback area or into a required distance between buildings.
   (B)   Porches, steps, decks or terraces or similar features located at
ground level or within five feet of ground level may project not more than ten
feet nor more than one-half the minimum required dimension into a required
setback area, or may project not more than five feet nor more than one-fourth
the minimum required dimension into a required distance between buildings.
Steps that form an exit discharge may project into a required setback area to
the degree necessary to conform with the adopted Building Code’s means of
egress standards, at the discretion of the Administrator.
   (C)   Balconies, decks, terraces and other similar unroofed features
projecting from a structure at a height of more than five feet above ground
level may project not more than five feet nor more than one-half the minimum
required dimension into a required setback area, or may project not more than
five feet nor more than one-fourth the minimum required dimension into a
required distance between buildings. A balcony or deck projecting from a higher
elevation may extend over a lower balcony or deck but in such case shall not be
deemed a roof for the lower balcony or deck.
   (D)   Fire escapes or exterior emergency exit stairways may project into any
required setback area or distance between buildings not more than four feet.
   (E)   Bay windows and similar features extending the interior enclosed space
of a structure may project not more than three feet into a required setback
area or a required distance between buildings, provided that the total of all
such projection does not exceed more than one-tenth the area of the wall
surface from which it projects or extends.
   (F)   Towers, spires, cupolas, chimneys, flagpoles and similar architectural
features not usable as habitable floor area may extend above the height limit a
distance of not more than 25% of the height limit nor more than 15 feet.
   (G)   A parapet or guardrail, transparent or otherwise, may exceed the
allowable building height by no more than 30 inches, subject to a finding of
the Design Review Board that the proposal meets the criteria enumerated in §
12-11-1.
(Ord., 9-21-1999; Ord. 29(2005) § 81; Ord. 8(2019) § 2)
§ 14-10-5 BUILDING MATERIALS AND DESIGN.
   (A)   Intent. The town is situated within the wildland urban interface where
community values intersect with the potential consequences of wildland fires.
Wildland fires both big and small have the potential to destroy homes and
neighborhoods within the town. The architecture and chosen materials of a
building greatly affect the survivability of that structure in the face of a
wildfire. The use of class A roof coverings and ignition resistant building
materials decrease the hazards to the individual structures as well as the
surrounding homes.
   (B)   Ignition resistant materials. The use of ignition resistant building
materials and designs intended to prevent the spread of fire are required. Vail
Fire and Emergency Services is available to provide more information on the use
of ignition resistant materials and designs. Predominantly natural building
materials shall be used in the town. The exterior use of wood, wood siding,
native stone, brick, concrete, stucco and EIFS may be permitted. Concrete
surfaces, when permitted, shall be treated with texture and color; however,
exposed aggregate is more acceptable than raw concrete. The exterior use of the
following siding materials is prohibited: stucco or EIFS with gross textures or
surface features that appear to imitate other materials, simulated stone,
simulated brick, plastic and vinyl.
      (1)   The exterior use of any building material, including those not
specifically identified by this section, shall only be permitted, unless
otherwise prohibited by this code, if the Design Review Board finds:
         (a)   That the proposed material is satisfactory in general
appearance, quality over time, architectural style, design, color, and texture;
         (b)   That the use of the proposed material complies with the intent
of this code; and
         (c)   That the use of the proposed material is compatible with the
structure, site, surrounding structures, and overall character of the town.
      (2)   This subsection of this section shall apply to the construction,
alteration, movement, repair, maintenance and use of any building, structure or
premises in the town, unless otherwise exempt by §
12-11-3(C)(5) of this code.
      (3)   Repair or replacement of 25% or less of a deck surface or support
structure is exempt from the ignition resistant requirements of this
subsection.
      (4)   Repair or replacement of twenty-five percent (25%) or less of a
building's exterior siding is exempt from the ignition-resistant requirements
of this subsection (B).
      (5)   Combustible siding, as defined in the town’s adopted Building Code,
may be used as long as it does not cover more than 33% of a given wall
(excluding windows, doors and other openings) and may not be within five (5)
feet of ground level. Combustible siding with a profile that may allow ember
intrusion such as wood shake or wood shingle is prohibited.
   (C)   Same or similar materials. The same or similar building materials and
colors shall be used on main structures and any accessory structures upon the
site. Translucent components of greenhouses shall be exempt from this
requirement.
   (D)   Colors. Exterior wall colors should be compatible with the site and
surrounding buildings. Natural colors (earth tones found within the Vail area)
should be utilized. Primary colors or other bright colors should be used only
as accents and then sparingly such as upon trim or railings. All exterior wall
materials shall be continued down to finished grade thereby eliminating
unfinished foundation walls. All exposed metal flashing, trim, flues and
rooftop mechanical equipment shall be anodized, painted or capable of
weathering so as to be nonreflective.
   (E)   Roof forms. The majority of roof forms within the town are gable roofs
with a pitch of at least four feet in 12 feet. However, other roof forms are
allowed. Consideration of environmental and climatic determinants such as snow
shedding, drainage, fire safety and solar exposure should be integral to the
roof design.
   (F)   Rooflines. Rooflines should be designed so as not to deposit snow on
parking areas, trash storage areas, stairways, decks and balconies, or
entryways. Secondary roofs, snow clips and snow guards should be utilized to
protect these areas from roof snow shedding if necessary.
   (G)   Regulations: All structures shall have Class A roof assemblies or
Class A roof covering materials, as defined by the Town's adopted building
code. The use of concrete tile, slate, metal, asphalt shingle, fiberglass
shingle, and built up tar and gravel roofing may be permitted. Metal roofing,
when permitted, shall not reflect direct sunlight onto an adjacent property and
shall be surfaced with a low gloss finish or be capable of weathering to a dull
finish. Metal roofing, when permitted, shall be of a heavy gauge and designed
to provide visual relief to the roof surface (including without limitation a
standing seam). Asphalt and fiberglass shingles, when permitted, shall be
designed to provide visual relief through texture, dimension and depth of
appearance. For purposes of this subsection (G), all parts of a mansard roof
are considered "roof" and shall comply with current roofing regulations. Wood
shake, wood shingles and rolled roofing are prohibited. Two-family dwellings
and multi-family dwellings shall have uniform roof covering materials, unless
the Design Review Board determines that the materials are compatible, are
integral to the architectural style of the structure, and different materials
do not share any ridges or planes, but may share a valley.
      (1)   Nonconforming structures. All structures that do not have a class A
roof assembly or class A roof covering material, or structures with wood shake
or wood shingles shall replace the roof covering as follows.
         (a)   Additions. All additions affecting roof area shall trigger
compliance of the roof structure of a single-family dwelling, a side of a two-
family dwelling, or the entire multiple-family dwelling, except for a onetime
exemption of up to 500 square feet of GRFA, occurring after February 6, 2007,
where any addition of roof area does not share a plane or ridge with the
nonconforming roof, and may only share a valley. The additional roof area shall
conform to roofing regulations, and shall be deemed compatible by the Design
Review Board.
         (b)   Two-family structures. Upon reroofing one side of a two-family
dwelling, the other side shall be required to be reroofed if the two sides have
roof systems that share ridges or planes. Different materials on each side of
the two-family dwelling may be permitted by the Design Review Board if the
materials are deemed compatible, integral to the architectural style of the
structure and share a valley or do not intersect.
         (c)   Developments with multiple structures. Upon reroofing a single
structure that is part of a multistructure project with conforming roof
covering materials that do not match existing materials, the conforming
materials shall be deemed compatible with the existing nonconforming materials
by the Design Review Board. Upon reroofing of additional structures in the
development, the materials shall match the approved conforming materials.
Should the matching material no longer be manufactured, a different material
may be permitted, should the materials be deemed compatible by the Design
Review Board.
      (2)   Applicability. The provisions of this subsection (G) shall apply to
new construction, reroofing, utilization of the 250 ordinance, per §
12-15-5 of this code, and all additions except those exempt, per §
12-11-3(C)(2) of this code.
      (3)   Roofing material. The use of any roofing material, including those
not specifically identified by this section, shall only be permitted, unless
otherwise prohibited by this code, where the Design Review Board finds:
         (a)   That the proposed material is satisfactory in general
appearance, quality over time, architectural style, design, color and texture;
         (b)   That the use of the proposed material complies with the intent
of the provisions of this code; and
         (c)   That the use of the proposed material is compatible with the
structure, site, surrounding structures, and overall character of the Town of
Vail.
   (H)   Rooftops. Rooftop heating and air conditioning equipment, large vent
stacks, elevator penthouses and similar features should be avoided; however, if
necessary, shall be designed to be compatible with the overall design of the
structure or screened from view of all adjacent properties. Rooftop antennas
shall not be permitted unless as allowed under a conditional use review as
specified within the zoning code.
   (I)   Solar energy devices.
      (1)   The intent of these regulations is to facilitate the installation
of alternative energy sources in Vail while minimizing visual impacts. Further,
these regulations are intended to limit the creation of an elevated perceived
roofline by solar energy devices.
      (2)   Solar energy devices should be installed on building facades and
roof planes and oriented for energy production, except as permitted by
subsection (I)(13) of this section. In Vail, optimal solar energy device
orientation for maximized energy production and adequate snow shed is typically
achieved by up to a 50 degree orientation.
      (3)   Solar energy devices shall be designed and placed in a manner
compatible and architecturally integrated into the overall design of the
building and site, with some flexibility granted for existing structures.
      (4)   Solar energy devices may be screened to minimize visual impact with
a false facade, roof plane or parapet walls integrated into the overall design
of the building.
      (5)   Solar energy devices may project not more than four feet into a
required setback area.
      (6)   Solar energy devices shall not be included in calculation of
building height.
      (7)   Solar energy devices should follow the slope direction of the roof
plane upon which it is mounted.
      (8)   Solar energy devices shall project no further from the building
facade or roof plane than the minimum distance necessary to achieve up to a 50
degree orientation. No portion of any solar energy device shall project more
than eight feet from the building facade or roof plane to which the solar
energy device is attached.
      (9)   When mounted to a roof plane with a pitch of three in 12 feet (3:
12) or steeper, solar energy devices shall extend no higher than one foot above
the ridgeline.
      (10)   When mounted to a roof plane, solar energy devices shall not
extend beyond the roof eave.
      (11)   Solar energy device framing, brackets and associated equipment
shall be black or a color that matches adjacent building surfaces. No
advertising shall be permitted on any solar energy device, framing, brackets
and associated equipment.
      (12)   Solar energy devices, framing, brackets and associated equipment
shall be maintained and kept in good repair, including repainting when
appropriate and other actions that contribute to attractive building
aesthetics.
      (13)   Solar energy devices may be ground mounted only when the Design
Review Board determines that the design or site planning of an existing
structure creates practical difficulties in mounting a solar energy device to a
building facade or roof plane to achieve energy production. Cost or
inconvenience to the applicant of strict or literal compliance with this
regulation shall not create a practical difficulty. Ground mounted solar energy
devices shall not be permitted in the required setback area. Ground mounted
solar energy devices shall count as site coverage. Site coverage is calculated
by measuring the footprint created by vertical projection from the energy
devices and associated hardware to the ground. Should ground mounted solar
energy devices be adjustable, site coverage shall be calculated for the
position that creates the greatest site coverage. Ground mounted solar energy
devices shall not exceed eight feet in height above grade. Ground mounted solar
energy devices shall be located and screened to minimize visual impact.
   (J)   Overhangs. Deep eaves, overhangs, canopies and other building features
that provide shelter from the elements are encouraged.
   (K)   Fenestration. Fenestration should be suitable for the climate and for
the orientation of the particular building elevation in which the fenestration
occurs. The use of both passive and active solar energy systems is strongly
encouraged.
   (L)   Duplexes. In no instance shall a duplex structure be so constructed as
to result in each half of the structure appearing substantially similar or
mirror image in design.
   (M)   Footings and foundation. Building footings and foundations shall be
designed in accordance with the minimum standards of the adopted Building Code.
Footings and foundations shall also be designed to be responsive to the natural
topography of the site, and shall be designed and constructed in such a manner
as to minimize the necessary amount of excavation and site disturbance.
(Ord., 9-21-1999; ; Ord. 3(2007) § 4; Ord. 3(2008) § 3; Ord. 3(2010) § 3; Ord.
5(2011) § 2; Ord. 25(2016) § 3; Ord. 26(2016) § 2; Ord. 19(2019) §§ 12, 13;
Ord. 7(2022) § 3)
§ 14-10-6 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to ensure that residential development
be designed in a manner that creates an architecturally integrated structure
with unified site development. Dwelling units and garages shall be designed
within a single structure, except as set forth in subsection (B) of this
section, with the use of unified architectural and landscape design. A single
structure shall have common roofs and building walls that create enclosed space
substantially above grade. Unified architectural and landscape design shall
include, but not be limited to, the use of compatible building materials,
architectural style, scale, roof forms, massing, architectural details, site
grading and landscape materials and features.
   (B)   The presence of significant site constraints may permit the physical
separation of units and garages on a site. The determination of whether or not
a lot has significant site constraints shall be made by the Design Review
Board. SIGNIFICANT SITE CONSTRAINTS shall be defined as natural features of a
lot such as stands of mature trees, natural drainages, stream courses and other
natural water features, rock outcroppings, wetlands, other natural features and
existing structures that may create practical difficulties in the site planning
and development of a lot. Slope may be considered a physical site constraint
that allows for the separation of a garage from a unit. It shall be the
applicant’s responsibility to request a determination from the Design Review
Board as to whether or not a site has significant site constraints before final
design work on the project is presented. This determination shall be made at a
conceptual review of the proposal based on review of the site, a detailed
survey of the lot and a preliminary site plan of the proposed structure(s).
   (C)   The residential development may be designed to accommodate the
development of dwelling units and garages in more than one structure if the
Design Review Board determines that significant site constraints exist on the
lot. The use of unified architectural and landscape design as outlined herein
shall be required for the development. In addition, the Design Review Board may
require that one or more of the following common design elements such as
fences, walls, patios, decks, retaining walls, walkways, landscape elements or
other architectural features be incorporated to create unified site
development.
   (D)   Exemption.
      (1)   Residential development meeting all the following criteria may be
exempt from the unified architectural and landscaping design requirement of
subsection (A):
         (a)   Existing separated duplexes (where two dwelling units share a
development lot but are not physically connected);
         (b)   That do not share a unified architectural and landscape design,
as determined by the Design Review Board; and
         (c)   That received Design Review Board approval prior to May 7, 2019.
      (2)   A registry of qualifying properties shall be kept by the Community
Development Department and made publically available.
      (3)   This section shall not exempt separated duplexes from any other
approval requirements of this code, including without limitation, §
12-11-3.
(Ord., 9-21-1999; Ord. 29(2005) § 82; Ord. 9(2019) § 1)
§ 14-10-7 OUTDOOR LIGHTING.
   (A)   Purpose. This section establishes standards and guidelines for
minimizing the unintended and undesirable side effects of outdoor lighting
while encouraging the intended and desirable safety and aesthetic purposes of
outdoor lighting. It is the purpose of these standards and guidelines to allow
the minimum amount of lighting needed for the property on which the light
sources are located, while protecting the legitimate privacy of neighboring
properties. The standards and guidelines established in this section are also
intended to promote the use of environmentally sensitive and energy efficient
lighting technologies, and to promote “dark sky” lighting fixtures and
installation techniques to reduce light pollution.
   (B)   Applicability. Except as provided elsewhere in this title, the design,
placement and use of all outdoor lighting within the town limits shall conform
to the standards and guidelines as set forth in this section.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FULL CUTOFF. Light fixtures that do not emit light above the horizontal
plane of the light source.
      LIGHT SOURCE. A single artificial point source of luminescence that emits
measurable radiant energy in or near the visible spectrum.
      LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES. For the purposes of this section,
properties with no more than three dwelling units or employee housing units.
      MULTIPLE-FAMILY AND COMMERCIAL PROPERTIES. For the purposes of this
section, those with four or more dwelling units or employee housing units,
commercial uses, or mixed uses.
      OUTDOOR LIGHTING. Any light source, or collection of light sources,
located outside a building, including, but not limited to, light sources
attached to any part of a structure, located on the surface of the ground, or
located on freestanding poles.
   (D)   Lighting regulations.
      (1)   Quantity of light fixtures.
         (a)   The maximum number of outdoor light sources for all properties
is subject to the requirements of the adopted Building Codes and design review.
         (b)   For low density residential properties, the maximum number of
light sources per lot shall be limited to one outdoor light per 1,000 square
feet of lot area. Light sources which are no more than 18 inches above grade,
as measured from the top of the fixture to the finish grade below, and are full
cutoff fixtures, may be allowed in addition to the total number of permitted
outdoor light sources.
      (2)   Height limits for light fixtures. Outdoor lights affixed to a
structure shall not exceed the height of the roof eaves. The maximum mounting
height for light sources on a pole shall not exceed 20 feet.
      (3)   Full cutoff.
         (a)   All outdoor lights shall be fully cut off to not emit light
above the horizontal plane of the light source. Outdoor lights must be
Illuminating Engineering Society (IES) “full cutoff” class, International Dark-
Sky Association (IDA) approved, or have similarly recognized verification of
being full cutoff. Lights must be installed and maintained in such a manner
that the full cutoff is effective.
         (b)   Exceptions: the following outdoor lights may be nonfull cutoff:
            1.   Uplighting fully contained by an overhanging building element
that prevents the light from emitting upward to the sky, when the light source
is shielded from the sides;
            2.   Uplighting for flags when the light source is shielded from
the sides;
            3.   Lights with a gas flame as the sole light source; and
            4.   Lights specifically recommended by the Vail Comprehensive
Plan.
      (4)   Lighting direction. All outdoor lighting shall be directed at the
object intended to be illuminated and away from adjacent properties and public
ways. Outdoor lights shall be directed downward, unless contained by
overhanging building or landscape elements with the light source shielded from
the sides. Uplighting is allowed for flags when the light source is shielded
from the sides.
      (5)   Energy efficiency. All outdoor lighting shall comply with the
town’s adopted energy conservation code.
   (E)   Lighting guidelines.
      (1)   Compatibility. All outdoor lighting fixtures, fixture locations,
and the color and intensity on the lighting should be aesthetically compatible
with the site and structures on which they are located, the character of the
surroundings, and with Vail’s environment. Outdoor lighting must also be
consistent with any applicable design guidelines outlined in the Vail
Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   Light pollution. All outdoor lights should be designed, installed
and maintained to minimize the contribution of outdoor lighting to nighttime
light pollution. Examples of low light pollution fixtures are available from
lighting manufacturers and organizations such as the International Dark-Sky
Association (IDA).
      (3)   Energy efficiency. Outdoor lighting should use the least number of
light sources necessary to achieve the safety and aesthetic purposes for the
lighting. Outdoor lighting should utilize energy efficient light sources of the
lowest wattage feasible, and utilize energy efficient technologies. Outdoor
lighting should also be operated and maintained to eliminate any unnecessary
daytime use and to reduce nighttime use during nonbusiness hours and periods of
limited residential activity.
   (F)   Prohibited outdoor lights.
      (1)   Lights that flash, move, revolve, rotate, scintillate, blink,
flicker, vary in intensity or color, or use intermittent electrical pulsation;
      (2)   Lights affixed to the top of the roof of a structure;
      (3)   Neon, or similar gas filled, lights;
      (4)   Laser source lights;
      (5)   Searchlights;
      (6)   Lights attached to vegetation, except decorative holiday lights;
and
      (7)   Any lighting that could interfere with the public health, safety or
welfare.
   (G)   Exemptions. The standards of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Decorative holiday lights;
      (2)   Sign illumination, as set forth in Title 11 of this code;
      (3)   Official government lighting, other than those owned and maintained
by the Town of Vail, installed for the benefit of public health, safety and
welfare;
      (4)   Outdoor lights associated with an approved special events permit;
      (5)   Outdoor lights associated with an Art in Public Places Board (AIPP)
approved public art display;
      (6)   Temporary construction zone work lighting associated with an
approved building permit or design review approval (construction zone security
and egress lights are not exempt from the provisions of this section); and
      (7)   Lighting identifying hazards or road construction.
(Ord. 21(2008) § 1)
§ 14-10-8 LANDSCAPING, DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL.
   (A)   (1)   Various natural vegetation zones exist within the Gore Valley as
a result of the form and aspects of the land itself. The north facing slopes
within the valley are typically heavily wooded with spruce, pine and aspen and
generally receive less direct sunlight than the drier south facing slopes which
typically consist of sage, aspen and other vegetation tolerant of drier
conditions. The valley floor which is adjacent to Gore Creek consists of a wide
variety of trees and shrubs adapted to the relatively fertile soil and natural
availability of water.
      (2)   The goal of any landscape plan should be to preserve and enhance
the natural landscape character of the area in which it is to be located and
serve as an aid in fire prevention and protection. The landscape scale and
overall landscape design shall be developed so that new vegetation is integral
with the natural landscape and the inherent form, line, color and texture of
the local plant communities. The major objective of the landscaping is to help
reduce the scale of new structures, to assist in the screening of structures,
to reduce the risk to life and structures from the intrusion of fire from
wildland fire exposure and fire exposures from adjacent structures, and to
mitigate structure fires from spreading to wildland fuels. The planting of
large-sized, well-spaced plant materials is encouraged. Fire wise plant
materials are required due to their ability to resist fire. Trees shall be
maintained through limbing and pruning in order to prevent limbs from being too
close to structures and other plant materials. Special care should be taken in
selecting the types of plants to use when designing a landscape plan. Final
selection should be based upon the soils and climate, ease of establishment,
suitability for the specific use desired, ability to deter the spread of fires
and the level of maintenance that can be provided. New planting shall use
plants that are indigenous to the Rocky Mountain alpine and subalpine zones or
are capable of being introduced into these zones.
      (3)   (a)   A recommended list of plant materials, some indigenous to the
Vail area, is on file with the Department of Community Development. Also
indicated on the list are fire wise plant materials which are suitable for
planting within the Vail area. The minimum sizes of landscape materials
acceptable are as follows:
         (b)   Required trees.
 
Deciduous       2 inch caliper
Conifers        6 foot
Required shrubs #5 gallon container Foundation shrubs shall have a minimum
                height of 18 inches at time of planting
 
   (B)   Landscape design shall be developed to locate new plantings in natural
looking groups and shall be designed and installed in conformance with the Vail
Fire and Emergency Services Fire-Resistant Landscaping guidelines, unless
exempted by §
12-11-3 of this code. Geometric plantings, evenly spaced rows of trees, and
other formal landscape patterns shall be avoided.
   (C)   Particular attention shall be given the landscape design of off-street
parking lots to reduce adverse impacts upon living areas within the proposed
development, upon adjacent properties, and upon public spaces with regard to
noise, lights, and visual impact.
   (D)   All landscaping shall be provided with a method of irrigation suitable
to ensure the continued maintenance of planted materials.
   (E)   Whenever possible, natural drainage patterns upon the site shall not
be modified. Negative drainage impacts upon adjacent sites shall not be
allowed.
   (F)   Runoff from impervious surfaces such as roofs and pavement areas shall
be directed to natural or improved drainage channels or dispersed into shallow
sloping vegetated areas.
   (G)   Slope of cut and fill banks shall be determined by soil
characteristics for the specific site to avoid erosion, and promote
revegetation opportunities, but in any case shall be limited to a maximum of
two to one (2:1) slope.
   (H)   Measures shall be taken to retain all eroded soil material on site
during construction, control both ground water and surface water runoff, and to
permanently stabilize all disturbed slopes and drainage features upon
completion of construction.
   (I)   All plants shall be planted in a good quality topsoil mix of a type
and amount recommended by the American Landscape Contractor Association and the
Colorado Nurseryman’s Association.
   (J)   All plantings must be mulched with materials as listed in the Vail
Fire and Emergency Services Fire-Resistant Landscaping guidelines, unless
otherwise exempt per §§
14-10-5(B),
12-11-3 of this code.
   (K)   Paving near a tree to be saved must contain a plan for a “tree vault”
in order to ensure the ability of the roots to receive air.
   (L)   Defensible space shall be created and maintained in an area extending
from the perimeter or projection of the building or structure to a radius of
100 feet or the lot lines, whichever is less. Defensible space and landscaping
shall comply with Vail Fire and Emergency Services Fire-Resistant Landscaping
guidelines.
(Ord., 9-21-1999; ; Ord. 3(2007) § 5; Ord. 19(2019) § 14)
§ 14-10-9 FENCES, HEDGES, WALLS AND SCREENING.
   (A)   Placement. The placement of walls and fences shall respect existing
landforms and fit into land massing rather than arbitrarily follow site
boundary lines. Fences shall not be encouraged except to screen trash areas,
utility equipment and the like.
   (B)   Design. Design of fences, walls, and other structural landscape
features shall be of materials compatible with the site and the materials of
the structures on the site. Retaining walls and cribbing should utilize natural
materials such as wood timbers, logs, rocks or textured, color tinted concrete.
No chainlink fences shall be allowed except as temporary construction fences or
as required for recreational facilities.
   (C)   Setbacks observed. All accessory uses and structures except fences,
hedges, walls and landscaping, or ground level site development such as walks,
driveways and terraces shall be located within the required minimum setback
lines on each site. Recreational amenities may be exempted by the Design Review
Board if it determines that their location is not detrimental environmentally
and/or aesthetically.
   (D)   Sight triangle. To minimize traffic hazards at street intersections by
improving visibility for drivers of converging vehicles in any district where
setbacks are required, no fence or structure over three feet in height shall be
permitted within the triangular portion of a corner lot measured from the point
of intersection of the lot lines abutting the streets a distance of 30 feet
along each lot line.
   (E)   Height limitations. Height limitations. Fences, hedges, walls and
landscaping screens shall not exceed three feet in height within any required
front setback area and shall not exceed six feet in height in any other portion
of the site, except in the Community Housing-1 (CH-1), Community Housing- 2
(CH-2), and Community Housing–3 (CH-3) Districts where retaining walls shall
not exceed an exposed face height of 15 feet. Higher fences, hedges, walls or
landscaping screens may be authorized by the Administrator when necessary to
screen public utility equipment. No barbed wire or electrically charged fence
shall be erected or maintained.
(Ord., 9-21-1999; Ord. 29(2023) § 4; Ord. 6(2024) § 14)
§ 14-10-10 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES; UTILITIES; SERVICE AREAS.
   (A)   Design of accessory structures upon a site shall be compatible with
the design and materials of the main structure or structures upon the site.
   (B)   Accessory buildings generally should be attached to the main building
either directly or by means of a continuous wall or similar feature of the same
or a complementary material as the main building’s exterior finish.
   (C)   All utility service systems shall be installed underground. Any
utility system the operation of which requires aboveground installation shall
be located and/or screened so as not to detract from the overall site design
quality.
   (D)   All utility meters shall be enclosed or screened from public view.
   (E)   Service areas, outdoor storage, and garbage storage shall be screened
from adjacent properties, structures, streets and other public areas by fences,
berms or landscaping.
   (F)   Adequate trash storage areas shall be provided. There shall be year
round access to all trash storage areas which shall not be used for any other
purpose.
   (G)   Greenhouses, when permitted, shall be subject to the following
standards.
      (1)   All wall and roofing materials shall be constructed of rigid
material and shall not include polyethylene or other similar flexible films.
      (2)   All nontranslucent elements including framing and doors shall be
painted to be compatible with the site and surrounding buildings.
      (3)   No internal lighting shall be permitted between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Exterior lighting shall comply with §
14-10-7 of this chapter.
      (4)   All greenhouses shall be subject to the development standards for
the zone district for which they are located.
      (5)   Greenhouses shall not be used for storage of household items,
vehicles, watercraft or other items not associated with the cultivation of food
or ornamental crops.
   (H)   Hoop houses/cold frames, when permitted, shall be subject to the
following standards.
      (1)   Hoop houses/cold frames shall be four feet in height or less and be
120 square feet or less in floor area.
      (2)   Hoop houses/cold frames shall meet the deck (not ground level)
setback requirements as defined in §
14-2-1 of this title and summarized in §
14-8-1 of this title.
      (3)   One hoop house/cold frame shall be permitted per dwelling unit.
      (4)   Hoop houses/cold frames shall be exempt from design review.
      (5)   Hoop houses/cold frames shall not be used for storage of any kind.
(Ord., 9-21-1999; Ord. 26(2016) § 3; Ord. 19(2019) § 15)
§ 14-10-11 SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   To protect the health and safety of the inhabitants of the town by
setting forth requirements for the installation of satellite dish antennas;
      (2)   To protect and support the aesthetic concerns of the town, a resort
community which must remain aesthetically pleasing to visitors to remain
economically viable; and
      (3)   To provide the protection set forth in subsections (A)(1) and (A)
(2) of this section in the least restrictive manner possible.
   (B)   Application; review. Satellite dish antennas shall comply with all the
requirements set forth herein. Person or persons wishing to install a satellite
dish antenna within the town shall submit an application to the Department of
Community Development for review. The application shall set forth the
following:
      (1)   Completed Design Review Board application form;
      (2)   Site plan showing proposed location of the satellite dish antenna;
      (3)   Description of the satellite dish antenna (i.e., size, design,
materials and the like);
      (4)   Color sample (if applicable);
      (5)   Landscape plan (if applicable);
      (6)   An improvement location certificate and/or a preliminary title
report; and
      (7)   Elevations, perspectives or renderings if deemed applicable by the
staff of the Department of Community Development.
   (C)   Compliance with requirements.
      (1)   No more than one satellite dish antenna shall be allowed on any lot
as delineated on the official town zoning map.
      (2)   The temporary use and/or installation of a satellite dish antenna
shall be limited to a maximum period of one day. Only three temporary
installations shall be allowed per business or residence per year.
      (3)   The maximum height allowed for any satellite dish antenna, when
measured from the top of the satellite dish antenna down to existing or
finished grade, whichever is more restrictive, shall not exceed 15 feet.
      (4)   The maximum size of any satellite dish antenna installed for use by
a single residence or business shall be limited to nine feet in diameter.
Satellite dish antennas serving multi-family dwellings shall be limited to a
maximum of 12 feet in diameter.
      (5)   No advertising, logos or identification shall be allowed on any
satellite dish antenna.
      (6)   Satellite dish antennas shall comply with the existing setback
requirements of the zone district in which the satellite dish antenna is
installed. Satellite dish antennas shall be prohibited in easements and public
rights-of-way. No portion of a satellite dish antenna or its supporting
structure shall encroach into the vertical plane as drawn from an existing
easement or setback line.
      (7)   Issuance of a building permit from the Department of Community
Development shall be required prior to the installation of any satellite dish
antenna.
      (8)   Adjacent property owners and owners of dwelling units on the same
lot as the applicant shall be notified of any application for the installation
of a satellite dish antenna. Notification procedures shall be as outlined in §
12-14-19 of this code. Names and mailing addresses of adjacent property owners
and of owners of dwelling units on the same lot as the applicant shall be
provided to the Department of Community Development by the applicant.
      (9)   Due to the special aesthetic importance of the core areas of the
town, exterior installations of satellite dish antennas in Commercial Cores 1
and 2 and in Lionshead Mixed Use 1 and 2 shall be permitted only if screened by
some type of enclosing structure. Said structures required to enclose a
satellite dish antenna in these areas shall comply with all applicable zoning
regulations and shall be architecturally compatible with the existing
structure.
   (D)   Design guidelines. It is the purpose of these guidelines to ensure
that the visibility of a satellite dish antenna from any public right-of-way or
adjacent properties be reduced to the highest degree possible. It shall be the
burden of the applicant to demonstrate how the satellite dish antenna
installation complies with these guidelines. The following guidelines shall be
used by the Design Review Board in evaluating applications for satellite dish
antennas.
      (1)   All wiring and cable related to a satellite dish antenna shall be
installed underground.
      (2)   The use of mesh satellite dish antennas is highly encouraged
because of their ability to be more sensitively integrated on a site or
structure.
      (3)   The use of appropriate colors shall be required to provide for a
more sensitive installation when integrating a satellite dish antenna onto a
site or structure. Color selection for a satellite dish antenna should be made
with respect to specific characteristics on a site or structure. Unpainted
surfaces and satellite dish antennas with reflective surfaces shall not be
allowed.
      (4)   Locations of satellite dish antennas shall be made so as to ensure
that the satellite dish antenna is screened from view from any public right-of-
way or adjacent property to the highest degree possible. In addition to
effective site planning, screening a satellite dish antenna may be accomplished
through the use of landscaping materials, fencing, existing structures,
subgrade placements or other means that both screen the satellite dish antenna
and do not appear unnatural on the site.
      (5)   Satellite dish antennas on or attached to existing structures shall
be permitted provided the satellite dish antenna is architecturally integrated
into the structure. Effective use of color shall be required to ensure
compatibility between the satellite dish antenna and existing structure. The
use of a mesh material shall be strongly encouraged when attempting to
integrate a satellite dish antenna onto an existing structure.
      (6)   Landscaping or other site improvements intended to screen a
satellite dish antenna proposed on any application shall be completed prior to
the issuance of a building permit to install a satellite dish antenna. A letter
of credit equal to 125% of the costs of installing landscaping or site
improvements may be submitted to the town if seasonal weather conditions
prohibit the installation of landscaping or site improvements.
      (7)   All improvements required by the Design Review Board for the
purpose of reducing the visibility of satellite dish antennas shall remain in
place so long as the satellite dish antennas remain in place unless permission
to alter or remove said improvements is obtained from the Design Review Board.
All satellite dish antennas and all improvements required by the Design Review
Board to reduce the visibility of satellite dish antennas shall be adequately
maintained and repaired and shall not be allowed to become dilapidated or fall
into a state of disrepair.
(Ord., 9-21-1999; Ord. 2(2007) § 10)
§ 14-10-12 COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS AND APPURTENANT EQUIPMENT.
   Communications antennas and any associated appurtenant equipment should be
integrated into existing principal buildings and structures. All antennas and
appurtenant equipment shall be located and screened so as not to detract from
the overall site design quality.
(Ord. 12(2008) § 28)
CHAPTER 11: EXHIBITS
Section
14-11-1 Purpose
14-11-2 Diagrams
§ 14-11-1 PURPOSE.
   This chapter provides details of items referenced in this title.
(Ord., 9-21-1999)
§ 14-11-2 DIAGRAMS.
   See the following pages for diagrams.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9705f9f5a609f564c22e87000bf13fb3850d87c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-31.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9705f9f5a609f564c22e87000bf13fb3850d87c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-33.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9705f9f5a609f564c22e87000bf13fb3850d87c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-35.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9705f9f5a609f564c22e87000bf13fb3850d87c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-37.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9705f9f5a609f564c22e87000bf13fb3850d87c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-39.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9705f9f5a609f564c22e87000bf13fb3850d87c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-41.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9705f9f5a609f564c22e87000bf13fb3850d87c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-43.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9705f9f5a609f564c22e87000bf13fb3850d87c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-45.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9705f9f5a609f564c22e87000bf13fb3850d87c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-47.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9705f9f5a609f564c22e87000bf13fb3850d87c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-49.png]
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Colorado Revised Statutes
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO COLORADO REVISED STATUTES
C.R.S. Cites Code Section
C.R.S. Cites                       Code Section
10-4-705                           7-2B-1,
                                   7-2B-2
10-4-716                           7-2B-1,
                                   7-2B-2
11-35-101(1)                       4-3-6-2
12-10-501 et seq.                  12-2-2
12-22-303(7)                       5-5-3,
                                   6-3G-7
12-25-102                          12-21-13
12-47-411(3.5)                     6-3C-4
Title 12, Article 59               6-3C-5
12-61-401 et seq.                  12-2-2
12-120-202                         12-21-13
Title 13, Article 10               1-9-2
13-10-109                          1-9-7
Title 13, Article 40               4-2-2
16-2.5-101                         7-2A-12
16-8-101                           6-3G-6
18-1-704 - 18-1-707             4-15-18
18-1-901                           6-3G-8,
                                   6-4-2
18-5-205                           6-3B-2
18-9-204.5                         6-4-2
18-12-102                          4-15-1
18-12-105.1                        6-3G-4,
                                   6-3G-7
18-13-121                          4-3-3-2
Title 19                           6-3I-2
23-41-208                          12-21-13
24-4-105                           3-5-8,
                                   4-5-15
24-6-401, et seq.                  3-7-4
Title 24, Article 65.5             12-3-10,
                                   13-1-8
24-65.5-103(1)                     12-3-10,
                                   13-1-8
Title 24, Article 68               12-19-1,
                                   12-19-7
24-72-200.1                        7-15-7
Title 24, Article 75, Part 7       2-2-6
25-4-1602(14)                      5-13-2
25-4-1602(14)(j)                   5-13-2
25-5-402(9)                        5-13-2
25-5-410(1)(i)(II)                 6-3C-5
25-8-202(b)                        9-1-2
25-8-404                           9-1-2
25-8-501 et seq.                   9-1-1
25-8-501                           9-1-4
29-2-106.1                         2-8-14
29-2-106.1(2)(a)                   2-8-14
29-2-106.1(3)                      4-3-6-3
29-2-106.1(3) through (7)          4-3-6-3
29-2-106.1(8)                      4-3-6-3
29-2-109                           4-3-3-6
29-20-101 et seq.                  13-7-1
29-20-104                          13-7-1
Title 29, Article 21               2-1-3
29-21-101                          2-1-3
31-1-201 through 31-16-2-208       1-1-2
31-10-101 et seq.                  1-8-3
31-10-201(3)                       4-14-2
31-12-107                          12-20-2
31-15-401                          9-1-3
31-15-707(b)                       9-1-3
31-15-708(1)                       9-1-3
31-16-101                          1-4-1
Title 31, Article 23               13-1-2
33-14-112                          7-9-2
33-14.5-101 et seq.                7-9-3
33-14.5-101                        7-9-1
34-1-201                           12-21-13
35-5.5-101 et seq.                 5-1-6
35-5.5-108.5                       5-1-6
35-5.5-109                         5-1-6
Title 35, Article 80               6-4-4
Title 35, Article 80, Part 1       6-4-2
Title 35, Article 80, Part 102(10) 6-4-2
38-30-168                          12-11-4
38-33-106                          13-7-3
38-33-110                          12-2-2
38-45-101                          10-1-3
                                   13-3-6,
Title 38, Article 51               13-6-1,
                                   13-8-1,
                                   13-9-1
Title 38, Article 51               13-3-6
39-26-102(3)(c)                    4-3-1-2
Title 39, Article 27               4-3-3-6
39-28-202                          4-3-3-2
40-10.1-405                        7-3A-3
Title 42                           1-9-10
42-2-127(5)                        7-2A-8
42-4-614                           7-15-2
42-4-1802                          7-3A-3
42-4-1803                          7-3A-3
42-4-1814                          7-3A-14
42-2123                            7-2A-7
43-2-101(2)                        7-1-2
43-2-135(1)(g)                     7-2B-1
Title 44, Article 3                4-2-3;
                                   6-3C-5
44-3-101 et seq.                   4-2-9
44-3-103                           4-2-6
44-3-103(27)                       3-5-2
44-3-103(48)                       5-13-7
44-3-301(10)                       4-2-4
44-3-301(11)(c)(III)               4-2-6
44-3-310                           4-2-1
44-3-310(33)(b)                    4-2-1
44-3-310(3)                        4-2-1
44-3-310(4)                        4-2-1
44-3-303                           4-2-2
44-3-412                           4-2-3
44-3-423                           6-3C-4
Title 44, Article 4                6-3C-5
44-4-101 et seq.                   4-2-9
44-4-103(4)                        3-5-2
Title 44, Article 5                6-3C-5
44-5-101 et seq.                   4-2-8
44-5-105(3)                        4-2-5
44-5-107(2)(c)                     4-2-5
44-5-107(5)(a)                     4-2-5
44-5-107(5)(c)                     4-2-5
                                   
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Code Section
Ord. No.                       Code Section
17(1966) Art. 1 5              6-3C-4
17(1966) Art. 1 6              6-3F-1
17(1966) Art. 3 2              6-3A-9
17(1966) Art. 4 4              6-3C-1
17(1966) Art. 5 3              6-3E-4
17(1966) Art. 6 1, 2, 4        6-3E-6
17(1966) Art. 7 1              6-3A-1
17(1966) Art. 7 2              6-3A-2
17(1966) Art. 7 3              6-3A-3
17(1966) Art. 7 7              6-3A-7
17(1966) Art. 7 8              6-3A-8
18(1966) 1                     5-1-1
18(1966) 2                     5-1-2
18(1966) 2(b)                  5-1-3
18(1966) 2(c)                  5-1-4
18(1966) 2(e)                  5-1-8
4(1967) Art. 1 1, Art. 2 1 - 3 6-3B-2
1(1968) 1                      5-1-10
2(1968) 1                      7-3A-1
2(1968) 2                      7-3A-2
2(1968) 3                      7-3A-3
2(1968) 4                      7-3A-11
2(1968) 5                      7-3A-12
2(1968) 9-3-5                  7-3A-4
2(1968) 9-3-6                  7-3A-4
2(1968) 9-3-7                  7-3A-6
2(1968) 9-3-8                  7-3A-7
2(1968) 9-3-9                  7-3A-8
2(1968) 9-3-10                 7-3A-9
2(1968) 9-3-11                 7-3A-10
9(1968) 1                      6-3B-2
10(1968) 1                     6-3A-8
12(1968) 1                     6-3A-1
15(1968) 1                     5-1-3
16(1968) 1                     5-1-3
20(1970) 1                     8-5-35,
                               8-5-36
7(1971) 1                      8-1-1
7(1971) 2(A)                   8-1-2
7(1971) 2(B,C,E)               8-1-3
7(1971) 2(F)                   8-1-4
7(1971) 2(G)                   8-1-5
7(1971) 2(H)                   8-1-6
7(1971) 2(I)                   8-1-7
7(1971) 2(K)                   8-1-9
7(1971) 3                      8-1-10
7(1971) 4(A)                   8-1-11
7(1971) 4(B)                   8-1-12
7(1971) 4(C)                   8-1-13
7(1971) 4(D)                   8-1-15
7(1971) 4(E)                   8-1-16
7(1971) 4(F)                   8-1-17
7(1971) 4(G)                   8-1-18
7(1971) 4(H)                   8-1-19
7(1971) 4(I)                   8-1-20
7(1971) 4(J)                   8-1-21
7(1971) 4(K)                   8-1-22
7(1971) 5(A)(1)(a)             8-1-25
7(1971) 5(A)(2)(a)             8-1-27
7(1971) 5(A)(3)                8-1-29
7(1971) 5(A)(4)                8-1-30
7(1971) 5(A)(6)                8-1-33
7(1971) 5(A)(7)                8-1-34
7(1971) 5(A)(5)                8-1-32
7(1971) 6(A C)                 8-1-35
7(1971) 6(D)                   8-1-36
7(1971) 7                      8-1-37
7(1971) 8(A)                   8-1-37
7(1971) 8(B)                   8-1-39
7(1971) 9(A)                   8-1-40
7(1971) 10                     8-1-42
8(1971) 1                      5-6-1
8(1971) 2                      5-6-2
8(1971) 3, 4                   5-6-3
8(1971) 5                      5-6-4
8(1971) 6                      5-6-5
8(1971) 7                      5-6-6
18(1971) 1                     6-3E-6
19(1971) 3                     6-3C-5
4(1973) 1                      5-2-1
4(1973) 2(a c)                 5-2-2
4(1973) 3(a c)                 5-2-3
4(1973) 4(a)                   5-2-4
4(1973) 4(b)                   5-2-5
4(1973) 4(c)                   5-2-6
4(1973) 4(d)                   5-2-7
4(1973) 5(b)                   5-2-12
4(1973) 5(c)                   5-2-13
4(1973) 5(d)                   5-2-14
4(1973) 6                      5-2-15
4(1973) 7                      5-2-16
4(1973) 8                      5-2-17
8(1973) 1.000                  12-1-1
8(1973) 1.100                  12-1-2
8(1973) 1.201                  12-4-1
8(1973) 1.202                  12-5-1,
                               12-5-2
8(1973) 1.203                  12-5-3
8(1973) 1.204                  12-5-4
8(1973) 1.205                  12-5-5
8(1973) 1.300                  12-1-3
8(1973) 1.500                  12-2-1
8(1973) 1.600                  12-2-1
8(1973) 2.100                  12-6B-1
8(1973) 2.400                  12-6B-4
8(1973) 2.507                  12-6B-9
8(1973) 2.509                  12-6B-10
8(1973) 2.510                  12-6B-11
8(1973) 3.100                  12-6C-1
8(1973) 3.400                  12-6C-4
8(1973) 3.507                  12-6C-9
8(1973) 3.509                  12-6C-10
8(1973) 3.510                  12-6C-11
8(1973) 4.100                  12-6F-1
8(1973) 4.400                  12-6F-3
8(1973) 4.507                  12-6F-9
8(1973) 4.509                  12-6F-10
8(1973) 4.510                  12-6F-11
8(1973) 5.100                  12-6G-1
8(1973) 5.400                  12-6G-4
8(1973) 5.507                  12-6G-9
8(1973) 5.509                  12-6G-10
8(1973) 5.510                  12-6G-11
8(1973) 6.100                  12-6H-1
8(1973) 6.400                  12-6H-4
8(1973) 6.507                  12-6H-9
8(1973) 6.509                  12-6H-10
8(1973) 6.510                  12-6H-11
8(1973) 7.100                  12-7A-1
8(1973) 7.400                  12-7A-4
8(1973) 7.507                  12-7A-8
8(1973) 7.509                  12-7A-10
8(1973) 7.510                  12-7A-11
8(1973) 8.300                  12-7B-6
8(1973) 8.400                  12-7B-9
8(1973) 8.511                  12-7B-18
8(1973) 9.200                  12-7C-2
8(1973) 9.300                  12-7C-3
8(1973) 9.400                  12-7C-4
8(1973) 9.500                  12-7C-6
8(1973) 9.610                  12-7C-13
8(1973) 9.611                  12-7C-14
8(1973) 10.100                 12-7E-1
8(1973) 10.200                 12-7E-2
8(1973) 10.500                 12-7E-5
8(1973) 10.607                 12-7E-10
8(1973) 10.609                 12-7E-11
8(1973) 10.610                 12-7E-12
8(1973) 11.100                 12-7G-1
8(1973) 11.200                 12-7G-2
8(1973) 11.400                 12-7G-4
8(1973) 11.405                 12-7G-8
8(1973) 11.407                 12-7G-9
8(1973) 11.409                 12-7G-10
8(1973) 11.410                 12-7G-11
8(1973) 11.411                 12-7G-12
8(1973) 11.412                 12-7G-13
8(1973) 11.413                 12-7G-14
8(1973) 12.100                 12-8A-1
8(1973) 12.400                 12-8A-4
8(1973) 12.507                 12-8A-9
8(1973) 12.509                 12-8A-10
8(1973) 12.510                 12-8A-11
8(1973) 14.100                 12-10-1
8(1973) 14.200                 12-10-1
8(1973) 14.201                 12-10-3
8(1973) 14.202                 12-10-4
8(1973) 14.300                 12-10-5
8(1973) 14.400                 12-10-6
8(1973) 14.500                 12-10-7
8(1973) 14.502                 12-10-9
8(1973) 14.601                 12-10-9
8(1973) 14.603                 12-10-12
8(1973) 14.701                 12-10-13
8(1973) 14.703                 12-10-15
8(1973) 14.800                 12-10-16
8(1973) 16.100                 12-12-1
8(1973) 16.200                 12-12-2
8(1973) 16.300                 12-12-3
8(1973) 16.401                 12-12-4
8(1973) 16.402                 12-12-5
8(1973) 16.403                 12-12-6
8(1973) 16.404                 12-12-7
8(1973) 16.405                 12-12-8
8(1973) 16.501                 12-12-9
8(1973) 16.502                 12-12-10
8(1973) 16.503                 12-12-11
8(1973) 16.504                 12-12-12
8(1973) Art. 17                12-14-1
8(1973) 17.208                 12-14-10
8(1973) 17.209                 12-14-11
8(1973) 17.301 17.306          12-14-12
8(1973) 17.400                 12-14-13
8(1973) 17.401                 12-14-14
8(1973) 17.500                 12-14-15
8(1973) 17.700                 12-14-16
8(1973) 18.100                 12-16-1
8(1973) 18.200                 12-16-2
8(1973) 18.300                 12-16-3
8(1973) 18.400                 12-16-4
8(1973) 18.500                 12-16-5
8(1973) 18.600                 12-16-6
8(1973) 18.900                 12-16-9
8(1973) 19.100                 12-17-1
8(1973) 19.200                 12-17-2
8(1973) 19.300                 12-17-3
8(1973) 19.400                 12-17-4
8(1973) 19.500                 12-17-5
8(1973) 19.600                 12-17-6
8(1973) 19.900                 12-17-8
8(1973) 20.100                 12-18-1
8(1973) 20.200                 12-18-2
8(1973) 20.300                 12-18-3
8(1973) 20.400                 12-18-4
8(1973) 20.500                 12-18-5
8(1973) 20.600                 12-18-6
8(1973) 20.700                 12-18-7
8(1973) 20.800                 12-18-8
8(1973) 20.900                 12-18-9
8(1973) 21.100                 12-3-1
8(1973) 21.102                 12-3-2
8(1973) 21.200                 12-3-4
8(1973) 21.300                 12-3-5
8(1973) 21.400, 21.403         12-3-5
8(1973) 21.501, 21.504, 21.506 12-3-7
8(1973) 23.100                 12-6E-1
8(1973) 23.400                 12-6E-4
8(1973) 23.501                 12-6E-5
8(1973) 23.507                 12-6E-9
8(1973) 23.509                 12-6E-10
8(1973) 23.510                 12-6E-11
8(1973) 24.100                 12-9B-1
8(1973) 24.400                 12-9B-4
10(1973) 1                     1-8-1
10(1973) 2                     1-8-2
13(1973) 1                     7-4-1
13(1973) 2                     7-4-2
13(1973) 3                     7-4-3
13(1973) 4                     7-4-6
1(1974) 1 6                    1-5-11
2(1974) 1                      2-5-1
2(1974) 2                      2-5-2
2(1974) 3                      2-5-3
2(1974) 5, 6, 7(A),(D)         2-5-4
2(1974) 8                      2-5-5
2(1974) 9                      2-5-6
2(1974) 10                     2-5-7
2(1974) 11                     2-5-8
2(1974) 12                     2-5-9
2(1974) 13                     2-5-10
12(1974) 1                     7-5-1
12(1974) 2                     7-5-2
12(1974) 3                     7-5-3
12(1974) 3(A)                  7-5-4
12(1974) 3(B)                  7-5-5
12(1974) 3(C)                  7-5-6
12(1974) 4(A)                  7-4-1
12(1974) 4(B)                  7-4-2
24(1974) 3(A)                  12-4-1
                               12-6E-1,
                               12-6E-4,
24(1974) 3(B)                  12-6E-5,
                               12-6E-9 
                               12-6E-11
9(1975) 1                      3-5-1
9(1975) 2                      3-5-2
9(1975) 3 5                    3-5-3
9(1975) 6                      3-5-4
9(1975) 7                      3-5-5
9(1975) 8                      3-5-6
9(1975) 9                      3-5-7
9(1975) 10                     3-5-8
9(1975) 11                     3-5-9
16(1975) 3(B)                  12-7B-6
16(1975) 3(C)                  12-7B-9
16(1975) 4                     12-7B-8
2(1976) 3                      12-9B-1,
                               12-9B-4
2(1976) 3(A)                   12-4-1
2(1976) 3 (1-3-3)              1-1-9
8(1976) 1                      2-3-1
8(1976) 1(a)                   2-3-2
8(1976) 1(b)                   2-3-3
8(1976) 1(c)                   2-3-4
8(1976) 1(d)                   2-3-5
8(1976) 1(e)                   2-3-6
9(1976) 1-1                    8-4-1
9(1976) 1-2                    8-4-2
9(1976) 1-3                    8-4-3
9(1976) 1-4(a, b)              8-4-4
9(1976) 1-5                    8-4-5
9(1976) 1-6(a)                 8-4-6
9(1976) 1-6(b)                 8-4-7
9(1976) 1-7                    8-4-8
9(1976) 1-8                    8-4-9
9(1976) 1-9(a,b), 1-14 1-26    8-4-10
9(1976) 1-10(a d)              8-4-11
9(1976) 1-10(e)                8-4-12
9(1976) 1-11(a,b)              8-4-13
9(1976) 1-11(c)                8-4-14
9(1976) 1-11(d)                8-4-15
9(1976) 1-27, 1-28             8-4-16
9(1976) 1-29                   8-4-17
                               12-6E-4,
16(1976) 1(a)                  12-6F-3,
                               12-8A-4
19(1976) 2                     12-2-1
19(1976) 3                     12-6C-9,
                               12-6B-10
19(1976) 4                     12-6C-9,
                               12-6C-10
19(1976) 5                     12-6F-10
19(1976) 6                     12-6G-10,
                               12-6G-11
19(1976) 7                     12-6H-10,
                               12-6H-11
19(1976) 8                     12-7A-10,
                               12-7A-11
19(1976) 9                     12-7B-18
19(1976) 11A                   12-7E-11,
                               12-7E-12
19(1976) 11(B)                 12-7G-10,
                               12-7G-14
19(1976) 12                    12-10-1 
                               12-10-4
19(1976) 14                    12-12-1
19(1976) 15                    12-14-14,
                               12-14-16
20(1976) 2(1-2-5), 3(1-3-1), 5 1-3-2
20(1976) 2(1-2-4),(1-2-7)      1-3-1
20(1976) 2(1-2-6)              1-1-8
20(1976) 2(1-2-9)              1-2-1
20(1976) 2(1-2-10)             1-1-6
20(1976) 2(1-2-11)             1-1-7
20(1976) 3(1-3-2)              1-3-3
20(1976) 5                     2-1-1
20(1976) 6                     6-1-1 
                               6-1-4
20(1976) 7(2-7-1)(a)           1-9-1
20(1976) 7(2-7-1)(b)           1-9-2
20(1976) 7(2-7-1)(c)           1-9-3
20(1976) 7(2-7-2)              1-9-4
20(1976) 7(2-7-3)              1-9-5
20(1976) 7(2-7-4)(a - d)       1-9-6
20(1976) 7(2-7-5)(a - d)       1-9-7
20(1976) 9(2-8-2)              1-7-3
20(1976) 10                    7-3A-4 
                               7-3A-10
28(1976) 1                     3-5-9
29(1976) 2(1-2-1)              1-3-1
31(1976) 1                     4-6-1
31(1976) 2                     4-6-2
31(1976) 3                     4-6-3
31(1976) 4                     4-6-4
31(1976) 5                     4-6-5
31(1976) 7                     4-6-6
12(1977) 2                     12-6H-8
12(1977) 3                     1-1-1
12(1977) 5                     1-1-2
12(1977) 6                     1-1-3
12(1977) 8                     1-1-4
12(1977) 9                     1-1-5
12(1977) 13                    1-2-4
21(1977) 1                     6-3A-4
21(1977) 2, 3                  6-3A-5
21(1977) 4                     6-3A-6
21(1977) 5                     6-3B-1
21(1977) 6                     6-3B-2
21(1977) 7                     6-3C-2
21(1977) 8                     6-3C-3
21(1977) 9                     6-3D-1
21(1977) 10                    6-3D-2
21(1977) 11                    6-3D-3
21(1977) 12                    6-3D-4
21(1977) 14                    6-3E-3
23(1977) 1                     5-2-8
30(1977) 1                     12-2-1
                               12-4-1,
                               12-6D-1,
                               12-6D-4,
30(1977) 2                     12-6D-5,
                               12-6D-8,
                               12-6D-9,
                               12-6D-11
30(1977) 4                     12-6F-1
30(1977) 5                     12-6G-1
30(1977) 6                     12-6H-1
30(1977) 7                     12-7A-1
10 (1978) 1                    3-2-2
8(1978) 21.500                 12-3-7
9(1978) 1                      5-1-9
                               3-2-1,
10(1978) 1                     3-2-5,
                               3-2-6
12(1978) 1                     12-2-1,
                               12-6C-8
                               12-6B-8,
12(1978) 2                     12-6D-8,
                               12-7A-8,
                               12-7E-9
                               12-6B-5,
                               12-6D-5,
                               12-6E-5,
                               12-6F-5,
                               12-6G-5,
12(1978) 3                     12-6H-5,
                               12-7A-5,
                               12-7B-10,
                               12-7C-7,
                               12-7E-6,
                               12-7G-5
                               12-21-1,
12(1978) 4                     12-21-3 
                               12-21-7,
                               12-21-10
16(1978) 1                     12-2-1
13(1978) 2                     12-7B-14
13(1978) 3                     12-7B-17
16(1978) 2(a)                  12-12-7
16(1978) 2(b)                  12-12-10 
                               12-12-12
16(1978) 4(a)                  12-16-2
16(1978) 4(b)                  12-16-5
16(1978) 5(c)                  12-17-7
16(1978) 7                     12-3-5
16(1978) 8                     12-3-7
19(1978) 1                     6-3E-6
24(1978) 1                     12-3-8
30(1978) 1                     12-16-2
30(1978) 2                     12-6D-10,
                               12-17-2
35(1978) 2                     6-3E-6
37(1978) 1                     7-1-1
37(1978) 1(B)                  7-1-2
37(1978) 2                     7-1-3
                               8-1-7,
                               8-1-9,
                               8-1-10,
                               8-1-15,
43(1978) 1                     8-1-16,
                               8-1-20,
                               8-1-29,
                               8-1-39,
                               8-1-40
43(1978) 1, 2                  8-1-3
                               8-1-1,
                               8-1-2,
                               8-1-4,
                               8-1-5,
                               8-1-11,
                               8-1-18,
43(1978) 2                     8-1-19,
                               8-1-21,
                               8-1-22,
                               8-1-30,
                               8-1-32 
                               8-1-36,
                               8-1-37,
                               8-1-42
47(1978) 1                     2-1-2
48(1978) 1                     2-4-2
48(1978) 2                     2-4-3
48(1978) 3                     2-4-1
48(1978) 4                     2-4-5
48(1978) 5                     2-4-7
48(1978) 6                     2-4-4
48(1978) 9                     2-4-6
50(1978) 1                     12-7G-6
                               12-6B-6,
                               12-6C-6,
                               12-6D-6,
                               12-6F-6,
50(1978) 2                     12-6G-6,
                               12-6H-6,
                               12-7A-6,
                               12-7E-7,
                               12-8A-6
50(1978) 7                     12-7C-3
50(1978) 8                     12-7C-4
50(1978) 10                    12-10-11,
                               12-10-14
50(1978) 11                    12-10-18
50(1978) 15                    12-16-2,
                               12-17-2
50(1978) 17                    12-3-7
                               12-6E-8,
50(1978) 18                    12-6F-8,
                               12-6G-8
                               12-6H-8,
50(1978) 19                    12-7A-8,
                               12-7E-9
50(1978) 21                    12-4-2
50(1978) 22                    12-3-9
59(1978)                       12-6E-6
6(1979) 1                      5-2-10,
                               5-2-11
                               2-6-1,
6(1979) 3                      2-7-1 
                               2-7-5
17(1979) 1                     5-2-9
19(1979) 3(a)                  12-7B-14
                               12-6E-8,
19(1979) 5                     12-6F-8,
                               12-6G-8
20(1979) 2                     8-5-5
20(1979) 3                     6-3E-7
22(1979) 1                     12-6C-8,
                               12-6D-8
23(1979) 1                     3-5-3
26(1979) 1                     2-6-2
26(1979) 2                     2-6-3
26(1979) 4                     2-6-4
26(1979) 5                     2-6-5
26(1979) 6                     2-6-6
26(1979) 7                     2-6-7
26(1979) 8                     2-6-8
26(1979) 9                     2-6-9
26(1979) 10(a)                 2-6-10
26(1979) 10(b)                 2-6-11
26(1979) 10(c)                 2-6-12
26(1979) 11                    2-6-13
26(1979) 12                    2-6-14
28(1979)                       7-1-2
34(1979) 1                     12-8A-5,
                               12-8A-8
45(1979) 1                     2-5-3
47(1979) 1                     12-10-16
49(1979) 1                     12-3-6
49(1979) 2, 3                  12-3-7
1(1980) 1                      1-9-1
3(1980) 1                      6-3B-2
5(1980) 1                      2-6-2
5(1980) 2                      2-6-3
5(1980) 3                      2-6-1
5(1980) 4                      2-6-4
5(1980) 5                      2-6-5
5(1980) 6                      2-6-6
5(1980) 7                      2-6-7
5(1980) 8                      2-6-8
5(1980) 9                      2-6-9
5(1980) 10(a)                  2-6-10
5(1980) 10(b)                  2-6-11
5(1980) 10(c)                  2-6-12
5(1980) 11                     2-6-13
5(1980) 12                     2-6-14
21(1980)                       12-7C-10
                               12-7B-1,
                               12-7B-7,
                               12-7B-11,
21(1980) 1                     12-7B-13,
                               12-7B-15,
                               12-7B-16,
                               12-7B-19,
                               12-7B-20
                               12-7C-1,
                               12-7C-5,
21(1980) 2                     12-7C-8,
                               12-7C-11,
                               12-7C-12,
                               12-7C-15
26(1980) 1                     12-2-1
33(1980) 1                     4-10-1 
                               4-10-10
34(1980) 3                     1-4-1
35(1980) 1                     12-6D-8
36(1980) 1                     12-16-6
37(1980) 1                     12-2-1
                               12-6B-7,
                               12-6C-7,
                               12-6D-7,
                               12-6E-7,
                               12-6F-7,
                               12-6G-7,
37(1980) 2                     12-6H-7,
                               12-7A-7,
                               12-7B-12,
                               12-7C-9,
                               12-7E-8,
                               12-7G-7,
                               12-8A-7
37(1980) 6                     12-6G-1,
                               12-6H-1
37(1980) 10                    12-12-1,
                               12-12-5
38(1980) 1                     7-1-2
42(1980) 1                     2-6-5
1(1981) 1                      5-1-6
6(1981) 1                      6-3C-4
8(1981) 2                      12-7C-4
11(1981) 1                     12-7D-3 
                               12-7D-11
15(1981) 1                     4-11-1 
                               4-11-22
                               8-1-1,
20(1981) 1                     8-1-8,
                               8-1-28,
                               8-1-35
                               8-1-4,
20(1981) 2                     8-1-14,
                               8-1-18
19(1981) 1                     2-5-3
19(1981) 2, 3                  2-5-4
20(1981)                       8-1-21
                               8-1-3,
                               8-1-24,
20(1981) 1                     8-1-26,
                               8-1-34,
                               8-1-42
22(1981) 1                     12-6C-8,
                               12-6D-8
23(1981) 1                     12-6C-8
23(1981) 2                     12-6D-8
24(1981) 1                     12-6C-5
28(1981) 1                     7-3A-3
31(1981) 1                     1-4-1
35(1981) 1                     12-18-9
37(1981) 1                     3-2-2 
37(1981) 2                     3-1-3
43(1981) 1                     6-3C-5
                               12-7F-2,
5(1982) 1                      12-7F-4,
                               12-7F-6 
                               12-7F-14
5(1982) 2                      12-7F-5
6(1982) 1(a - c)               12-2-1
6(1982) 2(b)                   12-9B-4
6(1982) 3(b)                   12-7B-9
6(1982) 4(a)                   12-7C-6
6(1982) 5(b)                   12-7D-3
6(1982) 6(b)                   12-7E-5
6(1982) 8(b)                   12-7A-4
11(1982) 2                     12-7B-12
23(1982) 1, 2                  12-2-1
25(1982) 1(d)                  12-7B-7
25(1982) 1(e)                  12-7C-5
26(1982) 1                     12-10-1
26(1982) 2                     12-10-1
26(1982) 3                     12-10-3
26(1982) 5                     12-10-9
26(1982) 6                     12-10-9
26(1982) 7, 8                  12-2-1
30(1982) 1                     12-10-16
32(1982) 1                     5-1-6
34(1982) 1                     12-7B-18
34(1982) 2                     12-7C-14
34(1982) 3                     12-7D-11
34(1982) 4                     12-7E-12
35(1982) 2                     12-7F-4
39(1982) 1                     12-18-9
41(1982) 1(A - B)              12-2-1
                               13-1-1 
                               13-1-7,
                               13-2-1,
                               13-2-2,
                               13-3-1 
                               13-3-17,
                               13-4-1 
                               13-4-3,
                               13-6-1 
                               13-6-3,
                               13-7-1 
                               13-7-13,
                               13-8-1 
                               13-8-4,
                               13-10-1,
                               13-10-1-1,
                               13-10-1-2,
2(1983) 1                      13-10-1-3,
                               13-10-1-4,
                               13-10-2 
                               13-10-5,
                               13-10-5-1,
                               13-10-5-2,
                               13-10-5-3,
                               13-10-5-4,
                               13-10-5-5,
                               13-10-6,
                               13-10-7,
                               13-10-8,
                               13-10-8-1,
                               13-10-8-2,
                               13-10-9 
                               13-10-12,
                               13-11-2 
                               13-11-9
4(1983) 1                      12-7C-5
7(1983) 1                      7-3A-4
8(1983) 1 6                    6-3E-4
9(1983) 1                      6-3B-2
10(1983) 1                     4-10-7
11(1983) 2                     10-2-1 
                               10-2-5
12(1983) 1                     12-21-15
16(1983) 1                     12-21-10
21(1983) 1                     12-7C-4
25(1983) 1                     13-2-2
27(1983) 1                     6-3B-2
28(1983) 1                     7-3A-6
28(1983) 2                     7-3A-7
28(1983) 3                     7-3A-9
29(1983) 1                     13-7-6
34(1983)                       7-3B-7
34(1983) 1                     7-3B-1
34(1983) 2                     7-3B-2
34(1983) 3                     7-3B-3
34(1983) 4                     7-3B-4
34(1983) 5                     7-3B-5
                               3-4-1 
                               3-4-5,
                               12-11-1 
39(1983) 1                     12-11-4,
                               12-11-7,
                               12-11-8,
                               12-11-11,
                               12-11-12
41(1983) 1                     12-7B-7
1(1984) 1                      7-5-7
7(1984) 1                      12-7C-5
20(1984) 1                     4-2-1,
                               4-2-2
23(1984) 1                     2-6-13
26(1984) 1                     5-1-6
2(1985) 1                      7-3C-1
5(1985) 1                      12-21-1
5(1985) 3                      12-21-8
5(1985) 4                      12-21-9
5(1985) 5                      12-21-13
6(1985) 1                      1-7-1,
                               1-7-2
9(1985) 1                      12-2-1,
                               12-14-19
10(1985) 1                     3-5-9
13(1985) 1                     6-3E-2
18(1985) 1, 2                  3-4-1 
                               3-4-5 
19(1985) 3                     5-7-4
19(1985) 4                     5-7-5
20(1985) 1                     12-21-13
24(1985) 2                     6-3E-2
28(1985) 1                     6-3B-2
4(1986) 1                      12-11-6
6(1986) 1                      13-11-5
11(1986) 1                     13-3-6
11(1986) 2                     13-11-10
23(1986) 1                     12-6D-8
30(1986) 1                     12-4-1
33(1986) 1                     12-7F-4
5(1987) 1                      2-5-9
5(1987) 2                      2-5-10
6(1987) 1                      12-5-6
8(1987) 1                      2-6-4
8(1987) 2                      2-6-9
18(1987) 1                     7-3B-6
21(1987) 1 - 3                 13-7-7,
                               13-7-8
                               12-4-1,
                               12-6A-5,
23(1987) 1                     12-6A-1,
                               12-6A-4,
                               12-6A-6 
                               12-6A-11 
29(1987) 1                     3-2-2
36(1987) 1                     12-2-1
42(1987) 1                     6-3E-6
5(1988) 1                      8-4-17
12(1988) 1                     12-11-2
12(1988) 3                     12-6C-8
12(1988) 4                     12-6D-8
14(1988) 1                     8-2-1 
                               8-2-6
15(1988) 1                     5-1-6
16(1988) 1                     6-3C-4
17(1988) 1                     1-4-1
20(1988) 1                     5-1-6
21(1988) 1                     12-9A-1 
                               12-9A-14
32(1988) 1                     12-2-1,
                               12-7F-4
32(1988) 2                     12-4-1,
                               12-7F-1
38(1988) 1                     4-1-1 
                               4-1-14
8(1989) 1 - 6                  4-1-4
8(1989) 7                      4-1-12
11(1989) 1                     2-5-3
11(1989) 2, 3                  2-5-4
18(1989) 13                    8-5-13
18(1989) 29                    8-5-29
25(1989) 2                     13-9-1 
                               13-9-5
27(1989) 1                     3-5-9
31(1989) 8                     12-7B-6
31(1989) 9                     12-7C-4
31(1989) 12                    12-7F-4
31(1989) 16 - 19               12-2-1
31(1989) 16-119                12-14-18
3(1990) 1                      5-5-1 
                               5-5-4
5(1990) 1                      12-7F-4
15(1990) 1                     1-5-11
19(1990) 1                     12-6D-8
23(1990) 1                     12-7C-4
27(1990) 1                     12-2-1
34(1990) 1                     4-1-4
37(1990) 3                     12-6B-8
37(1990) 4                     12-6C-8
37(1990) 5                     12-6D-8
37(1990) 21                    12-6A-8
41(1990) 2                     12-6A-9
41(1990) 3                     12-6B-9
41(1990) 4                     12-6C-9
41(1990) 5                     12-6D-9
1(1991) 1                      13-5-1 
                               13-5-3
2(1991) 1                      12-19-1 
                               12-19-11
3(1991) 3                      5-7-3
5(1991) 1                      12-9A-12
6(1991) 1                      12-10-16
7(1991) 1                      6-3C-5
8(1991) 1                      8-1-18
8(1991) 2, 4                   8-1-22
8(1991) 3                      8-1-23
8(1991) 5                      8-1-24
8(1991) 6                      8-1-25
8(1991) 7                      8-1-26
8(1991) 8                      8-1-27
8(1991) 9                      8-1-28
8(1991) 10                     8-1-29
8(1991) 11                     8-1-30
8(1991) 12                     8-1-31
8(1991) 13                     8-1-41
8(1991) 14                     8-2-1
15(1991) 1                     12-2-1
16(1991) 1                     12-6E-8
16(1991) 2                     12-6F-8
16(1991) 3                     12-6G-8
17(1991) 2                     12-2-1
17(1991) 3                     12-6E-9
17(1991) 4                     12-6F-9
17(1991) 5                     12-6G-9
17(1991) 6                     12-6H-9
17(1991) 7                     12-7A-8
17(1991) 8                     12-7B-15
17(1991) 9                     12-7C-11
17(1991) 10                    12-7D-8
17(1991) 11                    12-7E-10
17(1991) 12                    12-7F-10
17(1991) 13                    12-7G-9
17(1991) 14                    12-8A-9
21(1991) 1                     5-3-1 
                               5-3-9
23(1991)                       4-2-2
25(1991) 5                     10-2-1
34(1991) 1                     2-3-5
35(1991) 1                     12-2-1
43(1991) 1, 2                  12-2-1
                               4-3-1-1,
                               4-3-1-3 
                               4-3-1-11,
                               4-3-2,
                               4-3-3-1 
                               4-3-3-7,
45(1991) 1                     4-3-4,
                               4-3-5-1 
                               4-3-5-4,
                               4-3-6,
                               4-3-6-2 
                               4-3-6-5,
                               4-3-7-1 
                               4-3-7-4
46(1991) 1                     3-4-1 
                               3-4-5
48(1991) 2                     12-17-7
49(1991) 1                     12-16-2
49(1991) 2                     12-17-2
3(1992) 1                      5-1-10
4(1992) 1                      12-9B-1,
                               12-9B-4
5(1992) 1                      6-3E-5
                               3-2-3,
                               3-2-4,
7(1992)                        3-3-1,
                               3-3-4 
                               3-3-7
8(1992) 1 - 3                  12-2-1
8(1992) 9, 10                  12-6C-8
8(1992) 13, 14                 12-6D-8
8(1992) 24, 25                 12-7F-4
10(1992) 1                     2-6-4
10(1992) 2                     2-6-9
14(1992) 1                     4-5-1 
                               4-5-25
                               12-22-1,
18(1992) 1                     12-22-2,
                               12-22-4 
                               12-22-9
28(1992) 1                     4-1-14
30(1992)                       3-1-1,
                               3-1-2
                               7-2A-1,
2(1993) 1                      7-2A-3—
                               7-2A-11
4(1993) 1                      12-7B-7
4(1993) 2                      12-7C-5
6(1993) H                      8-3-2
6(1993) I                      8-3-1
9(1993) 1 - 5                  12-2-1
9(1993) 6                      12-11-2
18(1993) 1                     13-3-12
18(1993) 2                     13-4-3
18(1993) 3                     13-6-4
18(1993) 4                     13-8-4
18(1993) 5                     13-9-5
18(1993) 6                     13-7-14
18(1993) 7                     13-11-10
19(1993) 1                     5-1-6
23(1993) 1                     2-6-13
23(1993) 2                     8-4-16
24(1993) 1                     4-3-3-6
32(1993)                       3-1-1,
                               3-1-2
33(1993) 1                     12-2-1
8(1994) 1                      5-6-1
9(1994) 1                      12-9A-1
9(1994) 2                      12-9A-2
10(1994) 1                     12-10-16
11(1994) 1 4                   2-1-3
12(1994) 2                     6-3G-1 
                               6-3G-12
12(1994) 3                     1-4-1
13(1994) 1                     12-21-10
15(1994) 1                     6-3H-1 
                               6-3H-10
17(1994) 1                     12-2-1
21(1994) 1 - 7                 12-2-1
                               12-8B-1,
                               12-8B-2,
21(1994) 9                     12-8B-4 
                               12-8B-6,
                               12-8B-8 
                               12-8B-12
                               12-5-6,
                               12-8C-1 
                               12-8C-7,
21(1994) 10                    12-9C-1,
                               12-9C-2,
                               12-9C-4 
                               12-9C-6
21(1994) 12                    12-6F-4,
                               12-8A-4
                               8-5-1 
                               8-5-28,
25(1994)                       8-5-30 
                               8-5-34,
                               8-5-37 
                               8-5-52
32(1994) 1                     4-2-3
32(1994) 2                     3-5-9
94-21(1994)                    12-4-1
94-21(1994) 12                 12-6E-4
1(1995) 1                      13-7-1
1(1995) 2                      13-7-2
1(1995) 3                      13-7-5
1(1995) 4                      13-7-7
1(1995) 4                      13-7-8
2(1995) 1                      12-21-10
                               6-4-1 
5(1995) 2                      6-4-24,
                               6-4A-1 
                               6-4A-10
6(1995) 6                      12-2-1
15(1995) 1                     13-7-7,
                               13-7-8
16(1995) 1 - 3                 7-2B-1
18(1995) 1                     6-3B-2
19(1995)                       12-8B-2
21(1995) 1                     4-1-12
                               12-8D-1,
24(1995) 1                     12-8D-2,
                               12-8D-4 
                               12-8D-15
4(1996) 1                      12-6G-8
7(1996) 8                      12-14-18
9(1996) 5                      3-4-1 
                               3-4-5
9(1996) 6                      12-11-2
                               3-2-2,
10(1996)                       3-4-1 
                               3-4-5
12(1996) 1                     13-3-6
12(1996) 2                     13-6-1
12(1996) 3                     13-11-1
13(1996) 3                     12-15-1
14(1996) 1                     12-2-1
16(1996) 1                     12-7C-4
16(1996) 5, 6                  12-7F-4
18(1996) 2(g)                  5-1-10
22(1996) 1                     12-2-1
22(1996) 3                     12-16-6
1(1997) 1, 2                   12-2-1
1(1997) 4                      12-7F-4
3(1997) 1                      2-2-4 
                               2-2-9
8(1997) 1                      7-2B-2
13(1997) 1                     12-2-2
13(1997) 2                     12-9A-2
13(1997) 3                     12-15-2 
                               12-15-5
17(1997)                       7-3A-1,
                               7-3A-13
1(1998) 1                      12-7B-7,
                               12-7C-5
2(1998) 1                      1-5-11
6(1998) 1                      4-1-2,
                               4-1-6
6(1998) 2                      4-3-3-6
10(1998) 1                     12-11-2
10(1998) 5, 6, 7               12-7C-4
10(1998) 5, 8                  12-7F-4
10(1998) 9                     12-16-6
10(1998) 10                    12-16-9
10(1998) 11                    12-16-7
13(1998)                       7-7-1 
                               7-7-3
16(1998) 1                     12-15-4
16(1998) 2                     12-15-5
20(1998)                       6-3C-5
                               14-2-1,
                               14-3-1,
                               14-3-2,
                               14-4-1,
                               14-5-1,
                               14-5-2,
                               14-6-3 
Ord., 9-21-1999                14-6-8,
                               14-7-1,
                               14-7-2,
                               14-10-1 
                               14-10-6,
                               14-10-8 
                               14-10-11,
                               14-11-1
                               12-7H-1,
3(1999) 1                      12-7H-4,
                               12-7H-6 
                               12-7H-18
                               12-7I-1,
3(1999) 2                      12-7I-2,
                               12-7I-6 
                               12-7I-18
3(1999) 3                      12-2-2
3(1999) 4                      12-4-1
3(1999) 7                      12-14-19
3(1999) 8                      12-15-2,
                               12-15-3
3(1999) 10                     5-1-7
3(1999) 11                     12-10-16
15(1999) 2                     4-9-1 
                               4-9-5
20(1999) 1                     8-6-1 
                               8-6-13
22(1999) 1                     13-2-2
22(1999) 2                     13-10-9
22(1999) 3                     12-10-7
22(1999) 4                     12-9C-6,
                               12-10-8
22(1999) 5                     12-11-5
22(1999) 6                     12-14-2 
                               12-14-9
22(1999) 7                     12-2-2
                               12-7A-1,
23(1999) 1                     12-7A-4 
                               12-7A-15
23(1999) 2                     12-2-2
5(2000) 1                      13-7-1 
                               13-7-14
                               12-7F-4,
                               12-7F-9,
6(2000) 2                      12-7H-4,
                               12-7I-2,
                               12-9C-2
6(2000) 4                      12-6C-8,
                               12-6D-8
6(2000) 5                      12-15-3
9(2000) 1                      12-2-2
9(2000) 2                      12-10-9
9(2000) 3                      12-10-18
9(2000) 4                      12-10-19
9(2000) 5                      12-10-20
15(2000) 1                     12-10-19
17(2000) 1                     3-4-1
                               12-11-3,
                               12-15-4,
24(2000) 2                     12-15-5,
                               12-16-2,
                               12-17-2
1(2001) 1                      1-5-11
                               13-13-1,
2(2001) 2                      13-13-2,
                               13-13-4
2(2001) 3                      13-11-1
2(2001) 4                      13-2-2
3(2001) 3                      12-4-1
3(2001) 4                      12-15-2
4(2001) 2                      12-10-16
4(2001) 3                      12-10-21
5(2001) 3                      12-21-10
5(2001) 4                      12-15-5
5(2001) 5                      12-18-4
5(2001) 6                      12-2-2
5(2001) 7                      13-2-2
5(2001) 8                      8-3-1
8(2001) 2                      12-7H-6
12(2001) 1                     6-5-1 
                               6-5-3
13(2001) 2                     6-3C-4
                               12-2-2,
                               12-7F-4,
17(2001) 2                     12-9C-2,
                               12-14-12,
                               12-16-7
19(2001) 3                     12-2-2
24(2001) 10                    12-2-2
31(2001) 2                     12-2-2
                               12-6H-8,
31(2001) 3, 5                  12-7A-8,
                               12-7B-13
31(2001) 3, 5, 8               12-7C-10
31(2001) 4                     12-14-18
                               12-6E-8,
                               12-6F-8,
                               12-6G-8,
31(2001) 5                     12-7E-9,
                               12-7H-12,
                               12-7I-12,
                               12-8D-12
31(2001) 6                     12-16-7
31(2001) 7                     12-7A-12
                               12-7C-1 
31(2001) 8                     12-7C-9,
                               12-7C-11 
                               12-7C-15
31(2001) 10                    12-11-11
31(2001) 11                    12-15-4
31(2001) 12                    12-18-9
31(2001) 13                    13-7-6
4(2002) 1                      12-3-7
12(2002) 1                     7-3A-3
12(2002) 2                     7-3A-14
16(2002) 1                     12-22-4
28(2002) 2                     12-2-2
29(2002) 2                     12-2-2
32(2002) 3                     4-3-1-5
32(2002) 4                     4-3-1-9
32(2002) 5                     4-3-3-2
32(2002) 6                     4-3-3-1
32(2002) 7                     4-3-3-3
32(2002) 8                     4-3-3-6
32(2002) 9                     4-3-6-4
1(2003) 2                      6-4-6
2(2003) 1                      12-11-9,
                               12-11-10
3(2003) 1                      8-1-23
3(2003) 2                      8-1-33
                               12-4-1,
                               12-8E-1,
4(2003) 1                      12-8E-4 
                               12-8E-19,
                               12-15-2
5(2003) 1                      12-2-2
5(2003) 4                      12-7A-8
5(2003) 5                      12-7A-12
5(2003) 6                      12-7B-7
5(2003) 7                      12-7C-2
5(2003) 8                      12-7C-5
5(2003) 9                      12-7E-2
5(2003) 10                     12-7F-2
5(2003) 11                     12-7H-7
5(2003) 12                     12-7I-7
5(2003) 13                     12-8D-7
5(2003) 14                     12-9A-5
5(2003) 15                     12-11-8
5(2003) 16, 17                 12-15-3
5(2003) 19                     12-3-8
5(2003) 20                     12-3-9
11(2003) 1                     12-10-9
18(2003) 1                     12-2-2
                               7-6-1
26(2003) 2                     —
                               7-6-4
33(2003) 1                     12-2-2,
                               12-16-7
36(2003) 1                     12-16-7
37(2003) 1                     7-2A-8
4(2004) 2                      6-4-6
5(2004) 1                      4-3-5-5
6(2004) 1                      5-1-6
9(2004) 1                      6-3A-10
                               6-3A-5,
                               6-3A-7
                               —
                               6-3A-9,
                               6-3B-1,
12(2004) 1                     6-3B-2,
                               6-3C-2
                               —
                               6-3C-5,
                               6-3D-2,
                               6-3D-3,
                               6-3E-2
14(2004) 1                     12-2-2
14(2004) 2                     12-6A-8
14(2004) 3                     12-6B-8
14(2004) 4                     12-6C-8
14(2004) 5                     12-6D-8
14(2004) 6                     12-6E-8
14(2004) 7                     12-6F-8
14(2004) 8                     12-6G-8
14(2004) 9                     12-6H-8
14(2004) 10                    12-10-10
14(2004) 12                    12-15-2
14(2004) 13                    12-15-3
14(2004) 14                    12-15-4
14(2004) 15                    12-15-5
19(2004) 1                     6-3C-4
23(2004) 1                     1-9-9
26(2004) 1, 2                  12-2-2
2(2005) 1                      6-4A-3
2(2005) 2                      6-4A-4
2(2005) 3                      6-4A-6
2(2005) 4                      6-4A-7
2(2005) 5                      6-4A-8
2(2005) 6                      6-4A-9
2(2005) 7                      6-4A-10
3(2005) 1                      12-11-4
5(2005) 1                      6-3C-5
10(2005) 1 3                   12-14-20
11(2005) 1                     12-14-14
                               12-2-2,
18(2005) 2                     12-10-10,
                               12-7H-4,
                               12-7H-12
23(2005) 1                     6-3I-1,
                               6-3I-2
24(2005) 2                     Ch. 4A, Ch. 4B
                               12-2-2,
24(2005) 3                     12-7H-4,
                               12-10-10
24(2005) 4                     13-2-2
27(2005) 3                     4-3-1-5
27(2005) 4                     4-3-1-9
27(2005) 5                     4-3-3-1
27(2005) 6                     4-3-3-2
27(2005) 7                     4-3-3-3
27(2005) 8                     4-3-3-6
29(2005) 16                    12-1-1
29(2005) 17                    12-2-1
29(2005) 18                    12-2-2
                               12-3-4
29(2005) 19                    —
                               12-3-7
29(2005) 20                    12-4-1
29(2005) 21                    12-4-2
                               12-5-2,
29(2005) 22                    12-5-3,
                               12-5-5
                               12-6A-1,
                               12-6A-4,
                               12-6B-1,
                               12-6B-4,
                               12-6C-1,
                               12-6C-4,
                               12-6D-1,
29(2005) 23                    12-6D-8,
                               12-6E-1,
                               12-6E-4,
                               12-6F-1,
                               12-6F-4,
                               12-6G-1,
                               12-6G-4,
                               12-6H-1,
                               12-6H-4
                               12-7A-1,
                               12-7A-4,
                               12-7A-6,
                               12-7A-8,
                               12-7A-9,
                               12-7A-11 
                               12-7A-14,
                               12-7B-1,
                               12-7B-6 
                               12-7B-9,
                               12-7B-11 
                               12-7B-17,
                               12-7B-19,
                               12-7B-20,
                               12-7C-1 
                               12-7C-6,
                               12-7C-8 
                               12-7C-12,
                               12-7C-15,
                               12-7D-3,
                               12-7D-5,
                               12-7E-1,
                               12-7E-2,
                               12-7E-5,
29(2005) 24                    12-7E-7,
                               12-7F-1,
                               12-7F-2,
                               12-7F-4,
                               12-7F-5,
                               12-7F-7,
                               12-7G-1,
                               12-7H-1,
                               12-7H-4,
                               12-7H-6 
                               12-7H-8,
                               12-7H-10,
                               12-7H-11,
                               12-7H-14,
                               12-7H-15,
                               12-7H-18,
                               12-7I-1,
                               12-7I-2,
                               12-7I-6 
                               12-7I-8,
                               12-7I-10,
                               12-7I-11,
                               12-7I-14,
                               12-7I-15,
                               12-7I-18
                               12-8A-1,
                               12-8B-1,
                               12-8B-2,
                               12-8B-4,
                               12-8B-6,
                               12-8B-10,
                               12-8B-12,
                               12-8D-2,
29(2005) 25                    12-8D-4 
                               12-8D-8,
                               12-8D-10,
                               12-8E-1,
                               12-8E-4 
                               12-8E-9,
                               12-8E-11,
                               12-8E-12,
                               12-8E-18,
                               12-8E-19
                               12-9A-1
29(2005) 26                    —
                               12-9A-14
                               12-9C-1,
                               12-9C-2,
29(2005) 28                    12-9C-4
                               —
                               12-9C-6
                               12-10-6,
                               12-10-7,
                               12-10-9,
29(2005) 29                    12-10-13,
                               12-10-16,
                               12-10-20,
                               12-10-21
                               12-11-1,
                               12-11-2,
29(2005) 30                    12-11-4
                               —
                               12-11-8,
                               12-11-11
                               12-12-1
29(2005) 31                    —
                               12-12-12
                               12-14-1,
                               12-14-10
29(2005) 33                    —
                               12-14-16,
                               12-14-18,
                               12-14-19
29(2005) 34                    12-15-2
29(2005) 35                    12-15-3
29(2005) 36                    12-15-4
29(2005) 37                    12-15-5
                               12-16-2
29(2005) 38                    —
                               12-16-7
                               12-17-1
29(2005) 39                    —
                               12-17-6
                               12-18-3
29(2005) 40                    —
                               12-18-9
29(2005) 41                    12-19-2
29(2005) 43                    12-21-3
29(2005) 44                    12-21-10
29(2005) 45                    12-21-11
29(2005) 46                    12-21-13
29(2005) 47                    12-22-2
29(2005) 48                    12-22-5
29(2005) 49                    12-22-6
29(2005) 50                    12-22-7
29(2005) 51                    13-2-2
29(2005) 52                    13-3-3
29(2005) 53                    13-3-4
29(2005) 54                    13-3-6
29(2005) 55                    13-3-10
29(2005) 56                    13-3-12
29(2005) 57                    13-4-1
29(2005) 58                    13-4-2
29(2005) 59                    13-6-1
29(2005) 60                    13-7-2
29(2005) 61                    13-7-6
29(2005) 62                    13-7-7,
                               13-7-8
29(2005) 63                    13-8-1
29(2005) 64                    13-8-2
29(2005) 65                    13-9-1
29(2005) 66                    13-9-3
29(2005) 67                    13-10-10
29(2005) 68                    13-10-11
29(2005) 69                    13-10-12
                               13-11-2
29(2005) 70                    —
                               13-11-10
29(2005) 71                    13-11-11
29(2005) 72                    13-12-1
29(2005) 73                    13-12-2
29(2005) 74                    13-12-3
29(2005) 75                    13-12-4
29(2005) 76                    13-13-3
29(2005) 77                    13-13-4
                               14-1-1
29(2005) 78                    —
                               14-1-7
29(2005) 79                    14-2-1
29(2005) 80                    14-6-4
29(2005) 81                    14-10-4
29(2005) 82                    14-10-6
32(2005) 1                     5-3-1
                               12-2-2,
                               12-4-1,
2(2006) 2                      12-7J-1
                               —
                               12-7J-14,
                               12-10-10
4(2006) 1                      12-2-2
                               9-1-1
6(2006) 1                      —
                               9-1-7
7(2006) 2                      8-1-2
7(2006) 3                      8-1-3
7(2006) 4                      8-1-4
7(2006) 5                      8-1-7
7(2006) 6                      8-1-8
7(2006) 7                      8-1-9
7(2006) 8                      8-1-10
7(2006) 9                      8-1-11
7(2006) 10                     8-1-13
7(2006) 11                     8-1-14
7(2006) 12                     8-1-15
7(2006) 13                     8-1-16
7(2006) 14                     8-1-17
7(2006) 15                     8-1-18
7(2006) 16                     8-1-19
7(2006) 17                     8-1-20
7(2006) 18                     8-1-21
7(2006) 19                     8-1-22
7(2006) 20                     8-1-23
7(2006) 21                     8-1-24
7(2006) 22                     8-1-26
7(2006) 23                     8-1-29
7(2006) 24                     8-1-30
7(2006) 25                     8-1-34
7(2006) 26                     8-1-35
7(2006) 27                     8-1-36
7(2006) 28                     8-1-37
7(2006) 29                     8-1-38
7(2006) 30                     8-1-40
7(2006) 31                     8-1-41
7(2006) 32                     8-1-42
                               12-20-1
10(2006) 2                     —
                               12-20-4
14(2006) 3                     12-7H-18
14(2006) 4                     12-18-5
14(2006) 5                     14-3-1
17(2006) 1                     12-21-12
                               5-9-1
20(2006)                       —
                               5-9-13
31(2006) 1                     2-6-9
33(2006) 2                     12-16-7
                               10-3-1
1(2007) 1                      —
                               10-3-10
                               5-3-2
2(2007) 2                      —
                               5-3-5
2(2007) 3                      12-10-10
2(2007) 4                      12-8D-2
2(2007) 6                      13-8-1
2(2007) 7                      13-9-1
2(2007) 8                      13-10-5-3
2(2007) 9                      13-11-12
2(2007) 10                     14-10-11
3(2007) 2                      14-2-1
3(2007) 3                      14-10-3
3(2007) 4                      14-10-5
3(2007) 5                      14-10-8
6(2007) 1                      7-9-1
6(2007) 2                      7-9-2
6(2007) 3                      7-9-3
7(2007) 1                      12-2-2
8(2007) 1                      12-2-2
                               12-13-1
9(2007) 1                      —
                               12-13-3
14(2007) 1                     5-1-7
                               5-10-1
16(2007) 1                     —
                               5-10-7
22(2007) 2                     12-2-2
22(2007) 3                     12-16-7
23(2007) 1                     5-1-5
27(2007) 2                     14-2-1
27(2007) 3                     14-6-1
27(2007) 4                     14-6-2
27(2007) 5                     14-6-6
28(2007)                       12-21-15
28(2007) 2                     12-2-2
28(2007) 4                     12-21-10
28(2007) 8                     12-21-12
28(2007) 9                     12-21-13
28(2007) 11                    14-2-1
28(2007) 12                    14-3-1
28(2007) 13                    14-3-2
28(2007) 14                    14-4-1
28(2007) 15                    14-5-1
28(2007) 16                    14-5-2
30(2007) 1                     1-5-8
                               8-7-1
32(2007) 2                     —
                               8-7-6
32(2007) 12                    12-2-2
32(2007) 13                    12-14-21
35(2007) 3                     12-16-7
                               2-8-1
37(2007) 1                     —
                               2-8-16
39(2007) 1                     12-2-2
                               12-7B-2
39(2007) 2                     —
                               12-7B-5
39(2007) 3                     12-7H-2
39(2007) 4                     12-7I-2,
                               12-7I-3
42(2007) 1                     6-3E-1
42(2007) 2                     6-3B-2
                               7-3D-2
43(2007) 1                     —
                               7-3D-8
1(2008) 1                      12-2-2
1(2008) 2                      12-6A-2
1(2008) 3                      12-6B-2
1(2008) 4                      12-6C-2
1(2008) 5                      12-6D-2
1(2008) 6                      12-6E-2
1(2008) 7                      12-6F-2
1(2008) 8                      12-6G-2
1(2008) 9                      12-6H-2
                               12-7B-2
1(2008) 12                     —
                               12-7B-5
1(2008) 15                     12-7F-4
1(2008) 16                     12-7H-2,
                               12-7H-4
                               12-7I-2
1(2008) 17                     —
                               12-7I-4
1(2008) 22                     12-9C-2
                               12-7J-2,
1(2008) 23                     12-7J-3,
                               12-8D-2
                               12-23-1,
1(2008) 24                     12-23-3
                               —
                               12-23-12
1(2008) 25                     12-24-1 
                               12-24-12
3(2008) 2                      14-2-1
3(2008) 3                      14-10-5
4(2008) 1                      12-14-20
6(2008) 1                      6-3D-5
8(2008) 2                      12-2-2
                               12-25-1
8(2008) 4                      —
                               12-25-6
                               4-12-1
11(2008) 1                     —
                               4-12-20
12(2008) 1                     12-2-2
12(2008) 2                     12-6A-3
12(2008) 3                     12-6B-3
12(2008) 4                     12-6C-3
12(2008) 5                     12-6D-3
12(2008) 6                     12-6E-3
12(2008) 7                     12-6F-3
12(2008) 8                     12-6G-3
12(2008) 9                     12-6H-3
12(2008) 11                    12-7A-2
12(2008) 11                    12-7A-3
                               12-7B-3,
12(2008) 12                    12-7B-4,
                               12-7B-5
12(2008) 13                    12-7D-1,
                               12-7D-2
12(2008) 14                    12-7E-3,
                               12-7E-4
12(2008) 15                    12-7F-3,
                               12-7F-4
12(2008) 16                    12-7G-3
12(2008) 17                    12-7H-5
12(2008) 18                    12-7I-5
12(2008) 19                    12-8A-2,
                               12-8A-3
12(2008) 20                    12-8B-3
12(2008) 21                    12-8D-2,
                               12-8D-3
12(2008) 22                    12-8E-3
                               12-9B-2,
12(2008) 23                    12-9B-3,
                               12-9B-5
12(2008) 24                    12-9C-2,
                               12-9C-3
                               12-13-4,
12(2008) 25                    12-7G-1,
                               12-7G-2,
                               12-7J-3
12(2008) 26                    12-16-8
12(2008) 27                    12-16-10
12(2008) 28                    14-10-12
13(2008) 1                     12-2-2
13(2008) 2                     12-7G-3
13(2008) 3                     12-16-7
18(2008) 1                     12-3-10
18(2008) 2                     13-1-8
21(2008) 1                     14-10-7
23(2008) 1                     12-22-4
30(2008) 1                     1-3-2
31(2008) 1                     12-13-5
2(2009) 1                      6-3D-4
4(2009) 1                      5-1-12—
                               5-1-17
9(2009) 1                      1-4-1
3(2010) 2                      14-2-1
3(2010) 3                      14-10-5
8(2010) 1                      12-14-20
13(2010) 1                     4-3-1-11
13(2010) 2                     4-3-4
13(2010) 3                     4-3-5-1
13(2010) 4                     4-3-6-1
13(2010) 5                     4-3-6-3
22(2010) 1                     12-2-2
1(2011) 1                      12-16-7
5(2011) 1                      14-2-1
5(2011) 2                      14-10-5
10(2011) 1, 2, 3, 4            12-13-5
13(2011) 1                     7-4-1
13(2011) 2                     7-4-6
16(2011) 1                     4-2-5
25(2011) 1, 2, 3, 4            12-15-3
2(2012) 2                      12-2-2
2(2012) 3                      12-4-1
                               12-6J-1
2(2012) 4                      —
                               12-6J-13
                               12-6E-2,
2(2012) 6                      12-6F-2,
                               12-6G-2,
                               12-13-4
2(2012) 7                      12-15-2
2(2012) 8, 9                   12-15-3
2(2012) 10                     12-15-4
2(2012) 11                     12-15-5
2(2012) 12                     12-24-1
6(2012) 2                      12-7H-3
10(2012) 2                     12-22-3,
                               12-22-6
10(2012) 3                     14-10-3
15(2012) 1                     7-10-1—
                               7-10-9
21(2012) 1                     12-2-2
21(2012) 2                     12-8B-7
2(2013) 1                      6-3C-6
14(2013) 1                     1-4-1
14(2013) 2                     4-12-20
14(2013) 3                     6-3H-11
14(2013) 4                     6-4-23
14(2013) 5                     6-4A-10
16(2013) 1                     13-7-8
19(2013) 1                     12-21-2
19(2013) 2                     12-21-10
19(2013) 3                     12-21-14
2(2014) 1                      1-4-1
2(2014) 2                      1-4-4
3(2014) 1                      6-3B-2
5(2014) 1                      6-3C-6
                               5-12-1
6(2014) 1                      —
                               5-12-8
6(2014) 1                      5-12-4
8(2014) 1                      12-2-2
8(2014) 2                      12-7B-2
8(2014) 3                      12-7H-2
8(2014) 4                      12-7I-2
8(2014) 5                      12-8E-2
16(2014) 1                     6-3D-6
1(2015) 1                      4-1-2
1(2015) 2                      4-1-4
1(2015) 4                      4-3-2
3(2015) 1                      3-3-2
3(2015) 2                      3-3-3
                               5-14-1
6(2015) 1                      —
                               5-14-8
10(2015) 1                     4-13-1
10(2015) 2                     4-13-2
11(2015) 2                     1-8-3
                               10-2-1,
14(2015) 1                     10-2-5,
                               14-2-1
1(2016) 1                      12-2-2
2(2016) 2                      12-2-2
2(2016) 3                      12-6F-3
2(2016) 4                      12-6F-3
2(2016) 5                      12-6F-3
2(2016) 5                      12-6G-3
2(2016) 6                      12-6H-3
2(2016) 7                      12-7B-2
2(2016) 8                      12-7B-4
2(2016) 9                      12-7C-4
2(2016) 10                     12-7D-2
2(2016) 11                     12-7E-4
2(2016) 12                     12-7H-2
2(2016) 13                     12-7H-3
2(2016) 14                     12-7H-4
2(2016) 15                     12-7I-2
2(2016) 16                     12-7I-2
2(2016) 17                     12-7I-4
2(2016) 18                     12-7J-3
2(2016) 19                     12-8D-3
2(2016) 20                     12-8E-3
4(2016) 2                      12-6C-8
4(2016) 3                      12-6D-8
9(2016) 1, 2                   7-4-1
9(2016) 3                      7-4-6
9(2016) 4                      7-4-5
10(2016) 1                     5-7-1
10(2016) 2                     5-7-2
16(2016) 1, 2                  12-15-3
19(2016) 1                     7-3B-8
                               5-15-1
21(2016) 1                     —
                               5-15-5
22(2016)                       5-4-3
                               5-4-1
22(2016) 1                     —
                               5-4-6
23(2016) 1                     12-13-5
23(2016) 2                     12-23-6
23(2016) 3                     12-24-6
24(2016) 1                     2-2-1
24(2016) 2                     2-2-2
24(2016) 3                     2-2-3
24(2016) 4                     2-2-4
24(2016) 5, 6                  2-2-5
24(2016) 7, 8, 9               2-2-6
24(2016) 10                    2-2-7
24(2016) 11, 12                2-2-8
24(2016) 13                    2-2-9
25(2016) 3                     14-10-5
26(2016) 1                     12-2-2
26(2016) 2                     14-10-5
26(2016) 3                     14-10-10
27(2016) 1                     12-2-2
27(2016) 2                     12-11-4
27(2016) 3                     12-14-18
27(2016) 4                     12-15-4
27(2016) 5                     12-15-5
27(2016) 6                     12-16-2
27(2016) 7                     12-17-2
30(2016) 1                     1-9-8
                               12-26-1
4(2017) 1                      —
                               12-26-5
12(2017) 1                     12-2-2
15(2017) 2                     4-1-2,
                               4-1-4
19(2017) 1                     Chapter 5-8
22(2017) 2                     7-3D-1
23(2017) 1                     1-9-8
2(2018) 1                      1-9-8
                               10-4-1
4(2018) 1                      —
                               10-4-6
5(2018) 1                      7-4-1
5(2018) 2                      7-4-4
5(2018) 3                      7-4-5
                               12-27-1
8(2018) 1                      —
                               12-27-7
14(2018) 1                     12-2-2
15(2018) 1                     12-10-17
                               7-8-1
16(2018) 1                     —
                               7-8-7
                               4-14-1
19(2018) 1                     —
                               4-14-9
20(2018) 1                     5-3-2
24(2018) 1                     12-23-2
2(2019) 1                      4-3-1-2
2(2019) 2                      4-3-2
2(2019) 3                      4-3-3-1
2(2019) 4                      4-3-3-3
2(2019) 5                      4-3-3-6
3(2019) 1                      4-1-2
3(2019) 2                      4-1-4
4(2019) 1                      12-7H-12
8(2019) 1                      12-2-2
8(2019) 2                      14-10-4
9(2019) 1                      14-10-6
                               4-8-1
10(2019) 1                     —
                               4-8-4
11(2019) 1                     12-7B-18
11(2019) 2                     12-7C-14
11(2019) 3                     12-7D-11
11(2019) 4                     12-7E-12
11(2019) 5                     12-7F-14
11(2019) 6                     12-7G-12
11(2019) 7                     12-7H-17
11(2019) 8                     12-7I-17
11(2019) 9                     12-7A-16
11(2019) 10                    12-7J-15
12(2019) 1                     5-14-8
15(2019) 1                     12-2-2
15(2019) 2                     14-2-1
19(2019) 3                     12-11-1
19(2019) 4, Attachment B       12-11-3
19(2019) 5                     12-11-4
19(2019) 6                     12-21-1
19(2019) 7                     12-21-2
19(2019) 8                     12-21-3
19(2019) 9                     12-21-16
19(2019) 10                    14-2-1
19(2019) 11                    14-10-3
19(2019) 12, 13                14-10-5
19(2019) 14                    14-10-8
19(2019) 15                    14-10-10
22(2019) 1                     4-3-3-2
5(2020) 1                      3-3-2,
                               3-3-3
6(2020) 1                      4-2-6
9(2020) 1                      4-3-1-2
9(2020) 2                      4-3-3-1
11(2020) 1                     12-15-2
12(2020) 1                     4-7-1 
                               4-7-8
                               13-14-1
14(2020) 1                     —
                               13-14-5
16(2020) 1                     12-16-7
20(2020) 1                     5-4-1
20(2020) 2                     5-4-5
                               3-2-4,
1(2021) 1                      6-2-1
                               —
                               6-2-3
                               6-4B-1
4(2021) 1                      —
                               6-4B-3
7(2021) 1                      4-2-7
8(2021) 1                      5-1-7
10(2021) 1                     7-3D-1
                               11-1-1 
                               11-1-4,
                               11-2-1,
                               11-3-1,
                               11-3-2,
                               11-4-1,
                               11-4-2,
                               11-5-1
                               —
                               11-5-4,
                               11-6-1
                               —
11(2021) 1                     11-6-3,
                               11-7-1
                               —
                               11-7-11,
                               11-8-1
                               —
                               11-8-3,
                               11-9-1
                               —
                               11-9-3,
                               11-10-1,
                               11-10-2,
                               11-11-1,
                               11-11-2
19(2021) 1                     7-4-1
19(2021) 2                     7-2B-3
20(2021) 1                     7-8-4
20(2021) 2                     7-8-6
24(2021) 1                     1-4-5
25(2021) 1                     12-15-3
26(2021) 1                     4-3-1-2
26(2021) 2                     4-3-1-5
26(2021) 3                     4-3-3-1
26(2021) 4                     4-3-3-2
26(2021) 5                     4-3-3-3
5(2022) 1                      3-5-2
5(2022) 2                      3-5-8
5(2022) 4                      4-2-1
5(2022) 5                      4-2-2
5(2022) 6                      4-2-3
5(2022) 8                      4-2-5
5(2022) 10                     6-3C-4
5(2022) 11                     6-3C-5
6(2022) 1                      12-14-17
6(2022) 2                      12-21-2
6(2022) 3                      12-21-17
7(2022) 1                      12-11-3
7(2022) 2                      14-10-3
7(2022) 3                      14-10-5
                               10-1-1
8(2022) 1                      —
                               10-1-12
9(2022) 1                      12-2-2
9(2022) 2                      12-21-2
9(2022) 3                      12-21-13
10(2022) 1                     6-3D-4
                               4-14-1
11(2022) 1                     —
                               4-14-9 
12(2022) 1                     5-1-1
12(2022) 2                     5-1-7
12(2022) 3                     5-1-8
12(2022) 4                     7-10-7
13(2022) 1                     7-3A-3
13(2022) 2                     7-3A-4
13(2022) 3                     7-3A-5
15(2022) 1                     7-4-4
                               7-12-1
15(2022) 4                     —
                               7-12-7
                               5-11-1
19(2022) 1                     —
                               5-11-12
20(2022) 1                     7-12-2
20(2022) 2                     7-12-3
20(2022) 3                     7-12-6
20(2022) 4                     7-12-7
                               5-13-1
23(2022) 1                     —
                               5-13-6
1(2023) 1                      4-14-4
2(2023) 1                      12-11-4
3(2023) 1                      3-6-1 3-6-5
3(2023) 2                      10-1-13
4(2023) 1                      4-1-6
                               4-15-1
5(2023) 1                      —
                               4-15-18
7(2023) 1                      12-3-3
8(2023) 1                       
                               4-2-4
9(2023) 1                      7-10-9 
10(2023) 1                     6-2-1
11(2023) 1                     1-5-11
13(2023) 1                     4-2-8,
                               4-2-9
14(2023) 1                     1-5-8
15(2023) 1                     7-3B-8
16(2023) 1                     12-3-9
17(2023) 1                     12-21-10
18(2023) 2                     7-12-2,
                               7-12-3
                               12-6K-1
19(2023) 1                     —
                               12-6K-14
19(2023) 2                     12-13-4
19(2023) 3                     12-15-2
19(2023) 4                     12-15-3
19(2023) 5                     12-15-5
19(2023) 6                     12-21-10
19(2023) 7                     12-21-12
19(2023) 8                     12-24-1
19(2023) 9                     12-24-8
21(2023) 1                     1-4-6
25(2023) 2                     5-13-2
25(2023) 3                     5-13-6
25(2023) 4                     5-13-7
29(2023) 3                     14-6-7
29(2023) 4                     14-10-9
2(2024) § 1                   12-7B-7
2(2024) § 2                   12-7C-5
5(2024) § 1                   7-1-1—
                               7-1-3
5(2024) § 2                   7-2A-1
6(2024) § 1                   12-4-1
6(2024) § 3                   12-6L-1—
                               12-6L-13
6(2024) § 4                   12-6M-1—
                               12-6M-14
6(2024) § 5                   12-6N-1—
                               12-6N-14
6(2024) § 6                   12-13-3
6(2024) § 7                   12-13-4
6(2024) § 8                   12-15-2
6(2024) § 9                   12-15-3
6(2024) § 10                  12-16-7
6(2024) § 11                  12-21-10
6(2024) § 12                  14-6-7
6(2024) § 14                  14-10-9
7(2024) § 1                   5-1-11
11(2024) § 1, 2               7-10-2
11(2024) § 3                  7-10-3
11(2024) § 4                  7-10-7
11(2024) § 5                  7-10-9
13(2024) § 1                  10-1-1—
                               10-1-13
16(2024)§ 1                   7-3D-1
17(2024)§ 1                   7-11-4
17(2024)§ 2                   7-12-1 —
                               7-12-4
17(2024)§ 3                   7-13-1 —
                               7-13-4
20(2024)§ 1                   2-8-13
21(2024)§ 1                   4-1-2
21(2024)§ 2                   4-1-3
22(2024)§ 1                   4-3-1-2
22(2024)§ 2                   4-3-3-6
3(2025)§ 1                    4-14-5
6(2025)§ 1                    7-15-1 —
                               7-15-7
7(2025)§ 1                    7-14-1 —
                               7-14-4
15(2025)§ 1                   12-2-2
15(2025)§ 2                   12-4-1
15(2025)§ 3                   12-7K-1  —
                               12-7K-18
15(2025)§ 4                   12-13-4
15(2025)§ 5                   12-15-2
15(2025)§ 6                   12-23-1
15(2025)§ 7                   12-24-1
18(2025)§ 1                   2-3-1 — 2-3-6
19(2025)§ 1                   7-1-1  —
                               7-1-4
20(2025)§ 1                   12-13-5
26(2025)§ 1                   7-8-1
26(2025)§ 2                   7-8-4
27(2025)§ 1                   12-7B-21
27(2025)§ 2                   12-7C-16
27(2025)§ 3                   12-7H-19
27(2025)§ 4                   12-7I-19
                               
 
 
