BARREN COUNTY, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-10 Supplement current through:
Ordinance No. 701, passed 12-16-2025; and
State legislation current through KRS 2025 Pamphlet
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
BARREN COUNTY OFFICIALS
(Effective July 1, 2024)
 
                                       Jamie Bewley Bird
                                       117 North Public Square Ste 3A
County Judge/Executive                 Glasgow KY 42141
                                       Phone: 270/651-3338
                                       Fax: 270/651-2844
                                       Email: cje@barrencountyky.gov
                                       Garland Gilliam
                                       117 North Public Square Ste 3A
                                       Glasgow KY 42141
Deputy County Judge/Executive          Phone: 270/651-4910
                                       Fax: 270/651-2844
                                       Cell: 270/670-7567
                                       Email: ggilliam@barrencountyky.gov
                                       Shanda M. Bradley
                                       117 North Public Square Ste 3 A
Fiscal Court Clerk/Finance Officer     Glasgow KY 42141
                                       Phone: 270/651-3338
                                       Fax: 270/651-2844
                                       Email: finance@barrencountyky.gov
                                       Amanda Steger
                                       117 North Public Square Ste 3A
County Treasurer                       Glasgow KY 42141
                                       Phone: 270/651-3338
                                       Fax: 270/651-2844
                                       Email: treasurer@barrencountyky.gov
                                       James Griffin
                                       126 East Public Square 2nd Floor
                                       Glasgow, KY 42141
County Building & Electrical Inspector Phone: 270/651-3921
                                       Fax: 270/651-9553
                                       Cell: 270/590-6606
                                       Email: jmgriffin@glasgow-ky.com
 
County Officials
                                 Marcus Thurman
                                 117 North Public Square Ste 3A
Solid Waste Coordinator/         Glasgow KY 42141
Code Enforcement Officer         Phone: 270/651-3338
                                 Fax: 270/651-2844
                                 Cell: 270/834-9761
                                 Email: mthurman@barrencountyky.gov
                                 Garland Gilliam
                                 117 North Public Square Ste 3A
                                 Glasgow KY 42141
Emergency Management Director    Phone: 270/651-4910
                                 Fax: 270/651-2844
                                 Cell: 270/670-7567
                                 Email: ggilliam@barrencountyky.gov
                                 Jamie DeGroft
                                 150 County Barn Road
County Road Supervisor           Glasgow KY 42141
                                 Phone: 270/678-2832
                                 Fax: 270/651-2844
                                 Email: bcrd@glasgow-ky.com
                                 Mike Richardson
                                 220 West Main Street
County Attorney                  Glasgow KY 42141
                                 Phone: 270/651-8766
                                 Fax: 270/651-5871
                                 Email: mrichardson@prosecutors.ky.gov
                                 Helena Birdwell
                                 117 North Public Square Ste 1A
County Clerk                     Glasgow KY 42141
                                 Phone: 270/651-3783
                                 Fax: 270/651-1083
                                 Email: helena.birdwell@ky.gov
                                 Kent Keen
                                 117 North Public Square Ste 1B
Sheriff                          Glasgow KY 42141
                                 Phone: 270/651-2771
                                 Fax: 270/651-8204
                                 Email: sheriffkeen@glasgow-ky.com
                                 Tim Gibson
                                 117 N. Public Sq., Ste 3A
Coroner                          Glasgow KY 42141
                                Phone: 270/651-3338
                                 Fax: 270/651-2844
                                 Cell: 270/590-6580
                                 Email: tgibson@barrencountyky.gov
                                 Aaron Shirley
                                 201 Samson Street
Jailer                           Glasgow KY 42141
                                 Phone: 270/651-8806
                                 Fax: 270/651-7717
                                 Email: bcjshirley@glasgow-ky.com
                                 Ashton McPherson
                                 6332 Burkesville Road
County Surveyor                  Glasgow KY 42141
                                 Phone: 270/651-8406
                                 Cell: 270/646-7747
                                 Email: leftwichland@hotmail.com
                                 Kim Shipley
                                 117 North Public Square Ste 2B
Property Valuation Administrator Glasgow KY 42141
                                 Phone: 270/651-2026
                                 Fax: 270/651-6895
                                 Email: kimshipley@glasgow-ky.com
 
Fiscal Court
Regular Meetings - Third Tuesdays of Each Month at 9:00 a.m.
 
              Jeff Botts
              1330 New Salem Road
   DistrictGlasgow, Kentucky 42141
              Cell: 270/834-0442
              Email: jbotts@barrencountyky.gov
              Derek Pedigo
              8301 Oil Well Road
   DistrictGlasgow, Kentucky 42141
              Cell: 270/590-2183
              Email: dpedigo@barrencountyky.gov
              Tim Durham 
              5280 Roseville Road
   DistrictGlasgow, Kentucky 42141
              Cell: 270/590-5777
              Email: tdurham@barrencountyky.gov
              Tim Coomer
              1084 Center Road
   DistrictGlasgow, Kentucky 42141
              Cell: 270/670-6530
              Email: tcoomer@barrencountyky.gov
              Marty Kinslow
              372 Beckton Rocky Hill Road
   DistrictGlasgow, Kentucky 42141
              Cell: 270/670-1309
              Email: mkinslow@barrencountyky.gov
              Ronnie Stinson
              3456 Herbert Turner Road
   DistrictPark City, Kentucky 42160
              Cell: 270/670-1600
              Email: rstinson@barrencountyky.gov
              Brad Groce
              406 Autumn Ridge Road
   DistrictGlasgow, Kentucky 42141
              Cell: 270/834-0442
              Email: bgroce@barrencountyky.gov
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 579
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE COUNTY OF BARREN, KENTUCKY,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING, AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE COUNTY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF
ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
      WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the County of
Barren, Kentucky, are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient
in form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace,
health, safety, and general welfare of the County of Barren, Kentucky, and for
the proper conduct of its affairs; and
      WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the Commonwealth of Kentucky
empower and authorize the Legislative Body of this County to revise, amend,
restate, codify and compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not
heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one
ordinance in book form; and
      WHEREAS, the Legislative authority of the County of Barren, Kentucky, has
authorized a general compilation, revision, and codification of the ordinances
of the County of Barren, Kentucky, of a general and permanent nature and
publication of such ordinance in book form; and
      WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
County of Barren, Kentucky, and for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health, safety, and general welfare of the municipality that this
ordinance take effect at an early date.
      NOW, THEREFORE, by the Legislative Body of the County of Barren,
Kentucky, that:
   Section 1.   The general ordinances of the County of Barren, Kentucky, as
revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the County of Barren,
Kentucky."
   Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist
of the following Titles:
   BARREN COUNTY, KENTUCKY
   TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Chapter
   TITLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   10. Rules of Construction; General Penalty
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   30. General Provisions
   31. Organizations
   32. Code of Ethics
   33. Personnel Policies
   34. Finance and Revenue
   35. Fees
   36. Public Records
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   50. Solid Waste
   51. Open Dumping
   52. Hazardous Material Response
   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   70. General Provisions
   71. Traffic Schedules
   72. Parking Schedules
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   90. Animals
   91. Nuisances
   92. Fire Prevention
   93. Fair Housing
   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   110. Sexually-Oriented Businesses
   111. Cable Television Franchises
   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   (Reserved)
   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   150. Flood Damage Prevention
   151. Building Code
   152. Mobile Homes
   153. Central Addressing System
   154. Subdivisions
   155. Comprehensive Plan
   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
   I. Contracts and Agreements
   II. Real Estate Transactions
   III. Road Maintenance
   IV. Acceptances and Dedications
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
   References to Kentucky Revised Statutes
   References to Resolutions
   References to Ordinances
   INDEX
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in the
Code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
Ordinance, except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in
such code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plats, or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the County Legislative Body and the Clerk of the County of
Barren, Kentucky, is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code
of Ordinances in the Office of the County Clerk.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained, and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded and approved, and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6.   This Ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of this County, and shall take effect at the earliest
date provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of the County of Barren,
Kentucky, on this 21st day of  June ,  2016
                               /s/ Micheal Hale
                                 Micheal Hale
                           Barren County Judge/Executive
ATTEST:   /s/ Sherry J. Jones
      Sherry J. Jones
      Fiscal County Court
ORDINANCE NUMBER 604
BARREN COUNTY, KENTUCKY
IN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE COUNTY OF BARREN, KENTUCKY.
      WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2017 S-1 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the County of
Barren, Kentucky, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
      WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
      WHEREAS, it is the intent of this legislative authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth
of Kentucky;
      NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the County of Barren, Kentucky:
   Section 1.   That the 2017 S-1 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
County of Barren, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   That this Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of the County of Barren,
Kentucky, on this  21 day of  November , 2017.
   /s/
   Michael Hale
   Barren County Judge/Executive
ATTEST:   /s/
         Sherry J. Jones
         Fiscal Court Clerk
ORDINANCE NUMBER 616
BARREN COUNTY, KENTUCKY AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE
CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE COUNTY OF BARREN, KENTUCKY.
      WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2018 S-2 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the County of
Barren, Kentucky, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
      WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
      WHEREAS, it is the intent of this legislative authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth
of Kentucky;
      NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the County of Barren, Kentucky:
   Section 1.   That the 2018 S-2 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
County of Barren, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   That this Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of the County of Barren,
Kentucky, on this  18th day of  September , 2018.
   /s/ Micheal Hale
   Micheal Hale
   Barren County Judge/Executive
ATTEST:   /s/ Sherry J. Jones
         Sherry J. Jones
         Fiscal Court Clerk
ORDINANCE NUMBER 627
BARREN COUNTY, KENTUCKY
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE COUNTY OF BARREN, KENTUCKY.
      WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2019 S-3 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the County of
Barren, Kentucky, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
      WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
      WHEREAS, it is the intent of this legislative authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth
of Kentucky;
      NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the County of Barren, Kentucky:
   Section 1.   That the 2019 S-3 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
County of Barren, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   That this Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of the County of Barren,
Kentucky, on this  20th day of  August , 2019.
   /s/ Micheal Hale
   Micheal Hale
   Barren County Judge/Executive
ATTEST:   /s/ Sherry J. Jones
         Sherry J. Jones
         Fiscal Court Clerk
ORDINANCE NUMBER 645
BARREN COUNTY, KENTUCKY
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE COUNTY OF BARREN, KENTUCKY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2020 S-4 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the County of
Barren, Kentucky, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and,
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes; and,
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of this legislative authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth
of Kentucky.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the County of Barren, Kentucky:
   Section 1. That the 2020 S-4 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
County of Barren, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2. That this Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.
Passed and Adopted by the Legislative Authority of the County of Barren,
Kentucky, on this 18th day of August, 2020.
                     /s/ Micheal Hale
                     Micheal Hale
                     Barren County Judge/Executive
ATTEST:
    /s/ Sherry J. Jones
   Sherry J. Jones
   Fiscal Court Clerk
ORDINANCE NUMBER 659
   BARREN COUNTY, KENTUCKY
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE COUNTY OF BARREN, KENTUCKY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2021 S-5 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the County of
Barren, Kentucky, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and,
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes; and,
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of this legislative authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth
of Kentucky.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the County of Barren, Kentucky:
   Section 1. That the 2021 S-5 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
County of Barren, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2. That this Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.
Passed and Adopted by the Legislative Authority of the County of Barren,
Kentucky, on this 29th day of June, 2021.
               /s/ Micheal Hale
               Micheal Hale
               Barren County Judge/Executive
ATTEST:
    /s/ Sherry J. Jones
   Sherry J. Jones
   Fiscal Court Clerk
ORDINANCE NUMBER 669
BARREN COUNTY, KENTUCKY
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE COUNTY OF BARREN, KENTUCKY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2022 S-6 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the County of
Barren, Kentucky, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and,
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes; and,
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of this legislative authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth
of Kentucky.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the County of Barren, Kentucky:
   Section 1. That the 2022 S-6 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
County of Barren, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2. That this Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.
Passed and Adopted by the Legislative Authority of the County of Barren,
Kentucky, on this 22st day of June, 2022.
   /s/ Micheal Hale
   Micheal Hale
   Barren County Judge/Executive
ATTEST:
    /s/ Sherry J. Jones
   Sherry J. Jones
   Fiscal Court Clerk
ORDINANCE NUMBER 680
BARREN COUNTY, KENTUCKY
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE COUNTY OF BARREN, KENTUCKY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2023 S-7 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the County of
Barren, Kentucky, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and,
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes; and,
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of this legislative authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth
of Kentucky.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the County of Barren, Kentucky:
   Section 1. That the 2023 S-7 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
County of Barren, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2. That this Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.
Passed and Adopted by the Legislative Authority of the County of Barren,
Kentucky, on this 20th day of June, 2023.
                                             /s/ Jamie B. Byrd
                                             Jamie B. Byrd
                                             Barren County Judge/Executive
ATTEST:
    /s/ Tammie Branstetter
   Tammie Branstetter
   Fiscal Court Clerk
ORDINANCE NUMBER 701
BARREN COUNTY, KENTUCKY
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE COUNTY OF BARREN, KENTUCKY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2024 S-8 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the County of
Barren, Kentucky, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general name
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and,
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes; and,
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of this legislative authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth
of Kentucky.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the County of Barren, Kentucky:
   Section 1. That the 2024 S-8 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
County of Barren, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2. That this Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.
Passed and Adopted by the Legislative Authority of the County of Barren,
Kentucky, on this 16th day of December, 2025.
   /s/ Jamie Bewley Byrd   
   Jamie Bewley Byrd
   Barren County Judge/Executive
ATTEST:
    /s/ Shanda Bradley      
   Shanda Bradley
   Fiscal Court Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for Barren County shall be designated
as the Code of Barren County and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
Statutory reference:
   Construction of statutes, see KRS Ch. 446
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted, amending, or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Specific definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AVIS. The Automated Vehicle Information System established and maintained
by the Transportation Cabinet to collect titling and registration information
on vehicles and boats and information on holders of motor vehicle operator’s
licenses and personal identification cards.
(KRS 89446.010(55))
      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This county code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
      COUNTY. Barren County, Kentucky.
      FISCAL COURT. The governing body of Barren County, Kentucky.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this county unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers, or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The Commonwealth of Kentucky.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the
words YEAR OF OUR LORD.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this county shall be by the following
rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this county exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express that intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state or federal laws, shall
be the official time within this county for the transaction of all county
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed by the Fiscal Court requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the Fiscal Court shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, shall be
substituted in its place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(KRS 83A.090)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
            This county shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
         Statutory reference:
            Inspection of public records, see KRS 61.870 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this code of
ordinances, and no penalty is otherwise provided, the offense shall be deemed a
violation and the offender shall be fined not more than $250 for each offense.
Statutory reference:
   Enforcement of ordinances, see KRS 83A.065
   Maximum fine for violations, see KRS 534.040(2)(c)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   CODE OF ETHICS
      
33.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
34.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
35.   FEES
      
36.   PUBLIC RECORDS
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
30.01   Enhanced 9-1-1 emergency telephone service system
   
30.02   Electioneering
 
   
30.99   Penalty
§ 30.01 ENHANCED 9-1-1 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE SYSTEM.
   (A)   Generally. There is hereby established a public safety answering
service to provide a single telephone number for emergency services within the
local area, which service shall be known as enhanced 9-1-1.
   (B)   Agreement.
      (1)   The county, by and through the County Judge/Executive, is
authorized to enter into an agreement with the phone companies to provide for
the construction, implementation, and ongoing maintenance of enhanced 9-1-
1 within the local area. Said agreement shall be for a period of one year
commencing on the completion of installation by the phone companies in 1993,
and terminating June 30, 1994, and shall be automatically renewable for 12-
month periods of July 1 through June 30 upon the same terms and conditions,
unless prior to 30 days of the close of said 12-month period, either party
notifies the other of its intention to modify and/or terminate said agreement.
      (2)   Said agreement shall reflect the installation costs and the current
tariffed recurring charges for enhanced 9-1-1 service charged during the
contact period.
   (C)   Effective date. This section shall become effective immediately upon
passage and publication.
(Ord. 189, passed 9-1-1993)
§ 30.02 ELECTIONEERING.
   (A)   Electioneering generally; purpose. To fulfill the government’s
obligation to protect the voter and the integrity of the election process from
actual or attempted fraud; from obstruction; from intimidation, real or
inferred; from attempted or actual vote-buying; from invasion of privacy; from
harassment, real, threatened, or implied; from hindrance or delay; and all done
under the disguise of electioneering, an electioneering-free zone is
established within 300 feet of the entrance to any building containing a
polling place on any election day.
      (1)   No person shall, on the day of any election as established in KRS
118.025, do any electioneering at the polling place or within a distance of 300
feet of the main entrance of a building used by voters in which a voting
machine is located on election day. No person shall, on the day of any election
as established in KRS 118.025, intentionally invade the right of privacy of any
person on his or her way to vote or cause the interference, harassment, or
alarm to any person on his or her way to vote. No person shall loiter or
congregate or hinder or delay a voter, or solicit or attempt to influence any
voter in casting his or her vote within this 300-foot campaign-free zone.
      (2)   Electioneering shall including the following:
         (a)   Displaying of signs;
         (b)   The distribution of campaign literature, cards, or handbills;
         (c)   The soliciting of signatures to any petition; or
         (d)   The solicitation of votes for or against any political party,
candidate, or question on the ballot in any manner.
      (3)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit electioneering
conducted within the interior of a private residence or business establishment
by persons having a leased or ownership interest in such property, within the
campaign-free zone; provided, that all electioneering activities are confined
to the interior of the buildings and cannot be heard or observed by any voters
going to the polling place.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the displaying of political
signs on private property or private establishments by a person having a leased
or ownership interest in that private property or private establishment within
the campaign-free zone, regardless of the distance from the polling place;
provided, that the sign is not accompanied by a person and does not emit any
sound and is not audiovisual or mechanical and is no larger than four-square
feet in size.
   (B)   Enforcement. Any Precinct Election Officer, County Clerk, Deputy
County Clerk, or any law enforcement official may enforce this section at the
polls within 300 feet of the main entrance to the building used by voters in
which the voting machine is located. Assistance may be requested of any law
enforcement officer.
   (C)   Non-public forums. Any property used for a polling location on
election day shall not be considered a public place in any manner for public
discourse. The grounds, buildings, sidewalks, and parking lots at all polling
locations are designated non-public forums for the election day.
   (D)   Effective date. This section shall become effective upon its passage.
(Ord. 410, passed 5-14-2004) Penalty, see §
30.99
§ 30.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Violators of any provision of §
30.02 shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor under the laws of the
commonwealth and shall be fined up to $1,000 and/or up to one year in the
county jail, per violation.
(Ord. 410, passed 5-14-2004)
CHAPTER 31: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Rules of construction
   
31.02   General administration
   
31.03   Fiscal Court
   
31.04   Administrative agencies, boards, commissions, and authorities
   
31.05   Magisterial districts; reapportionment
   
31.06   Access to county services, programs, and facilities
   
31.07   Grievance procedure generally; handicapped status
Specific County Organizations
   
31.20   Extension Board
   
31.21   Glasgow/Barren County Tourist and Convention Commission
   
31.22   County Cemetery Board
   
31.23   Hiseville Cemetery Board
   
31.24   Office of Emergency Management
   
31.25   Industrial Development Economic Authority
   
31.26   County Road Department
   
31.27   [Reserved]
   
31.28   County Recreational Park System
Cross-reference:
   Open Records, see
Chapter 36
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   Unless the context otherwise requires:
   (A)   The masculine shall include the feminine and the feminine shall
include the masculine; and
   (B)   The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the
singular.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
§ 31.02 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Office of the County Judge/Executive.
      (1)   In 1976, the General Assembly of the commonwealth created the
Office of County Judge/Executive.
(KRS 67.700)
      (2)   The County Judge/Executive shall be the chief executive of the
county and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of an executive
and administrative nature vested in, or imposed upon, the county of its Fiscal
Court by law, or by agreement with any municipality of other subdivision of
government and such additional powers as are granted by the Fiscal Court. The
County Judge/Executive shall be responsible for the proper administration of
the affairs of the county placed in his or her charge.
(KRS 67.710)
   (B)   Responsibilities of Judge/Executive.
      (1)   Responsibilities. The responsibilities of the Judge/Executive shall
include but are not limited to, the provisions in KRS 67.710, 67.711, and
67.715.
      (2)   Power to issues orders. The County Judge/Executive shall have the
power to issue such executive orders that are necessary and proper for the
execution of his or her duties.
      (3)   Professional development. Any elected county official or his or her
staff shall be authorized to attend seminars, conferences, training sessions,
and the like, that are in keeping with the responsibilities of the office. The
decision to attend those functions is at the discretion of the official who
will provide notice or submit claims for reimbursement to the Fiscal Court at
the earliest opportunity. Funding in the proper budgetary account must be
available to provide for expenses reasonably incurred for registration, room,
board, and travel.
   (C)   Compensation.
      (1)   Not later than the first Monday in May in the year in which he or
she is elected, the Fiscal Court shall set the salary of the County Judge/
Executive.
      (2)   The minimum annual compensation paid to the County Judge/Executive
shall be the greater of a sum not less than 60% of the maximum compensation
certified under KRS 64.527, or not less than the annual compensation of the
Sheriff, County Clerk, or Jailer in the county, except that no Fiscal Court
shall be required under the provisions of this section to approve an amount for
the compensation of any one official which would exceed 6% of the county’s
total annual General Fund receipts.
      (3)   The salary may be reset each year by the Fiscal Court at a rate no
greater than that computed each year by the Finance and Administration Cabinet
based upon the increase or decrease in the consumer price index as determined
by KRS 64.527.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
§ 31.03 FISCAL COURT.
   (A)   Composition of the Court. Section 144 of the Constitution of the
commonwealth requires each county to have a Fiscal Court which serves as the
county’s legislative body. This Court consists of the County Judge/Executive
and the county’s Justices of the Peace (commonly called Magistrates).
Magistrates are elected by districts as prescribed by the commonwealth’s
Constitution and statutes.
   (B)   Presiding. The County Judge/Executive shall preside if present. A
majority of Magistrates shall elect one of their number to preside during the
absence or inability of the County Judge/Executive to preside.
   (C)   Responsibilities. The responsibilities of the Fiscal Court shall
include, but are not limited to the provisions in KRS 67.080 and 67.083.
   (D)   Compensation.
      (1)   Not later than the first Monday in May in the year they are
elected, the Fiscal Court members shall set their compensation. The salary
shall be subject to the limitations as outlined by the Constitution and the
Kentucky Revised Statutes. This compensation shall be fixed for the term of the
Fiscal Court members.
      (2)    The salary may be reset each year by Fiscal Court at a rate no
greater than that computed each year by the Finance and Administration Cabinet
based upon the increase or decrease in the consumer price index as determined
by KRS 64.527. Any year in which the County Judge/Executive receives a consumer
price index salary increase, the Magistrates are eligible to receive the same
consumer price index salary increase to be effective in July of the fiscal year
following the County Judge/Executive’s increase.
      (3)   Each member of Fiscal Court shall be entitled to an expense account
as provided by statutes of the commonwealth.
   (E)   Fiscal Court terms.
      (1)   Regular meetings of the County Fiscal Court shall be held
consistent with KRS 67.090.
      (2)   Provided, however, that if the regular meeting day or date falls on
a legal holiday, the Court shall determine the date and time of meeting with
notice.
      (3)   All meetings of members of the Fiscal Court at which any public
business is discussed or any action taken shall be open to the public at all
times except as otherwise permitted by KRS 61.810.
      (4)   The County Judge/Executive or a majority of the members of County
Fiscal Court may call a special meeting of Fiscal Court pursuant to Kentucky
Revised Statutes for the purpose of transacting any business over which Fiscal
Court has jurisdiction. Whenever practicable, 24-hour written notice shall be
provided to each member and to each local newspaper of general circulation,
each news service, and each local radio or television station which has on file
with the Fiscal Court, a written request to be notified of special meetings.
      (5)   If time does not permit giving 24-hour notice, then notice that is
reasonable under the circumstances and calculated to inform the members of
County Fiscal Court and the general public shall be sufficient.
      (6)   Action at a special meeting shall be limited to the issues stated
in the call.
   (F)   Quorum.
      (1)   Not less than a majority of the members of the Fiscal Court shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
      (2)   No proposition shall be adopted except with the concurrence of at
least a majority of the members present.
   (G)   Order of business.
      (1)   At each meeting of the Fiscal Court, the following regular order of
business shall be observed unless dispensed by a two-third majority vote of the
members present:
         (a)   Call to order by the County Judge/Executive;
         (b)   Roll call by the Fiscal Court Clerk; and
         (c)   The orders of the day will be followed.
      (2)   The County Judge/Executive shall prepare an “orders of the day” for
each Fiscal Court meeting and furnish the County Attorney and each Magistrate
with a copy along with a copy of all paperwork pertaining to any item on the
orders at least 24 hours prior to the beginning of any regular Fiscal Court
meeting and at least eight hours prior to the beginning of any special Fiscal
Court meeting.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the requirements of division (G)(1)(c) above to
follow the day’s orders, any elected county official may address the Fiscal
Court upon any matter which comes before it affecting the operation of that
office. Notice requirements shall be the same as those listed in division (G)
(2) above for the affected officeholder.
      (4)   The County Judge/Executive shall prepare an itemized list of all
bills and claims for Fiscal Court approval. Originals will be available for
inspection at regular office hours in the County Judge/Executive office suite.
      (5)   No bill shall be approved for payment unless contained in the
itemized list.
   (H)   Fiscal Court records and minutes.
      (1)   The Clerk of the Fiscal Court shall attend all meetings of the
Fiscal Court and keep a record of all proceedings. In the event the Clerk of
the Fiscal Court is unable to attend due to illness or other emergency, the
Fiscal Court appointed Deputy shall serve for a period not to exceed 90 days in
length.
      (2)   The Clerk of the Fiscal Court shall keep an index of all Fiscal
Court records and make such index and records available for public inspection
in accordance with KRS 61.870 and 61.884.
      (3)   The Fiscal Court is a court of record. Minutes of the proceedings
of each meeting shall be prepared and submitted for approval at the next
succeeding meeting.
      (4)   Every official action of the Fiscal Court shall be made a part of
the permanent records of the county.
      (5)   The county budget ordinance shall be indexed so that each index
list covers one fiscal year, and shall be listed in such index no later than 30
days after passage and any required approval.
      (6)   County ordinances other than the county budget ordinance shall be
indexed in a composite index as all county ordinances in force, and shall be
listed in the index no later than 30 days after passage and any required
approval.
      (7)   A copy of all records required by this section shall be kept in the
office of the County Clerk.
   (I)   Voting.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by statute, a majority of the Fiscal
Court shall constitute a quorum and a majority vote by the Fiscal Court members
present shall be required to pass an ordinance. No meeting shall be held by the
Fiscal Court without notice to all members thereof.
      (2)   When there is a tie vote in the Fiscal Court, with deadlock results
and it continues for 15 days or longer, the County Judge/Executive shall cause
to be entered upon the minutes of the Fiscal Court an order reciting the facts
as to the deadlock, and the question upon which it has occurred and exists, and
thereof, the County Judge/Executive shall break the tie by his or her vote.
   (J)   Rules of order.
      (1)   Except when in conflict with the foregoing provisions, Robert’s
Rules of Order shall govern the deliberations of the Fiscal Court.
      (2)   The presiding officer shall follow the spirit of Robert’s Rules in
a fair and even-handed manner to speed along the proceedings.
      (3)   The following is the Forward to Robert’s Rules of Orders Revised.
 
From Foreword to Robert’s Rules of Order Revised...
“...The rules within these pages make up the most widely accepted guide to fair and
orderly meetings. They are applicable within the framework of any political belief
and within the structure of any club, organization, or meeting that must transact
business.
 
Parliamentary procedure, properly used, provides the means whereby the affairs of
an organization or club can be controlled by the general will within the whole
membership, the “general will”, in this sense, does not always imply even near
unanimity or “consensus” but rather the right of the deliberate majority to decide.
Complementary to this right is the right of the minority - at least a strong
minority - to require the majority to be deliberate - that is, to act according to
its considered judgment after a full and fair “working through” of the issues
involved”. (Pg., Robert’s Rules of Order, most recent edition)
 
Further, “...there should always be flexibility as to the strictness of application
of the rules - dependent on the particular situation and the members’ knowledge of
parliamentary procedure.” (Pg vi, Robert’s Rules of Order, most recent edition)
 
      (4)   Division (G) above notwithstanding, any elected official who is
present may address the Court in a peaceful and orderly manner so long as he or
she receives recognition from the presiding officer and so long as his or her
comments are germane to the order item at hand.
   (K)   Ordinances, orders, and resolutions.
      (1)   An ORDINANCE means a general act of the Fiscal Court enforceable by
law or an appropriation of money; all other acts or orders are resolutions.
      (2)   All ordinances shall relate to one subject only; and contain a
title which expresses the following subject: “An Ordinance relating to...”
      (3)   County ordinances shall be amended by ordinance and only by setting
out each amended section.
      (4)   No county ordinance shall be passed until it has been read on two
separate days, but ordinances may be read by title and a summary only.
      (5)   No county ordinance shall be passed until it has been published
pursuant to KRS Ch. 424. Prior to passage, ordinances may be published by
summary. Publication shall include the time, date, and place at which the
county ordinance will be considered, and a place within the county where a copy
of the full text of the proposed ordinance is available for public inspection.
In the event consideration for passage is continued from the initial meeting to
a subsequent date, no further publication is necessary; provided, that at each
meeting the time, date, and place of the next meeting is announced.
      (6)   All county ordinances and amendments shall be published after
passage and may be published in full or in summary form at the discretion of
the Fiscal Court.
      (7)   Traffic, building, housing, plumbing, electrical, safety, and other
self-contained codes may be adopted by reference if a copy of the code is kept
with the adopting ordinance and is made a part of the permanent records of the
county.
      (8)   County ordinances other than the budget ordinance shall be indexed
in a composite index of all current county ordinances and placed in a three-
ring binder according to the Kentucky Ordinance Code Topical Numbering System.
Each ordinance shall be listed in the index by date and title no later than 30
days after passage and any required approval.
   (L)   Administrative code. The Fiscal Court shall adopt a county
administrative code pursuant to KRS 68.005(2) which includes, but is not
limited to, procedures and designation of responsibility for the following:
      (1)   General administration of the Office of County Judge/Executive,
county administrative agencies, and public authorities;
      (2)   Administration of county fiscal affairs;
      (3)   Personnel administration;
      (4)   County purchasing and award of contracts; and
      (5)   Delivery of county services.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995; Ord. 684, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 31.04 ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND AUTHORITIES.
   (A)   Regular meetings.
      (1)   Each administrative agency shall set a time and place for regular
meetings of the governing body of the agency and such meetings shall be
convenient to the public. A schedule of all regular meetings shall be made
available.
      (2)   Each administrative agency shall prepare an agenda for each public
meeting and make the agenda available to the public not less than two business
days before each meeting.
      (3)   A majority of the members of the agency board shall constitute a
quorum for the conduct of official business and no action or decision shall be
made except upon concurrence of a majority of members present.
      (4)   A record of all motions and official actions taken by the agency
shall be kept and a copy submitted to the County Judge/Executive and made
available to the public.
   (B)   Special meetings.
      (1)   A special meeting of any administrative agency may be called by the
County Judge/Executive or by a majority of the Fiscal Court.
      (2)   Written notice of a special meeting shall be given to each member
at least 48 hours before the time set for the special meeting, unless all
members are present at such meeting or enter a written waiver of notice in the
record.
      (3)   Action at a special meeting shall be limited to the issues stated
in the call.
   (C)   Procedures for appointment or removal of administrative personnel and
members of boards and commissions.
      (1)   The Judge/Executive shall nominate qualified persons to serve in
administrative positions and on boards and commissions and inform the Fiscal
Court at a regular meeting of his or her intention to make an appointment.
Generally, the nomination will be made, then the Fiscal Court will be asked to
take action on the nomination at its next meeting. However, in some cases, the
County Judge/Executive may request immediate action on a nomination. If the
Fiscal Court does not act on the nomination within 30 days, said nomination
shall be deemed approved by the Fiscal Court. A majority of those Fiscal Court
members present at the time the vote is taken shall vote in favor of the
nomination in order for it to be approved.
      (2)   No person shall be selected as a member of a board or commission or
for an administrative position if such person holds or is employed in a
position which is incompatible with the one for which he or she is nominated.
      (3)   When Fiscal Court approval of an appointment is not required by
state law, the Judge/Executive shall make such appointment. Within ten days of
making the appointment, the Judge/Executive shall notify the Fiscal Court in
writing of the appointment. Such notice may be filed with the County Clerk.
      (4)   Before any administrative personnel, board, or commission member
may be dismissed, such person shall be presented, in writing, with a list of
reasons for the dismissal. A hearing shall be conducted by the Judge/Executive
or his or her duly-appointed representative no sooner than 15, and no later
than 30 days, after receipt of the reasons for dismissal. At such hearing, the
person sought to be dismissed shall have an opportunity to make a statement on
his or her behalf, to be represented by anyone of his or her choosing, to call
witnesses and present evidence, and to question any witnesses which may testify
against him or her. The Judge/Executive shall thereupon make a written
recommendation to the Court which shall contain the facts upon which his or her
determination is based. The Court shall, at its next regular meeting, after
receipt of the report, vote whether or not to approve the dismissal. The
majority of those Fiscal Court members present at the time the vote is taken
may either affirm or reject the dismissal whereupon they shall issue a written
opinion which shall contain the facts upon which the determination is made. The
Fiscal Court’s decision shall be final and binding. Any administrative
personnel, board, or commission member whose term of office expires shall not
be considered to have been dismissed, therefore, this section does not apply to
the expiration of a term.
   (D)   Procedures for organization/reorganization of county departments and
agencies. Procedures for organization or reorganization of county departments
and agencies shall follow the provisions of KRS 67.715.
   (E)   Appeals from administrative agencies.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (E), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY. Any agency, board, or commission, by whatever name
known, which is under the direction, control, or responsibility to or financed,
in part or in whole, by the Fiscal Court or the County Judge/Executive. This
does not include county employees or elected officials and employees of their
offices.
      FORMAL DECISION. Any decision, order, or regulation by whatever name
known which is denominated as such by an administrative agency or any other
conclusive statement of rights of any person or persons unless it is appealed.
      PERSONS AGGRIEVED. Any person who has a substantial legal interest which
is adversely effected by a formal decision of an administrative agency.
      (2)   Unless otherwise provided for in this section, any person aggrieved
by a formal decision of an administrative agency may appeal the decision to the
Fiscal Court by filing a written notice of appeal within 20 days of the formal
decision with the Fiscal Court.
      (3)   The Fiscal Court, upon receiving a notice of appeal from a person
aggrieved by a formal decision of an administrative agency, may hold a hearing
on the appeal or may hear the appeal directly.
   (F)   Procedures to assure county representation.
      (1)   Every independent board, commission, agency, or special district
which has a vacancy shall notify the County Fiscal Court, through the Office of
the County Judge/Executive.
      (2)   The Judge/Executive shall announce the vacancies, and vacancies
shall be filled pursuant to law.
      (3)   The Judge/Executive or his or her designee shall meet with the
governing body annually.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
§ 31.05 MAGISTERIAL DISTRICTS; REAPPORTIONMENT.
   (A)   KRS 67.045(6) states that the Fiscal Court shall consider the report
of the Reapportionment Commission and in accordance with the provisions of KRS
67.075 through 76.077, adopt or amend the report in establishing the
magisterial districts.
   (B)   The magisterial districts for the county shall be reapportioned and
laid out so that all districts are compact, contiguous, and the population of
each is as nearly equal as reasonably possible and shall be described as
follows:
      (1)   Beginning at the Cumberland Parkway and Highway 31E, go north on
Highway 31E and L. Rogers Wells Boulevard to Cleveland Avenue, go east on
Cleveland Avenue to Leslie Avenue, go south on Leslie Avenue to S. Green
Street, go north on S. Green Street to W. Main Street, go west on W. Main
Street to N. Race Street, go north on N. Race Street to E. Cherry Street, go
east on E. Cherry Street to Columbia Avenue, go east on Columbia Avenue and
Edmonton Road (Highway 68-80) to Lecta-Kino Road, go south on Lecta-Kino Road
to Hollis Thomas Road, go south on Hollis Thomas Road to New Salem Road
(Highway 1307), go west on New Salem Road to Spencer Road, go west on Spencer
Road to Hollow Road, go northwest on Hollow Road to Green Valley Road, go
northwest on Green Valley Road to Burkesville Road (Highway 90), go west on
Burkesville Road to the Cumberland Parkway, go west on the Cumberland Parkway
to Tompkinsville Road (Highway 63), go south on Tompkinsville Road to Boyd’s
Creek, go southwest following Boyd’s Creek to Roseville Road (Highway 249), go
north on Roseville Road to the Cumberland Parkway, go west on the Cumberland
Parkway to Highway 31E and the beginning;
      (2)   Beginning at the Cumberland Parkway and Highway 31E, go south on
Highway 31E and Scottsville Road to South Fork Road (Highway 2207), go west on
South Fork Road to Finney Road (Highway 252), go west on Finney Road to Beaver
Creek, go south following Beaver Creek and Barren River Lake to the Allen
County line, go southeast following the Allen County line to the Barren County
and Monroe County line, go northeast following the Monroe County line to Peter
Creek, go northwest following Peter Creek to Dry Fork Creek, go northeast
following Dry Fork Creek to Dover Church Road, go north on Dover Church Road to
Caney Fork Road (Highway 820), go north on Caney Fork Road to Mt. Pleasant
Road, go north on Mt. Pleasant Road to Elmo Road, go northwest on Elmo Road to
Roseville Road (Highway 249), go north on Roseville Road to the Cumberland
Parkway, go west on the Cumberland Parkway to Highway 31E and the beginning;
      (3)   Beginning at Boyd’s Creek and Roseville Road (Highway 249), go
south on Roseville Road to Elmo Road, go southeast on Elmo Road to Mt. Pleasant
Road, go south on Mt. Pleasant Road to Caney Fork Road (Highway 820), go south
on Caney Fork Road to Dover Church Road, go south on Dover Church Road to Dry
Fork Creek, go southwest following Dry Fork Creek to Peter Creek, go southeast
following Peter Creek to the Monroe County line, go northeast following the
Monroe County line to the Metcalfe County line, go north following the Metcalfe
County line to Edmonton Road (Highway 68-80), go west on Edmonton Road to
Lecta-Kino Road, go south on Lecta-Kino Road to Hollis Thomas Road, go south on
Hollis Thomas Road to New Salem Road (Highway 1307), go west on New Salem Road
to Spencer Road, go west on Spencer Road to Hollow Road, go northwest on Hollow
Road to Green Valley Road, go northwest on Green Valley Road to Burkesville
Road (Highway 90), go west on Burkesville Road to the Cumberland Parkway, go
west on the Cumberland Parkway to Tompkinsville Road (Highway 63), go south on
Tompkinsville Road to Boyd’s Creek, go southwest following Boyd’s Creek to
Roseville Road (Highway 249) and the beginning;
      (4)   Beginning at E. Cherry Street and N. Race Street, go north on N.
Race Street to N. Jackson Highway (Highway 31E), go north on N. Jackson Highway
to Country Club Road, go west on Country Club Road to Old Munfordville Road, go
north on Old Munfordville Road to the Hart County line, go east following the
Hart County line to the Metcalfe County line, go south following the Metcalfe
County line to Edmonton Road (Highway 68-80), go west on Edmonton Road and
Columbia Avenue to E. Cherry Street, go west on E. Cherry Street to N. Race
Street and the beginning;
      (5)   Beginning at W. Main Street and L. Rogers Wells Boulevard (Highway
31E Bypass), go west on W. Main Street and New Bowling Green Road (Highway 68-
80) to Donnelley Drive, go south on Donnelley Drive to Old Bowling Green Road
(Highway 1297), go southwest on Old Bowling Green Road to Beaver Creek, go
southwest following Beaver Creek to Finney Road (Highway 252), go south
following Beaver Creek and Barren River Lake to the Allen County line, go west
following the Allen County line to the Warren County line and Barren River, go
north following the Warren County line to the Edmonson County line, go east
following the Edmonson County line to Apple Grove Road (Highway 1339), go east
on Apple Grove Road to Park City Bon Ayr Road (Highway 255), go north on Park
City Bon Ayr Road to Dripping Springs Road, go east on Dripping Springs Road to
Happy Valley Road (Highway 90), go northwest on Happy Valley Road to Flint Knob
Road, go north on Flint Knob Road to Poynter Road, go east on Poynter Road to
Old Munfordville Road, go south on Old Munfordville Road to Veterans Outer Loop
(Highway 68), go south on Veterans Outer Loop to Beaver Trail, go east on
Beaver Trail to Lexington Drive, go south on Lexington Drive to L. Rogers Wells
Boulevard (Highway 31E Bypass), go south on L. Rogers Wells Boulevard to W.
Main Street and the beginning;
      (6)   Beginning at Happy Valley Road (Highway 90) and Dripping Springs
Road, go west on Dripping Springs Road to Park City Bon Ayr Road (Highway 255),
go south on Park City Bon Ayr Road to Apple Grove Road (Highway 1339), go west
on Apple Grove Road to the Edmonson County line, go north following the
Edmonson County line to the Hart County line, go east following the Hart County
line to to Old Munfordville Road, go south on Old Munfordville Road to Poynter
Road, go west on Poynter Road to Flint Knob Road, go south on Flint Knob Road
to Happy Valley Road (Highway 90), go southeast on Happy Valley Road to
Dripping Springs Road and the beginning;
      (7)   Beginning at South Fork Road (Highway 2207) and Scottsville Road
(Highway 31E), go west on S. Fork Road to Finney Road (Highway 252), go west on
Finney Road to Beaver Creek, go northeast following Beaver Creek to Old Bowling
Green Road (Highway 1297), go northeast on Old Bowling Green Road to Donnelley
Drive, go north on Donnelley Drive to New Bowling Green Road (Highway 68-80),
go east on New Bowling Green Road and W. Main Street to L. Rogers Wells
Boulevard (Highway 31E Bypass), go north on L. Rogers Wells Boulevard to
Lexington Drive, go north on Lexington Drive to Beaver Trail, go west on Beaver
Trail to Veterans Outer Loop (Highway 68), go north on Veterans Outer Loop to
Old Munfordville Road, go north on Old Munfordville Road to Country Club Road,
go east on Country Club Road to N. Jackson Highway (Highway 31E), go south on
N. Jackson Highway to N. Race Street, go south on N. Race Street to W. Main
Street, go east on W. Main Street to S. Green Street, go south on S. Green
Street to Leslie Avenue, go north on Leslie Avenue to Cleveland Avenue, go west
on Cleveland Avenue to L. Rogers Wells Boulevard, go south on L. Rogers Wells
Boulevard and Scottsville Road (Highway 31E) to South Fork Road (Highway 2207)
and the beginning.
   (C)   This section shall become effective upon publication following passage
upon second reading.
Ord. 506, passed 8-2-2011; Ord. 540, passed 9-19-2013; Ord. 681, passed 7-18-
2023)
§ 31.06 ACCESS TO COUNTY SERVICES, PROGRAMS, AND FACILITIES.
   It is the objective of the Fiscal Court to provide equal access to county
services, programs, and facilities, regardless of age, physical abilities,
income, race, religion, or other factors.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
§ 31.07 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES GENERALLY; HANDICAPPED STATUS.
   (A)   Grievance procedures generally.
      (1)   The attached procedures shall be the grievance procedures for
anyone who believes he or she has been discriminated against by the County
Fiscal Court based on handicapped status with respect to federally-funded
programs.
      (2)   The administration of these procedures and related federal and
state regulations shall be the responsibility of the executive authority of the
County Fiscal Court.
      (3)   These procedures may be amended by ordinance to comply with court
directives or additional federal and state regulations.
   (B)   Steps of the grievance procedure. The following steps address the
grievance procedure.
      (1)   Step one. Any person with a grievance concerning access to
services, programs, and facilities that the county provides shall present the
grievance, in writing, to the County Judge/Executive. The Judge/Executive shall
attempt to correct the matter immediately, if possible, or provide a written
response within five days as to what action will be taken and the deadline for
such action.
      (2)   Step two.
         (a)   If the complainant is not satisfied with the response of the
Judge/Executive or if no action is taken, the written grievance shall be
submitted to the Judge/Executive.
         (b)   The Judge/Executive shall meet with the complainant and/or his
or her representative to discuss the problem informally. Documentation of the
meeting shall be prepared and maintained in the county’s files.
         (c)   The Judge/Executive shall provide a written response within 15
days of the informal meeting as to action to be taken and the deadline for
completion.
      (3)   Step three.
         (a)   If the Judge/Executive’s response is not satisfactory or if no
action is taken, the complainant may take the grievance to the Fiscal Court. A
hearing may be requested by submitting the written request to the Judge/
Executive. The grievance shall be brought before the Fiscal Court no later than
the next regularly scheduled meeting. A special-called meeting of the Fiscal
Court may be made, if necessary, to discuss the grievance.
         (b)   In discussing the grievance, the complainant may designate any
person of his or her choice to appear with him or her for him or her to
participate in the discussion. Written documentation of the discussion shall be
maintained in the county’s records.
         (c)   The Fiscal Court shall issue a written decision on the matter
within 15 days. This decision shall be the final procedure for the complainant
at the local administrative level.
(Ord. 69, passed 10-3-1984; Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
SPECIFIC COUNTY ORGANIZATIONS
§ 31.20 EXTENSION BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby created the county extension district, whose
boundaries shall be co-existent with the boundaries of county, and which shall
henceforth, from the adoption of this section, constitute a governmental
subdivision of the commonwealth and a public body corporate.
   (B)   There is hereby created the County Extension Board, to be composed of
the County Judge/Executive and six other county residents appointed in
accordance with KRS 164.635, said Board shall possess all powers granted unto
it pursuant to KRS 164.605 to KRS 164.675 and other applicable law.
   (C)   This section shall become effective immediately upon its adoption and
publication by law.
(Ord. 298, passed 2-18-1998)
§ 31.21 GLASGOW/BARREN COUNTY TOURIST AND CONVENTION COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Common Council of the City of Glasgow and the Fiscal Court hereby
jointly creates and establishes the Glasgow/Barren County Tourist and
Convention Commission for the purpose of promoting convention and tourist
activity within the City of Glasgow and the county with the exception of that
part of the county presently under the jurisdiction of the Cave City Tourist
and Convention Commission. The Glasgow/Barren County Tourist and Convention
Commission shall be governed by KRS 91A.350(2) and other applicable provisions
of the Kentucky Revised Statutes as they now exist and as they may hereafter be
amended, and said Commission shall have all the authority, powers, duties, and
obligations granted to it by these statutes.
   (B)   The territory covered by this section shall be all of that territory
within the City of Glasgow, and within the county, excluding that territory
within the City of Cave City, which is now included in the territory of the
Cave City Tourist and Convention Commission.
   (C)   All references to the Commission shall refer only to the Glasgow/
Barren County Tourist and Convention Commission.
   (D)   The Glasgow/Barren County Tourist and Convention Commission shall be
composed of seven members to be appointed jointly by the Mayor of the City of
Glasgow and the County Judge/Executive, in the following manner:
      (1)   Two Commissioners from a list of three or more names submitted by
the local city hotel and motel association;
      (2)   One Commissioner from a list of three or more names submitted by
the local county hotel and motel association; provided, that if only one local
hotel and motel association exists which covers both the city and county, then
three Commissioners shall be appointed from a list of six or more names
submitted by it. If no formal local city or county hotel and motel association
is in existence upon the establishment of a Commission or upon the expiration
of the term of a Commissioner appointed pursuant to division (D)(1) above and
this division (D)(2), then up to three Commissioners shall be appointed from a
list of six or more names of persons residing within the jurisdiction of the
Commission, submitted by the Commonwealth Hotel and Motel Association. A local
city or county hotel or motel association shall not be required to be
affiliated with the Commonwealth Hotel and Motel Association to be recognized
as the official local city or county hotel and motel association;
      (3)   One Commissioner from a list of three or more names submitted by
the local restaurant association or associations. If no formal local restaurant
association or associations exists upon the establishment of a Commission or
upon the expiration of the term of a Commissioner appointed pursuant to this
division (D)(3), then one Commissioner shall be appointed from a list of three
or more names of persons residing within the jurisdiction of the Commission,
submitted by the Commonwealth Restaurant Association. A local restaurant
association or associations shall not be required to be affiliated with the
Commonwealth Restaurant Association to be recognized as the official local
restaurant association or associations;
      (4)   One Commissioner from a list of three or more names submitted by
the chamber or chambers of commerce existing within the City of Glasgow and
within the county excluding that territory within the City of Cave City which
is included in the territory within which the Cave City Tourist and Convention
Commission imposes a transient room tax and restaurant tax as of the effective
date of this section. Each chamber of commerce within the territory covered by
this section shall submit a list of three names, and the Mayor of the City of
Glasgow and the County Judge/Executive jointly shall appoint one Commission
member from the aggregate list;
      (5)   One Commissioner by the Mayor of the City of Glasgow; and
      (6)   One Commissioner by the County Judge/Executive.
   (E)   A candidate submitted for appointment to the Commission, pursuant to
divisions (D)(1) to (D)(4) above, shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City
of Glasgow and the County Judge/Executive, within 30 days of the receipt of the
required list or lists; if not, the association or associations shall by
election within ten days, determine the Commissioner from the list or lists
submitted by plurality vote of the aggregate membership.
   (F)   Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner that the original
appointments are made.
   (G)   The Commissioners shall be appointed for terms of three years;
provided, that in making the initial appointments, the Mayor of the City of
Glasgow and the County Judge/Executive, shall appoint two Commissioners for a
term of three years, two Commissioners for a term of two years, and three
Commissioners for a term of one year. There shall be no limitation on the
number of terms to which a Commissioner is reappointed. Subsequent appointments
shall be for three-year terms.
   (H)   The Commission shall elect from its membership a Chairperson and a
Treasurer, and may employ such personnel and make such contracts as are
necessary to carry out the purpose of KRS 91A.350 to KRS 91A.390 as they now
exist and as they may hereafter be amended. The contracts may include, but
shall not be limited to, the procurement of promotional services, advertising
services, and other services and materials relating to the promotion of tourist
and convention business. Contracts of the type enumerated shall be made only
with persons, organizations, and firms with experience and qualifications for
providing promotional services and materials, such as advertising firms,
chambers of commerce, publishers, and printers.
   (I)   The books of the Glasgow/Barren County Tourist and Convention
Commission shall be audited annually by an independent auditor who shall make a
report to the Commission, to associations submitting lists of names from which
Commission members are selected, the Mayor of the City of Glasgow, to the
County Judge/Executive, and to the Common Council of the City of Glasgow, and
the Fiscal Court. A copy of the audit reports shall be available by the
Glasgow/Barren County Tourist and Convention Commission to members of the
public upon request and at no charge.
   (J)   A Commissioner may be removed from office, by joint or separate
action, of the Common Council of the City of Glasgow, or the Fiscal Court, as
provided by KRS 65.007, as it now exists and as it may hereafter be amended.
   (K)   The Glasgow/Barren County Tourist and Convention Commission shall
annually submit to the City of Glasgow and the Fiscal Court, a request for
funds for the operation of the Commission for the ensuing year or for the
balance of the fiscal year of the initial adoption of this section. The Common
Council of the City of Glasgow shall include the Commission in its annual
budget in an amended budget for the balance of the fiscal year of initial
adoption of this section and the Fiscal Court shall include the Commission in
its annual budget (or in an amended budget for the balance of the fiscal year
of initial adoption of this section), and both of them shall provide funds for
the operation of the Commission by imposing a transient room tax of up to 3% of
the rent for every occupancy of a suite, room, or rooms, charged by all
persons, companies, corporations, or other like or similar persons, groups, or
organizations doing business as motor courts, motels, hotels, inns, or like or
similar accommodations businesses. The transient room tax imposed by this
section shall not apply to the rental or leasing of an apartment supplied by an
individual or business that regularly holds itself as exclusively providing
apartments. For the purposes of this section, APARTMENT means a room or set of
rooms, in an apartment building or other multiple-family structure, fitted
especially with a kitchen, and usually leased as a dwelling for a minimum of 30
days or more.
   (L)   A portion of the money collected from the imposition of this tax, as
determined by the Common Council of the City of Glasgow and the Fiscal Court,
may be used to finance the cost of acquisition, construction, operation, and
maintenance of facilities useful in the attraction and promotion of tourist and
convention business and shall include athletic stadiums. The balance of the
money collected from the imposition of this tax shall be used for the purposes
set forth in KRS 91A.350, as it now exists and as it may hereafter be amended.
Proceeds of the tax shall not be used as a subsidy in any form to any hotel,
motel, or restaurant. Money not expended by the Glasgow/Barren County Tourist
and Convention Commission during any fiscal year shall be used to make up a
part of the Commission’s budget for its next fiscal year.
   (M)   The Glasgow/Barren County Tourist and Convention Commission, with the
approval of the Common Council of the City of Glasgow and the Fiscal Court, may
borrow money to pay its obligations that cannot be paid at maturity out of
current revenue from the transient room tax, but shall not borrow a sum greater
that can be paid out of the revenue anticipated from the transient room tax
during the year the money is borrowed. The Glasgow/Barren County Tourist and
Convention Commission may pledge securities for the repayment of any sum
borrowed.
   (N)   The fiscal year of the Commission shall begin July 1 and end on June
30 of each year.
   (O)   All persons, firms, organizations, or other like or similar persons,
groups, or organizations doing business as motor courts, motels, hotels, inns,
or other like or similar accommodations businesses shall collect and pay
transient room tax to the Treasury of the City of Glasgow on a monthly basis on
or before the fifteenth of the next month immediately following the month in
which the transient room taxes are collected and at the same time shall file a
return on a form provided by the Commission for such purpose.
   (P)   The Mayor of Glasgow and the County Judge/Executive, or their duly-
authorized agents, are empowered to examine the books, papers, and records of
any person, firm, organization, or other like or similar accommodation business
required in this division (P) to file a return. Said examination shall be
permitted in order to determine the accuracy of any return made, or if no
return was made, to determine the amount of room tax due and owing.
   (Q)   Any transient room tax imposed by this section remaining unpaid after
it becomes due shall bear interest at the rate of 10% of the amount of the
unpaid tax.
   (R)   All base amounts collected by the City of Glasgow in the ten-day
payment period as provided in this division (R) shall be paid over to the
Glasgow/Barren County Tourist and Convention Commission within 30 days, until
the budget for the current fiscal year has been paid over to the Commission.
Amounts received by the City of Glasgow during the fiscal year, and subsequent
to the funding of the fully-approved budget of the Commission, shall be
retained by the City of Glasgow in a separate fund, to be utilized only for the
purpose of funding subsequent years’ approved Commission budget, and/or
expenditure by the City of Glasgow and the county for purposes permitted by KRS
91A.350, and jointly agreed upon by the Glasgow City Council and the County
Fiscal Court. Late payments collected by the City of Glasgow shall be paid over
to the Commission within 30 days after receipt, subject to same provisions
contained in the preceding sentence.
   (S)   This section becomes effective immediately upon final adoption of this
section by the Common Council of the City of Glasgow, the county, and the
County Fiscal Court and publication as required by law.
   (T)   The Barren County Fiscal Court and Glasgow City Council has levied a
transient room tax of 3% of the gross rental income on the rent for every
occupancy of a suite, room, rooms, cabins, lodgings, campsites, or other
accommodations charged by any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin,
campgrounds, recreational vehicle, parks, or any other place in which
accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for consideration or by
any person that facilitates the rental of the accommodations by brokering,
coordinating, or in any other way arranging for the rental of the
accommodations in Barren County, Kentucky, to be collected by such persons,
companies, and corporations on behalf of the Treasurer. The tax levied herein
shall be deemed collectible from and enforceable against the owner of the
property in question and/or the third-party broker or facilitator.
   (U)   All entities or persons subject to the transient room tax levied in
division (T) must on or before the 20th day of the month following close, file
a return with the Treasurer of the City of Glasgow or designated agent of the
Fiscal Court setting forth the aggregate amount of the gross rental charges
during the preceding calendar month for every occupancy of a suite, room, or
rooms, together with such pertinent information as the Treasurer or designated
agent may require. Such information shall be of a confidential nature and be
open to inspection by the public but shall be for the use and benefit of the
designated agents of the Glasgow City Council and Barren County Fiscal Court of
the Treasurer only.
(Ord. 312, passed 3-2-1999; Ord. 319, passed 5-18-1999; Ord. 320, passed 5-18-
1999; Ord. 392, passed 6-17-2003; Ord. 678, passed 12-20-2022) Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.22 COUNTY CEMETERY BOARD.
   (A)   The County Fiscal Court enacts this section which shall be known and
may be cited as the “Barren County Cemetery Board Ordinance”.
   (B)   There is hereby created the County Cemetery Board, in accordance with
the provisions of KRS 67.680 and 67.682, which shall serve in the interest of
restoring, preserving, and maintaining nonprofit cemeteries in the county that
do not receive perpetual care funds pursuant to KRS 367.952. The County
Cemetery Board shall operate to achieve the objectives set out above, within
the administrative guidelines adopted by the Department for Local Government
pursuant to KRS 67.682
   (C)   Pursuant to KRS 67.680(2), the County Cemetery Board shall meet three
times annually in a space provided by the Fiscal Court and shall have five
volunteer members with no more than three members representing the same
political party. Members shall be appointed by the County Judge/Executive with
the approval of the Fiscal Court, shall have lived in the county for at least
one year prior to appointment, and shall have demonstrated an interest in
cemetery preservation, genealogy, local history, or related area.
   (D)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its
approval, adoption, and publication.
(Ord. 399, passed 10-7-2003)
§ 31.23 HISEVILLE CEMETERY BOARD.
   (A)   The County Fiscal Court enacts this section, which shall be known and
may be cited as the “Hiseville Cemetery Board Ordinance”.
   (B)   (1)   There is hereby created the Hiseville Cemetery Board, which
shall serve in the interest of overseeing the daily operations and preserving
and maintaining the Hiseville Cemetery.
      (2)   The Hiseville Cemetery Board shall operate to achieve the
objectives set out above.
   (C)   The Hiseville Cemetery Board shall meet at a minimum of four times
annually in a space provided by the Fiscal Court.
   (D)   (1)   The Hiseville Cemetery Board shall consist of seven members. One
member will be the elected Magistrate for Magisterial District Four, the
District in which the cemetery is located.
      (2)   The remaining six members will be volunteers who shall be appointed
by the County Judge/Executive with the approval of the Fiscal Court. Said
members shall have lived in Magisterial District Four for at least one-year
prior to appointment. Each of the volunteer members will serve three-year
terms. The Hiseville Cemetery Board’s terms will be staggered so that two
members will come off the Board each year and two replacement appointments will
be made each year. January 1 of each year will be the date terms will end and
new appointments will be made.
      (3)   Those whose terms are just expiring or have served on the Board in
the past are eligible to be reappointed by the County Judge/Executive with the
approval of the Fiscal Court.
   (E)   (1)   The Hiseville Cemetery Board or its designee will oversee the
day-to-day operations of the Hiseville Cemetery.
      (2)   The Hiseville Cemetery Board will oversee the maintenance and
preservation of said cemetery and adopt rules and regulations for the Hiseville
Cemetery.
   (F)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its
approval, adoption, and publication.
(Ord. 423, passed 2-1-2005)
§ 31.24 OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   The Fiscal Court enacts this section which shall be known and may be
cited as the “Barren County Emergency Management Ordinance”.
   (B)   (1)   There is hereby created the County Office of Emergency
Management, in accordance with the provisions of KRS Chs. 39A to 39F, which
shall serve in the interest of public safety within the territorial boundaries
of the county.
      (2)   The County Office of Emergency Management shall develop, implement,
and maintain the local comprehensive emergency management program for the
county in accordance with the provisions of KRS Chs. 39A to 39F, the
comprehensive emergency management program requirements of the Commonwealth
Division of Emergency Management, the provisions of the Commonwealth Emergency
Operations Plan, administrative regulations promulgated by the Commonwealth
Division of Emergency Management, and the resolutions, orders, or ordinances of
the Fiscal Court.
      (3)   The County Office of Emergency Management shall be an
organizational unit of county government attached to the Office of the County
Judge/Executive and shall have primary jurisdiction, responsibility, and
authority for all matters pertaining to the comprehensive emergency management
program and disaster and emergency response of the county.
      (4)   The County Office of Emergency Management shall meet all
requirements of a local emergency management agency as defined in KRS Chs. 39A
to 39F, and shall be the administrative branch of the County Disaster and
Emergency Services organization established pursuant to KRS Chs. 39A to 39F.
      (5)   The County Judge/Executive shall designate and include a separate
Office of Emergency Management budget until classification with each annual
county budget and all financial matters of the County Office of Emergency
Management shall be handled through the County Treasury and uniform budget
system.
   (C)   (1)   The County Judge/Executive, within 30 days of assuming office,
shall appoint a County Emergency Management Director in accordance with the
provisions of KRS Ch. 39B, and shall immediately notify the Commonwealth
Division of Emergency Management of the appointment.
      (2)   The County Emergency Management Director, appointed pursuant to
this section, shall be sworn by oath to the Office of the Emergency Management
Director immediately upon appointment, and shall serve at the pleasure of the
County Judge/Executive, but shall serve no longer than four consecutive years
without reappointment and, as a minimum, shall meet all the qualification
requirements specified in KRS Chs. 39A to 39F.
   (D)   The County Emergency Management Director shall have and exercise all
the powers, authorities, rights, and duties as specified in KRS Chs. 39A to
39F, and in the orders or ordinances of the Fiscal Court, to include the
following:
      (1)   To represent the County Judge/Executive on all matters pertaining
to the comprehensive emergency management program and the disaster and
emergency response of the county;
      (2)   To be the executive head and chief administrative officer to the
County Office of Emergency Management and direct, control, supervise, and
manage the development, preparation, organization, administration, operation,
implementation, and maintenance of the comprehensive emergency management
program of the county, and to coordinate all disaster and emergency response of
the county;
      (3)   To develop, update, and maintain the County Emergency Operations
Plan in compliance with the provisions of KRS Chs. 39A to 39F;
      (4)   To establish, maintain, and coordinate or direct the County
Disaster and Emergency Operations Plan, the Commonwealth Emergency Operations
Plan, and the provisions of KRS Chs. 39A to 39F;
      (5)   To notify the County Judge/Executive and the Commonwealth Division
of Emergency Management immediately to the occurrence, or threatened or
impending occurrence of any emergency, disaster, or catastrophic incident or
situation; and provide in such notice an assessment of possible or actual
damages or threats to life, health, safety, property, or the environment; and
to recommend any emergency actions or orders which should be executed;
      (6)   To be the chief advisor to, and the primary on-scene representative
of, the County Judge/Executive in the event of any emergency, declared
emergency, disaster, or catastrophe within the county;
      (7)   To respond and have full access to the scenes of an emergency,
declared emergency, disaster, or catastrophe, and immediately investigate,
analyze, or assess the nature, scope, or seriousness of all situations;
coordinate the establishment and operation of an incident command or management
system; execute the provisions of the County Emergency Operations Plan;
activate the County Emergency Operations Center or on-scene command post;
convene meetings, gather information, and conduct briefings; notify the County
Judge/Executive and the Commonwealth Division of Emergency Management
immediately of the nature, scope, or seriousness of any emergency situation and
provide information on all on-going response actions being taken in association
with the incident; provide any assistance requested, as deemed necessary or
appropriate; and take any actions to fully expedite and coordinate the disaster
and emergency response of all local public or private agencies, departments,
units, or individuals;
      (8)   To take or direct immediate actions to protect public safety at the
direction of the County Judge/Executive during any declared emergency or
disaster;
      (9)   To act as an official representative of the Commonwealth Division
of Emergency Management when specifically requested by the Commonwealth
Director;
      (10)   To report directly to the County Judge/Executive and act in an
official policy-making capacity when carrying out all duties of the Office of
Emergency Management Director;
      (11)   To have full signatory authority, in accordance with the county
administrative code; for execution of all contracts, agreements, or other
official documents pertaining to the administration, organization, and
operation of the County Office of Emergency Management and the local
comprehensive emergency management program;
      (12)   To direct all paid or volunteer employees, staff, assistance, or
other workers of the County Office of Emergency Management, and supervise any
operating units and personnel associated with it which are officially appointed
and affiliated with the County Disaster and Emergency Services organization
pursuant to the provisions of KRS Chs. 39A to 39F;
      (13)   To prepare and submit regular or scheduled program activity
reports to the area manager of the Commonwealth Division of Emergency
Management and the County Judge/Executive;
      (14)   To execute bonds in the amount as determined by the County Judge/
Executive, when directed by the County Judge/Executive;
      (15)   To prepare and submit the County Judge/Executive, on an annual
basis by March 1, a program and agency budget request for the County Office of
Emergency Management;
      (16)   To prepare and submit to the Commonwealth Division of Emergency
Management, on an annual basis by July 15, a fiscal year program paper and
budget request for the County Office of Emergency Management;
      (17)   To enroll and be a registered member of an Emergency Management
Association;
      (18)   To perform the duties of, or appoint with the approval of the
Fiscal Court, the County Search and Rescue Coordinator pursuant to provisions
of KRS Ch. 39F; and
      (19)   To perform all administrative, organizational, or operational
tasks required pursuant to KRS Chs. 39A or 39F, the administrative regulations
of the commonwealth, the Commonwealth Emergency Operations Plan, or program
guidance issued by the Commonwealth Division of Emergency Management; and to
carry out all other emergency management-related duties as required by the
resolutions, orders, or ordinances of the Fiscal Court, the executive orders of
the County Judge/Executive, and the provisions of the County Emergency
Operations Plan.
   (E)   The section shall be in full force and effect from and after its
approval, adoption, and publication.
(Ord. 321, passed 6-15-1999; Ord. 324, passed - -; Ord. 486, passed 10-20-2009)
Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.25 INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ECONOMIC AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The county and City of Glasgow local governments are vitally
interested in the economic development of this county, and whereas, a strong
commitment is necessary on the part of local government to ensure the
continuing success of such economic development, and whereas, only by a joint
effort of public and private sectors can the continuous success be assured, and
whereas, the creation of an industrial development economic authority will
ensure that these development efforts are sustained, and whereas, an industrial
development economic authority will be able to bring about in the most
effective manner, the economic development of the county and City of Glasgow,
the county shall establish an industrial development economic authority
pursuant to KRS 154.50-20 et seq. in association and partnership with the City
of Glasgow for the purpose of providing the agricultural, business, and
industrial economics, and improving the overall quality of life for the
citizens of the county and City of Glasgow, and the county shall enter into the
appropriate interlocal agreement to establish this authority.
   (B)   This section becomes effective immediately upon passage upon second
reading and publication.
(Ord. 66, passed 6-29-1984)
§ 31.26 COUNTY ROAD DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Establishment of Department.
      (1)   There is hereby created and established a County Road Department
consisting of a County Road Engineer/Supervisor and such other employees of
said Department as may from time to time be provided for by the County Judge/
Executive and Fiscal Court.
      (2)   The County Road Engineer/Supervisor shall be appointed by the
County Judge/Executive with the consent of the Fiscal Court and shall serve for
a period of two or four years unless removed in accordance with KRS 179.060.
      (3)   All appointments to the Road Department, and removals therefrom,
shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this sections and the
Kentucky Revised Statutes.
      (4)   The County Road Department shall possess such qualifications as set
forth in KRS 179.020.
      (5)   If necessary, the County Judge/Executive may appoint a temporary
supervisor for a period not to exceed three months in accordance with the
provisions of KRS 179.020.
   (B)   Duties of the Road Engineer/Supervisor.
      (1)   The County Road Engineer/Supervisor shall be the head of the Road
Department subject to the order and direction of the County Judge/Executive.
      (2)   The County Road Engineer/Supervisor shall keep such records and
make such reports concerning the activities of his or her Department as may be
required by statute, by the County Judge/Executive or by the County Fiscal
Court.
      (3)   The County Road Engineer/Supervisor may issue such rules and
regulations as are reasonable and necessary for the operation of the Road
Department which are not inconsistent with the order of the County Judge/
Executive or the County Road and Bridge Plan. Such orders shall have the same
power and effect as an order of the County Judge/Executive unless disapproved
by him or her.
      (4)   The County Road Engineer/Supervisor shall be responsible for the
performance of the Road Department, of its function, and all persons who are
employees of the Road Department shall be subject to the supervision and
direction of the County Road Engineer/Supervisor.
      (5)   The County Road Engineer/Supervisor shall appear before the County
Fiscal Court at each meeting and be prepared to respond to any reasonable
inquiries concerning operation of the County Road Department or compliance with
the County Road Plan.
      (6)   The County Road Engineer/Supervisor shall conduct and document
prospective driver road tests for drivers of heavy vehicles in the Road
Department, pursuant to motor carrier safety regulations.
   (C)   Road Department property.
      (1)   Equipment and materials for the Road Department shall be acquired
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
      (2)   Employees of the Road Department shall be responsible for the good
care of departmental equipment and property, whether fixed or movable, assigned
to their use and keeping, and shall promptly report to their supervisor the
loss or damage to or unserviceable condition of such property.
      (3)   All employees of the Road Department shall immediately report to
their supervisor the loss of any departmental property or equipment that has
been furnished to the individual.
   (D)   Right-of-way procurement.
      (1)   Prior to expending county road funds for materials not associated
with the construction of projects along county roads, there will be an
agreement among County Judge Executive, Magistrate of the involved district,
and the County Road Supervisor.
      (2)   Any disagreements will be resolved by the County Fiscal Court prior
to the construction or paying for any materials.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995; Ord. 304, passed 7-9-1998; Ord. 351, passed 9-19-
2000)
§ 31.27 [RESERVED].
§ 31.28 COUNTY RECREATIONAL PARK SYSTEM.
   (A)   County Recreational Park System generally. The County Fiscal Court
hereby creates a Park System for the benefit of all its citizens, including
those of cities within the county that may already have a Park Department.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose for the creation of the Park System is to use the
real estate already owned by the county, or to purchase the necessary real
estate for the construction of parks to meet the educational and recreational
goals; including vocational and recreational programs for its citizens; and to
advance the educational, vocational, and recreational opportunities for
citizens of all ages of the county.
   (C)   Governing body.
      (1)   The Park System shall be administered by a Board of Directors
appointed by the County Judge/Executive with the approval of the Fiscal Court.
Ultimately, the supervision and control of the Board shall rest with the Court.
The Board shall consist of seven members and the County Judge/Executive, or his
or her designee ex-officio. Each member of the Board shall have equal voting
power.
      (2)   The Board shall have general control and management of such
programs and services as it deems necessary for the promotion of the objectives
of this section subject, always, to the state and county administrative code.
      (3)   The Board shall have the authority to accept funds from both public
and private sources, apply for grants, employ personnel, make purchases, and do
all things necessary and proper to carry out the full intent and purposes of
this section. Any funds from whatever source, including its source, accepted by
the Board shall promptly be remitted to the County Treasurer. The Court
reserves the right to hire and fire any and all personnel and employees.
      (4)   The Board shall select from its own members a slate of officers
which shall consist of a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, who will become the
Chair-Elect. It shall be the responsibility of the Chairperson to conduct the
meetings of the Board and appoint any necessary committees. An Executive
Committee may be selected by the Board of Directors and will be composed of
Board members and the Executive Director of the cooperative. Other committees
shall be established at the discretion of the Board. Minutes of the Board will
comply with KRS 61.805 through 61.850.
      (5)   The Board shall select an Executive Director of the Park System,
approved by the Court, who will be the executive agent of the Board but shall
not be a member of the Board. The Executive Director will have general
supervision, subject to the control of the Board, over the activities and
operations of the Park System and will be responsible for the everyday
management of the business affairs of said Park System. The Executive Director
will prepare, under the direction of the Board, all rules, regulations, by-
laws, and statements of policy for approval and adoption by the Board. The
Executive Director will submit to the Board, recommendations in regard to
personnel management and shall otherwise conduct the affairs of the Park System
as directed by the Board.
      (6)   The Executive Director will prepare a balanced budget for the
fiscal year for approval by the Board. The Executive Director shall keep a full
and complete account of all funds in such manner and make such reports
concerning them as is required by the Board or Court. The Executive Director
shall preserve all records relating to the transactions along with all funds in
his or her hands and all accounts and records due for proper audit and furnish
a copy to the County Treasurer.
      (7)   The County Treasurer is hereby designated as Treasurer for the Park
System and its Board. The Treasurer shall issue his or her check on the
depositor for payment of all legal claims which have been duly authorized for
payment in accordance with Court rules and the statutory rules and regulations
for public funds.
      (8)   The Board shall also select a Secretary who is not a member of the
Board. The Secretary shall keep the minutes, records, and documents of the
Board and perform other duties imposed upon him or her by the Board.
   (D)   Meetings.
      (1)   The Board of Directors shall have not less than one meeting every
two months at a place and time designated by the Board of Directors. The
Directors of the Park System or Chairperson of the Board of Directors may call
special meetings as deemed necessary by properly notifying members of the
Board. Proper notification shall be by written notice not less than 24 hours
preceding the meeting.
      (2)   All meetings shall comply with the Open Meetings Act.
      (3)   A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, and motions can be favorably passed by a simple
majority vote of those present.
      (4)   Any Board member who is absent from three consecutive regularly
scheduled meetings may be considered removed as a Board member. The County
Judge/Executive, with approval of the County Fiscal Court, may fill the
vacancies.
   (E)   Park System employees. The Board of Directors, subject to the approval
of the Court, will employ, upon recommendation of the Executive Director, the
personnel necessary for the efficient and practical operation of the Park
System. Job descriptions and salaries of Park System employees will be
recommended by the Executive Director for approval by the Board which shall be
submitted to the County Treasurer for approval. Employees of the Park System
are entitled to the same fringe benefits as employees of the fiscal agent.
   (F)   Financial responsibility. The Board of Directors shall have
responsibility for the receipts, recommended disbursements, and accountability
to the County Treasurer of any funds for the execution of this section.
   (G)   Cost of program and services. The costs of programs and services will
be paid by the county from its yearly budget or from contributions, grants, and
fees as authorized by the Court each year, and no later than April 1 of each
year, the Board shall submit a requested budget to the Court for the coming
fiscal year.
   (H)   Effective date. This section shall become effective upon its due
passage by the Fiscal Court as required by law.
(Ord. 371, passed 2-5-2002; Ord. 526, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 31.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)    In addition, any person who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to
properly complete and file a return as required in §
31.21(Q) or pay the tax imposed in §
31.21(Q), or any portion thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$25, nor more than $100, or imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or both fine
and imprisonment.
(C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
31.24, or any lawful orders, rules, or regulations promulgated pursuant to it,
upon conviction shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. Violators of §
31.24 may be issued a citation by the County Sheriff or by a duly-authorized
official.
(Ord. 312, passed 3-2-1999; Ord. 392, passed 6-17-2003; Ord. 486, passed 10-20-
2009)
CHAPTER 32: CODE OF ETHICS
Section
   
32.01   Definitions
   
32.02   Standards of conduct
   
32.03   Financial disclosure
   
32.04   Nepotism
   
32.05   County Ethics Commission
   
32.06   Complaints
   
32.07   Protection against reprisal
   
32.08   Transactions with subordinates
   
32.09   Inappropriate political solicitation
   
32.10   Records
 
   
32.99   Enforcement and penalty
   
Appendix A: Rules and Regulations of the County Ethics Commission
   
Appendix B: Forms
§ 32.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have their given
definition.
   APPOINTING AUTHORITY. The County Judge Executive, or any of his or her
designated subordinates, who appoint the non-elected county officers covered
under this chapter.
   BUSINESS ORGANIZATION. Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship,
firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed
individual, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust,
professional service corporation, or any other legal entity through which
business is conducted for profit.
   COUNTY OFFICER. For the purpose of this chapter, the following persons shall
be defined as a county officer:
      (1)   Any person elected or appointed to the office of:
         (a)   County Judge Executive;
         (b)   Fiscal Court Member;
         (c)   County Attorney;
         (d)   Sheriff;
         (e)   County Clerk;
         (f)   Surveyor;
         (g)   Constable; or
         (h)   Coroner.
      (2)   Any position as determined by a person identified in division (1)
of this definition that has the authority to enter into contracts over $10,000
in value or make purchases of goods or services over $10,000 in value.
      (3)   Any person nominated or appointed by the County Judge Executive or
the Fiscal Court to a county agency who has regulatory authority or has
independent authority or has independent authority to expend public funds.
   CANDIDATE. Any individual who seeks nomination or election to a county
government office. An individual is a candidate when the individual:
      (1)   Files a notification and declaration for nomination for office with
a County Clerk or the Secretary of State; or
      (2)   Is nominated for office by a political party under KRS 118.105,
118.115, 118.325, or 118.760.
   COUNTY GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEE. Any person, whether compensated or not, whether
full-time or part-time, employed by or serving the county government or county
government agency who is not a county government officer, but shall not mean
any employees of a school district or school board.
   COUNTY GOVERNMENT OFFICER. Any person, whether compensated or not, whether
full-time or part-time, who is elected to any county government office; or any
person who serves as a member of the governing body of any county government
agency or governing body of any county government agency or special taxing or
non-taxing district, but shall not mean any officer of a school district or
school board. See specific offices above.
   FAMILY MEMBER FOR PURPOSES OF FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE. Any person who is a
spouse, an un-emancipated child residing in an individual’s household, or a
person claimed by the individual’s spouse as a dependent for tax purposes.
   FAMILY MEMBER FOR PURPOSES OF HIRING AND NEPOTISM. Any person who is the
spouse, parent, sibling, child, mother-in-law, father-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, grandparent, or grandchild of a county officer; or is a
dependent for tax purposes of the county officer or the county officer’s
spouse; or who is a member of the county officer’s household including a person
who is not a spouse but is in a committed relationship with the county officer
and resides in the county officer’s household, whether or not that member of
the county officer’s household is a dependent of the county officer. “Committed
relationship” as used herein shall mean sharing of income and expenses by
couples involved in heterosexual and/or homosexual relationships.
   INTEREST. The ownership or control of more than 5% of the profits, assets,
or stock of a business, or holding a position as a principal of any nonprofit
entity including, but not limited to, a labor organization.
(Ord. 556, passed 3-17-2015)
§ 32.02 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
   In furtherance of the public trust assumed by county officers, upon their
election or appointment to public office or employment, the following standards
of conduct shall be applicable:
   (A)   No county officer or member of his or her family shall have an
interest in a business organization or engage in any business, transaction, or
professional activity, which is in conflict with the proper discharge of such
officer’s duties in the public interest.
   (B)   No county officer shall use or attempt to use his or her official
position to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for himself or herself,
members of his or her family or other persons.
   (C)   No county officer shall act in his or her official capacity in any
matter where such officer, a member of his or her family, or a business
organization in which such officer has an interest, has a direct or indirect
financial or personal involvement that might reasonably be expected to impair
his or her objectivity or independence of judgment.
   (D)   No county officer shall undertake any employment or service,
compensated or not, which might reasonably be expected to prejudice such
officer’s independence of judgment in the exercise of his or her official
duties.
   (E)   No county officer, members of his or her family, or business
organization, nonprofit entity, or labor organization in which such officer has
an interest, shall solicit or accept any gift, favor, loan, political
contribution, service, economic opportunity, promise of future employment, or
other thing of value based upon an understanding, or under circumstances from
which it could reasonably be inferred, that the gift, favor, loan,
contribution, service, promise, or other thing of value was given or offered:
      (1)   For the purpose of influencing such officer, directly or
indirectly, in the discharge of his or her official duties; or
      (2)   For the purpose of gaining access to the county officer.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to the solicitation or
acceptance of contributions to the campaign of announced candidate for elective
public office as governed by applicable provisions of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes.
   (F)   No county officer, however, shall be prohibited from giving or
receiving:
      (1)   An award publicly presented in recognition of public service;
      (2)   Commercially reasonable loans made in the ordinary course of the
lender’s business; or
      (3)   Reasonable hosting, including entertainment, meals or refreshments
furnished in connection with public events, appearances, or ceremonies.
   (G)   No county officer authorized and qualified to solemnize a marriage
shall be prohibited from accepting a gratuity for performing such ceremony.
   (H)   No county officer shall use, or allow to be used, his or her public
office, or any information, not generally available to the members of the
public, which such officer receives or acquires in the course and by reason of
his or office, for the purpose of securing financial gain for himself or
herself, any member of his or her family, or any business organization with
which such officer is associated.
   (I)   No county officer or business organization in which such officer has
an interest shall represent any person or party other than the local government
in connection with any cause, proceeding, application or other matter pending
before any county agency.
   (J)   No county officer shall be deemed in conflict with these provisions
if, by reason of such officer’s participation in the enactment of any
ordinance, resolution or other matter required to be voted upon, no material or
monetary gain accrues to such officer as a member of any business, profession,
occupation or group, to any greater extent than any gain could reasonably be
expected to accrue to any other member of such business, profession, occupation
or group.
   (K)   No county officer shall be deemed in conflict with the provisions of
this ethics code, if by reason of such officer’s participation in the enactment
of any ordinance, resolution, or other matter required to be voted upon,
material or monetary gain is conferred upon a nonprofit or charitable
organization with which the county officer or a member of his or her family is
in any way associated if the county officer has disclosed said association to
the Ethics Commission through his or her annual report or a supplementary
report or if the county officer discloses said association with the clerk or
secretary of the voting body prior to casting such vote.
   (L)   No county officer shall be prohibited from making an inquiry for
information or providing assistance on behalf of a citizen or constituent if no
fee, reward or other thing of value is promised to, given to, or accepted by,
the officer or a member of his or her family, whether directly or indirectly,
in return therefor.
   (M)   Nothing in these standards of conduct shall prohibit any county
officer, or members of his or her family, from representing himself or herself,
or themselves, in negotiations or proceedings concerning his or her, or their,
own interests.
(Ord. 556, passed passed 3-17-2015)
§ 32.03 FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   Elected county officers, candidates for elected office, and officers
and employees with procurement authority exceeding $500 per purchase shall be
required to file with the Barren County Ethics Commission a financial
disclosure statement on a form provided by the Ethics Commission and signed
under oath by the filer. The financial disclosure statement shall include all
of the following information:
      (1)   Name of filer;
      (2)   Current business address, business telephone number and home
address of filer;
      (3)   Title of filer’s public office or elected office sought;
      (4)   Occupations of filer and spouse;
      (5)   The name, address, and telephone number of each business
organization doing business with the Barren County Government, or any county
agency, or any county officer, in which the filer or any member of the filer’s
family has:
         (a)   An interest of $10,000 at fair market value or 5% ownership
interest or more; or
         (b)   Received compensation in excess of $5,000 during the preceding
calendar year. If the interest is the ownership of publicly traded securities,
or publicly traded securities are the source of income, the interest need not
be reported unless the officer or family member owns 5% or more of the total
value of such publicly traded securities.
      (6)   The location and zoning designation of all real property within
Barren County, other than the filer’s primary residence, in which the filer or
any members of the filer’s family had an interest of $10,000 or more during the
preceding calendar year and which is the subject of any condemnation
proceeding, any regulatory or enforcement proceeding before any Planning
Commission within Barren County, or any proceeding before any other
administrative body or court of law wherein county government or any county
officer is an interested party.
   (B)   (1)   The financial disclosure statement shall be filed annually by
county officers no later than February 1 of each year. Newly appointed county
officers shall be required to file their initial statement no later than 21
days after the date of appointment. Candidates for elected office shall file a
financial disclosure statement no later than 21 days after the date of filing.
Any material change in the information required by divisions (A)(5) or (A)(6)
such as to cause previously submitted information to no longer be accurate or
complete, shall be reported in writing to the Ethics Commission within ten
business days after the affected Barren County Officer knows or reasonably
should know of that circumstance.
      (2)   The term “material change” under division (B)(1) shall include any
gift, loan, gratuity, discount, favor, service or economic opportunity of
significant value or having an aggregate value of $25 or more which the county
officer believes in good faith to be exempt from the application of §
32.02(B).
   (C)   When any county officer, or any member of his or her family, shall
have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or
matter pending before or within his or her office, or any county agency, the
county officer shall disclose such private interest to the Ethics Commission,
the governing body of the affected metro agency and, if the contract or matter
requires formal action by the Metro Council, to the Metro Council.
   (D)   Any member of the Barren County Fiscal Court or the County Attorney,
as well as any county officer who derives his or her authority from the Fiscal
Court or from the County Attorney or a member of any such person’s family, who
has a private interest in any matter pending before the Fiscal Court shall
disclose such private interest on the records of the Fiscal Court and shall
disqualify himself or herself from participating in any debate, vote, or
proceeding whatsoever relating thereto. Any matter pertaining to a county
officer’s budget or the operation of such officer’s office, agency or
department, including a county officer’s salary, shall not be construed as a
“private interest”.
(Ord. 556, passed passed 3-17-2015)
§ 32.04 NEPOTISM.
   (A)   A member of the family of a county officer shall not be given
preference for employment or appointment to position in a county agency if a
more qualified person has made application for the same position.
   (B)   No county officer shall act in his or her official capacity to hire,
or caused to be hired, any member of his or her family at an hourly pay rate or
with benefits in excess of any other employee with similar job duties,
responsibilities, and qualification requirements.
   (C)   No county officer shall exercise direct management or supervisory
authority over any member of his or her family; or shall any county officer
exercise contract management authority where any member of his or her family is
employed by or is under contract to any vendor who is subject to such officer’s
direct authority or management.
   (D)   After the effective date of this chapter, a member of the family of
the Judge Executive, a member of the Fiscal Court, County Attorney, Sheriff,
County Clerk, Coroner, Surveyor and Constable shall not be employed by or
appointed to a position with such elected official’s office. Any members of the
family of the county officers named in us section employed or serving in a
position within the office of such county officer on the effective date of this
chapter or amendments thereto shall be excluded from the prohibition contained
in this section including its amendments.
(Ord. 556, passed passed 3-17-2015)
§ 32.05 COUNTY ETHICS COMMISSION.
   (A)   Barren County Ethics Commission (the Ethics Commission) shall be
responsible for the enforcement and administration of the Code of Ethics
adopted in this chapter in the manner set forth in this chapter. When requested
by a county officer, the Ethics Commission shall issue an advisory opinion
concerning acts or activities covered by this chapter. Such opinions shall be
public and shall not disclose the identity of persons associated with the
opinion. Confidential opinions may be issued, if requested by the county
officer or county agency submitting the question only if the subject is exempt
from disclosure pursuant to KRS 61.878.
   (B)   (1)   The investigation and determination of whether a county officer
has committed any violation of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Ethics Commission. In order to ensure a thorough investigation, the Commission
is authorized to appoint an investigating officer.
      (2)   When requested by an appointing authority, the Ethics Commission
shall have authority to issue an opinion concerning whether or not an act or
activities undertaken by a county officer constitute a violation of this
chapter. The Ethics Commission shall have authority to adjudicate factual
issues, and to determine whether the alleged act or activity constitutes a
violation of this chapter.
   (C)   (1)   The Ethics Commission shall consist of seven members appointed
by the County Judge Executive and approved by the Fiscal Court. Ethics
Commission members shall be chosen by virtue of their known and consistent
reputation for integrity and their knowledge of local government affairs.
Nominations shall come from a list of Barren County citizens comprised of two
nominees each from the County Clerk, County Attorney, County Jailer, County
Sheriff, and County Coroner. Members of the Ethics Commission shall serve for a
term of three years or until his or her successor is appointed. Provided,
however, that the term of office may be less than three years at appointment if
necessary to prevent the expiration of more than three members’ term of office
in any one year. In addition, such Ethics Commission members may be reappointed
for one consecutive term and shall not be eligible for reappointment until one
year after the expiration of his or her last term. Members of the Ethics
Commission shall not receive compensation but shall be reimbursed for
reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties in the
same manner as provided by existing county government policy for expense
reimbursement.
      (2)   The absence of any member from three consecutive meetings, unless
the Ethics Commission has excused the absence for good and sufficient reason,
shall constitute a resignation.
      (3)   When a vacancy occurs in the membership of the Ethics Commission,
the vacancy shall, within 60 days, be filled for the unexpired portion of the
term in the same manner as regular appointments. Any person appointed to fill a
vacancy on the Ethics Commission must meet the qualifications and limitations
set forth in this chapter.
      (4)   An Ethics Commission member may be removed from office by at least
a two-thirds majority of the Fiscal Court, after written notice, including a
clear statement of the grounds for removal, and opportunity for reply, at least
30 days before voting on removal. The sole grounds for removal shall be failure
to meet the qualifications or limitations set forth in this code, neglect of
duty, gross misconduct in office, inability to discharge the powers or duties
of office, or a violation of this chapter.
      (5)   No member of the Ethics Commission may be, or have been within one
year prior to appointment: a person serving in an elected office of any level
of government or a candidate for election to office of any level of government;
a county officer or employee of the County Government; a member of a county
officer’s family.
   (D)   Within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter, the Ethics
Commission shall draft and submit to the Fiscal Court its rules and regulations
for the administration of this chapter and the conduct of its meetings,
including, but not limited, to maintenance of financial disclosure statements,
issuance of opinions and imposition of penalties for violations of this
chapter. If the Fiscal Court does not disapprove of the Ethics Commission’s
rules and regulations within 45 days after submission to the Council, such
rules and regulations shall go into effect on the 46th day after submission.
The Ethics Commission shall annually report any changes to its rules
operations, or procedures to the Fiscal Court by August 1.
   (E)   There is hereby created the position of Legal Counsel to the Ethics
Commission. The Ethics Commission may employ Legal Counsel on contract on
either a part-time or as-needed basis provided that Legal Counsel employed
under contract shall not be employed counsel or under contract in any capacity
with county government, or associated with an attorney employed by or under
contract in any capacity with county government.
   (F)   The County Judge Executive’s Office shall provide reasonable and
necessary staff support for the operation of the Ethics Commission, including
all training of county officers required in this section.
   (G)   The Ethics Commission shall be the official custodian of financial
disclosure statements to be filed under this chapter.
   (H)   (1)   The Ethics Commission shall conduct at least one annual training
and review session open and available to all county officers, and such other
training and review activities as shall from time to time be requested by the
County Judge Executive, the Fiscal Court, or Ethics Commission.
      (2)   All county officers in office on the effective date of this chapter
shall be required to attend one training session conducted by the Ethics
Commission within 12 months of the effective date of this chapter and at least
once every 24 months thereafter. All county officers elected or appointed after
the effective date of this chapter shall be required to attend one training
session conducted by the Ethics Commission within 12 months of his or her
election or appointment, and at least once every 24 months thereafter.
   (I)   The Ethics Commission shall prepare and submit an annual report to the
Fiscal Court, summarizing the activities, decisions, and advisory opinions of
the Ethics Commission. The annual report may also recommend changes to the text
or administration of this Ethics Code. The annual report must be submitted no
later than July 31 of each fiscal year, covering to the previous fiscal year
ending June 30, and must be filed with the Fiscal Court Clerk.
(Ord. 556, passed passed 3-17-2015)
§ 32.06 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Written complaints against county officers which allege violations of
this chapter may be filed by any person with the Ethics Commission and must be
filed within one year of the time of the occurrence which is the subject of the
complaint, or within one year of the date the occurrence was discovered or
should have been discovered in the exercise of reasonable care. No unsworn
complaint shall be considered by the Ethics Commission. The Ethics Commission
shall have no jurisdiction to consider a complaint against a person unless that
person is employed as a county officer.
      (1)   The complaint shall be filed on a form provided by the Ethics
Commission and shall contain the complaining party’s name, address and contact
information including telephone number, and fax number or e-mail address, if
the complaining party has such contact availability. The complaint shall be
made under oath and signed by the complaining party before a person who is
legally empowered to administer oaths. The Ethics Commission shall have no
jurisdiction in the absence of a sworn complaint. The complaint form provided
by the Ethics Commission shall contain a statement advising of the elements and
penalties under Kentucky law for perjury and for false swearing.
      (2)   The complaint shall contain the complaining party’s sworn statement
as to any known facts, details, or circumstances that support the allegation of
a violation, including all acts or omissions committed by the county officer.
      (3)   The complaining party shall file with the complaint all documents,
recordings, pictures and other information which support the basis for the
ethical violation by the officer.
      (4)   The complaining party shall provide the names and addresses of all
individuals which the complaining party believes have information to support
the allegation of a violation with a summary of what information the
complaining party believes each named individual has to support the alleged
violation.
      (5)   Failure of the complaining party to comply with subsections (A)(1),
(A)(2), (A)(3), and (A)(4) above may result in dismissal of the complaint with
prejudice or dismissal of individual allegations contained in the complaint.
The Ethics Commission may for cause shown allow for an amendment or
supplemental filing by the complaining party, grant additional time for
response by the subject of the complaint, prohibit the introduction of
undisclosed information, or other such order as may be just under the
circumstances.
      (6)   The Ethics Commission may amend a complaint by deleting allegations
that do not constitute a violation of this chapter or by deleting allegations
against persons or entities not covered by this chapter. The Ethics Commission
may amend a complaint to include additional documents, witnesses, or materials
that support the allegation or violation. The Ethics Commission may amend the
complaint to state an allegation of a violation that is apparent from the
complaint or amendments to the complaint.
      (7)   The Ethics Commission may request that the County Attorney contract
independent counsel to represent the complainant at the cost of county
government when the Commission deems such representation necessary to ensure
due process in hearings conducted before the Commission.
   (B)   Any county officer who is the subject of a complaint filed with the
Ethics Commission shall be afforded due process by the Ethics Commission
including, but not limited to, all of the following rights:
      (1)   Within ten days of its filing with the Ethics Commission, a
certified copy of the complaint or any amendment thereto shall be personally
served only on the county officer named in the complaint by handing it to the
county officer, by leaving it at a conspicuous place in his or her office, or
by leaving it at his or her dwelling house or usual place of abode with some
person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein.
      (2)   The county officer shall be given no less than 20 days to respond
to a complaint or any amendment thereto.
      (3)   The county officer shall have the right to legal counsel. The
county officer may retain their own attorney at their own expense. If requested
by the county officer, the Barren County Attorney shall contract independent
counsel to represent the county officer in all proceedings before the Ethics
Commission at the cost of county government.
      (4)   A county officer who is the subject of any proceedings before the
Ethics Commission shall be given not less than ten days’ notice of the date,
time, and place of each proceeding. The notice shall also include a description
of the matters to be heard at such proceedings together with copies of any
motions or other documents to be considered in connection with the noticed
proceedings whether in written or electronic form. Any individual who offers
facts pertaining to the complaint shall testify under oath. Only the party
filing the complaint and those individuals listed on the complaint, or a
supplemental list provided to the officer by the Ethics Commission in
accordance with division (B)(1) above and provided not less than ten days prior
to the proceedings, shall be permitted to testify in support of the violation
by the officer. Only documents filed with the Ethics Commission at the time of
the institution of the complaint, or supplemented not less than ten days prior
to the proceedings, shall be considered by the Ethics Commission. The names and
information of all individuals and documents provided by the complaining party
shall be immediately forwarded to the county officer.
      (5)   Any information whether in documentary or electronic format which
is not furnished to the Ethics Commission or to the county officer in
compliance with division (B)(4) above shall not be used for any purpose in any
proceeding before the Ethics Commission.
      (6)   If any hearing before the Ethics Commission is based upon a
complaint of an individual, not less than ten days before the date of the
hearing, the complainant shall be notified to appear at the time and place of
the hearing by certified mail. If the complaining party does not appear, the
hearing shall be continued to a later date, however no hearing will be held
unless the complainant within ten days of the original hearing dates states in
writing circumstances that compelled complainant’s absence. If the Ethics
Commission does not find that extraordinary circumstances exist to justify the
complaining party’s absence, such complaint may be dismissed.
      (7)   A complaint filed against a county officer shall be given a hearing
as provided by this chapter within 120 days of the complaint being filed,
unless the Commission grants, for good cause shown, extensions of time not to
exceed a total of 60 days. Otherwise the complaint shall be dismissed with
prejudice and not be considered by any hearing authority.
      (8)   The county officer shall be permitted to present to the Ethics
Commission, at any proceeding before the Ethics Commission involving a county
officer, or otherwise, any witnesses or any electronic or documentary evidence
the county officer wishes, subject only to reasonable standards of relevance
and materiality, and may examine or cross-examine all witnesses called to
testify at such a proceeding.
      (9)   Any evidence presented against a county officer at any proceeding
before the Ethics Commission involving a county officer, including witnesses
and electronic or documentary evidence, shall be subject to reasonable
standards of relevance and materiality.
      (10)   No person shall offer evidence at any proceeding before the Ethics
Commission involving a county officer unless the person is first placed under
oath in accordance with law. No person other than counsel for the Ethics
Commission, or the county officer involved in a proceeding before the Ethics
Commission, or the county officer’s counsel, who refuses to be placed under
oath may speak at any such proceeding.
   (C)   An officer found guilty by clear and convincing evidence by the Ethics
Commission of violating the Ethics Code may appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction as provided by law. Any such appeal shall be served on
Legal Counsel for the Ethics Commission.
   (D)   No person shall file a complaint against a county officer with the
Ethics Commission which complaint is false, or made in bad faith, or with
actual malice, or without probable cause. In the event that such a complaint is
filed with the Ethics Commission, it shall be forwarded to the Commonwealth’s
Attorney, together with all electronic and documentary materials related to the
complaint, for action as that official may deem appropriate.
   (E)   All Ethics Commission records, including the complaint and answer and
other records relating to a preliminary inquiry, shall be confidential until a
final determination is made by the Ethics Commission, except:
      (1)   The Ethics Commission may turn over to the Attorney General, the
United States Attorney, Commonwealth’s Attorney, County Attorney, or a law
enforcement agency within the jurisdiction, evidence which may be used in
criminal proceedings;
      (2)   If the complaining party or alleged violator publically discloses
the existence of a preliminary inquiry, the Ethics Commission may publically
confirm the existence of the inquiry and, in its discretion, make public any
documents which were issued to either party;
      (3)   The Ethics Commission shall make disclosure that are required, and
not subject to exemption, under Kentucky’s open records and open meetings laws.
   (F)   Following a hearing on a complaint filed against a county officer
pursuant to the County Code of Ethics, the record of the hearing may remain
open no more than 60 days for the filing of post-hearing pleadings and
documents, including transcripts and recommended orders. Upon showing of good
cause, the Ethics Commission may extend the period for an additional 60 days.
The Ethics Commission shall render a final decision within 30 days following
the closing of the record.
(Ord. 556, passed passed 3-17-2015)
§ 32.07 PROTECTION AGAINST REPRISAL.
   No county officer or any other employee of the county government or employee
of any office covered by this chapter shall subject to reprisal, or directly or
indirectly use, or threaten to use, an official authority or influence, in any
manner whatsoever, which tends to discourage, restrain, depress, dissuade,
deter, prevent, interfere with, coerce, or discriminate against any officer or
employee who in good faith reports, discloses, divulges, or otherwise brings to
the attention of the Ethics Commission, any appointing authority, any law
enforcement agency or its employees, or any other appropriate body or
authority, any facts or information relative to an actual or suspected
violation of this chapter or any law, statute, executive order, administrative
regulation, mandate, rule, or ordinance of the United States, the Commonwealth
of Kentucky, or the county government, or any facts or information relative to
actual or suspected mismanagement, waste, fraud, abuse of authority, or a
substantial and specific danger to public health or safety. No county officer
or county government employee or employee of any office covered by this chapter
shall be required to give notice of any kind prior to making such a report,
disclosure, or divulgence.
   (A)   No person shall be subject to discharge or disciplinary action if such
person elects not to answer inquiries or speak or testify about any complaint
or at any proceeding of the Ethics Commission.
   (B)   No county officer or any other employee of the county government shall
subject to reprisal or discriminate against, or use any official authority or
influence to cause reprisal or discrimination by others against, any person who
supports, aids, or substantiates any officer or employee who makes public any
wrongdoing set forth in division (A).
(Ord. 556, passed passed 3-17-2015)
§ 32.08 TRANSACTIONS WITH SUBORDINATES.
   (A)   No county officer shall compel a subordinate or any person or business
or nonprofit organization over which, in the county officer’s official duties
and responsibilities, he or she exercises supervisory responsibility, to engage
in a financial transaction, including the giving or receiving of loans or
monetary contributions, including charitable contributions.
   (B)   No county officer or candidate seeking an office covered by this
chapter shall compel any subordinate to participate in an election campaign or
ballot referendum, or make a political contribution.
(Ord. 556, passed passed 3-17-2015)
§ 32.09 INAPPROPRIATE POLITICAL SOLICITATION.
   No county officer shall engage in any political activity:
   (A)   With the use of any government funds, equipment supplies, vehicles, or
facilities;
   (B)   Using county government employees while still on duty to work at
meetings where the known purpose or agenda of the meeting is to endorse or
advocate for a political candidacy;
   (C)   Sending e-mails using county government resources which advocate the
candidacy of a person for political office;
   (D)   Creating and/or transferring a list, including, but not limited to, a
paper or electronic-based list, using county government resources for the
purpose of engaging in political activity; and
   (E)   Using county government resources to establish and/or transfer a
website domain name in a county government officeholder’s official capacity for
the purpose of engaging in political activity.
(Ord. 556, passed passed 3-17-2015)
§ 32.10 RECORDS.
   All files, records, and documents maintained by, or in the possession of any
ethics board, agency, or office under the jurisdiction of the county shall be
delivered to the Ethics Commission and thereafter maintained by the Ethics
Commission.
(Ord. 556, passed passed 3-17-2015)
§ 32.99 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.
   (A)   Upon a determination by the Ethics Commission of a violation of any of
the provisions of §§
32.01 through
32.09 by a county officer, the Ethics Commission may impose the following
penalties:
      (1)   For any unintentional violation which has been voluntarily
corrected by the officer prior to any action by the Ethics Commission, a notice
of mootness shall be issued by the Ethics Commission;
      (2)   For any violation which is determined by the Ethics Commission to
have been unintentional or the result of a good faith misinterpretation of the
requirements of §§
32.01 through
32.09, a letter of technical violation or a letter of reprimand shall be issued
by the Ethics Commission as the Ethics Commission deems appropriate;
      (3)   For any intentional violation which is acknowledged and rectified
by the officer prior to any action by the Ethics Commission, a letter of public
reprimand may be issued by the Ethics Commission;
      (4)   For any intentional violation a letter of formal censure may be
issued by the Ethics Commission;
      (5)   For any intentional violation a written recommendation may be made
by the Ethics Commission to the County Judge Executive, or other appointing
authority of removal, training, or remediation.
   (B)   In addition to any of the penalties set forth under division (A), an
intentional violation of §§
32.01 through
32.09 shall be a misdemeanor for which a county officer may be fined by the
Ethics Commission a sum not less than $25 nor more than $500.
   (C)   In addition to any of the penalties set forth under divisions (A) and
(B), an intentional violation of §§
32.01 through
32.09 may:
      (1)   In the case of a non-elected county officer, be grounds for other
sanctions or actions by his or her appointing authority; or
      (2)   In the case of a Fiscal Court member, be grounds for other
sanctions or actions by the Fiscal Court under its rules, or otherwise.
(Ord. 556, passed passed 3-17-2015)
APPENDIX A: RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE COUNTY ETHICS COMMISSION
Sections
   
1   Title and scope
   
2   Definitions
   
3   General provisions
   
4   Operation of the Commission
   
5   Advisory opinions
   
6   Complaints and requests for opinion by an appointing authority
   
7   Conduct of hearing
Section 1 Title and Scope
   1.1   The title of this document is the Rules and Regulations of the Barren
County Ethics Commission pursuant to Barren County Government Ordinance No.
556.
   1.2   These Rules shall govern the procedure for filing and investigating
all complaints; the practice in all hearing of complaints before the Barren
County Ethics Commission; and the procedure for seeking and rendering advisory
opinions.
(Ord. 556, passed 3-17-2015)
Section 2 Definitions
   2.1   Commission: when referred to in these Rules shall mean the Barren
County Ethics Commission.
   2.2   Ordinance: when referred to in these Rules shall mean Barren County
Government Ordinance #556.
   2.3   Day: when referred to in these Rules shall mean calendar day unless
otherwise noted. If the day upon which, or by which, an act is required to be
done is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the act shall be done on the next
work day.
   2.4   Complainant: when referred to in these Rules shall mean the person or
persons filing a complaint pursuant to the Barren County Ethics Ordinance and
these Rules and Regulations.
   2.5   Respondent: when referred to in these Rules shall mean the person
against whom a complaint is filed pursuant to the Ordinance and these Rules and
Regulations.
   2.6   Investigating Officer(s): when referred to in these Rules shall mean
the person or persons designated by the Commission to investigate a complaint.
   2.7   Hearing Officer(s): when referred to in these Rules shall mean the
person or persons designated by the Commission to conduct a hearing concerning
a complaint.
(Ord. 556, passed 3-17-2015)
Section 3 General provisions
   3.1 The address of the Commission shall be:
      Barren County Ethics Commission
      c/o County Judge Executive Office
      117 North Public Square, Suite 3A
      Glasgow, KY 42141
   3.2   All complaints, requests for advisory opinions, and other
correspondence directed to the Commission shall be addressed accordingly and
shall be submitted on the form developed by the Commission for such inquiries,
which is attached as Exhibit A and incorporated by reference.
   3.3   These Rules may be amended by majority vote of the members of the
Commission. Such amendments shall become effective upon approval by the Fiscal
Court.
(Ord. 556, passed 3-17-2015)
Section 4 Operation of the Commission
   4.1   The Commission shall hold regular meetings as scheduled in the
discretion of the Commission. The Commission may call special meetings at the
discretion of the Chair or by a quorum of Commission members.
   4.2   Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
   4.3   The Chair, Vice-Chair, and Secretary of the Commission shall be
determined internally and identified to the County Judge Executive and Barren
Fiscal Court annually.
(Ord. 556, passed 3-17-2015)
Section 5 Advisory opinions
   5.1   A County Officer as defined by the Ordinance may request an advisory
opinion from the Commission concerning acts or activities covered by the
Ordinance. Requests for advisory opinions by individuals other than County
Officers will not be accepted or considered.
   5.2   Such requests will be made in writing on the form designated by the
Commission as Appendix B, § 3 of this chapter.
   5.3   Unless good cause is shown, such requests will be made to the
Commission at least three weeks in advance of the act or activity that is the
subject of the request. This will allow sufficient time for the Commission as a
whole to consider the request.
   5.4   If good cause is shown, the Chair, Vice-Chair, or the Chair’s designee
may accept a request made within three weeks of the act or activity that is the
subject of the request.
   5.5   If good cause is shown within three weeks of the contemplated act or
activity, the Chair and Vice-Chair, in consultation with a third member, shall
consider and render an advisory opinion on behalf of the Commission. In this
event, the advisory opinion shall be disseminated to the Commission no later
than the next regularly scheduled meeting. Decisions rendered under this
Section 5.5 will not be precedent on the Commission unless and until ratified
by the full Commission.
   5.6   All opinions shall be open for public inspection.
   5.7   The Commission shall not entertain requests for advisory opinions from
a person about the conduct of another person, except that County Officers as
defined in the Ordinance may request an advisory opinion regarding the
contemplated act or activity of a person over whom the requesting County
Officer exercises supervisory authority.
(Ord. 556, passed 3-17-2015)
Section 6 Complaints and requests for opinion by an appointing authority
   6.1   A complaint may be filed by any person. Any complaint alleging a
violation of the Ordinance shall be filed by mailing or hand-delivery of the
written complaint to the Commission on the form designated by the Commission,
Exhibit B.
   6.2   An Appointing Authority under the ordinance may request an opinion
concerning whether an act by a County Officer constitutes a violation of the
ordinance. Such a request shall be filed by mailing or hand-delivery of the
written request to the Commission on the form designated by the Commission,
Appendix B. All such requests shall comply with and be governed by the
provisions of Sections 6 and 7 of these regulations.
   6.3   A complaint shall be signed by the Complainant under oath and shall
state the Complainant's full name and address, the name of the person alleged
to have violated the Ordinance, and a detailed description of the facts which
form the basis of the complaint, along with any documentary or other evidence
supporting the Complaint.
   6.4   The Commission shall dismiss without hearing any complaints that
appear to be frivolous on their face, not reasonably comprehensible, filed
principally for the purpose of harassment, or which pertain to a person not
within the definition of persons against whom the Ordinance may be enforced.
The Complainant shall be informed in writing in all cases of the action taken
by the Commission on each complaint.
   6.5   Within ten (10) days following the receipt of a complaint, the
Commission shall forward a copy of the complaint to the person alleged to have
violated the Ordinance.
   6.6   The County Officer, to whom the complaint is directed, shall be given
no less than twenty (20) days of receipt of the complaint, to respond to the
complaint or an amendment thereto.
   6.7   The Commission may commence an independent investigation into the
facts alleged in the complaint using such available investigative resources as
it may consider appropriate. Upon a determination to conduct an investigation,
the Commission shall designate Investigating Officer(s). Such officer(s) may be
members of the Commission.
   6.8   After receipt by the Commission of the response and such other
information it may have received pertaining to the matter, it will meet and
consider the complaint, response and other information. The Commission may
continue its investigation; determine whether the facts alleged constitute a
violation of the Ordinance; or determine whether a Hearing should be held
concerning the allegations in the complaint.
   6.9   If the Commission determines that a Hearing should be held concerning
the allegations stated in the complaint, it will issue a Notice of Hearing to
the County Officer alleged to have violated the Ordinance and to the
Complainant. The Notice of Hearing shall identify the time and place of the
hearing which shall not commence less than ten (10) days following the date of
the Notice of Hearing.
   6.10   If the person alleged to have violated the Ordinance refuses, based
on the right against self-incrimination or any other basis, to file a response
or to testify at a hearing, the Commission shall proceed with its consideration
and/or hearing.
(Ord. 556, passed 3-17-2015)
Section 7 Conduct of hearing
   7.1   Pleadings and Other Documents
      A.   All pleadings and other documents related to a hearing shall be
printed or typewritten on one (1) side of a page; and double spaced.
      B.   If a party is represented by an attorney, the party’s attorney shall
file a notice of appearance with the Commission; and sign pleadings and other
documents filed by that party. Service of pleadings and other documents upon
party’s attorney shall be deemed proper service upon the party.
      C.   Unless a statute or these Rules specifically provide otherwise, a
pleading or other document shall not be required to be verified or accompanied
by affidavit.
      D.   Seven copies of a brief, motion, or other pleading shall be filed
with the Commission.
      E.   For good cause shown, the Commission may permit a party to amend a
pleading or other document.
   7.2   Disclosures
      A.   At least ten (10) days prior to any scheduled hearing, the parties
shall exchange the following information in writing and copies shall be filed
with the Commission:
         (i)   The names and addresses of all persons each party intends to
call as a witness and a brief summary of each witness' expected testimony.
         (ii)   Copies of all records or other documents each party expects to
tender as evidence at the hearing.
      B.   Any physical evidence not easily photocopied or reproduced shall be
available for inspection by the opposing party and counsel at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing.
      C.   Except for a showing of extraordinary circumstances, the Hearing
Officer shall not permit a witness to testify or an exhibit to be admitted into
evidence unless compliance has been made pursuant to this section.
      D.   Any objection to a witness or to the admissibility of any document
or other physical evidence shall be ruled upon by the Hearing Officer.
   7.3   The Hearing
      A.   Hearings shall be conducted by the Hearing Officer(s), who will be
one or more members of the Commission, or a person(s) designated by the
Commission.
      B.   The parties to the hearing shall be the Respondent and the
Investigating Officer(s).
      C.   Upon motion to the Commission, the Complainant may intervene as a
party to the hearing.
      D.   During the hearing process, the parties may be represented by legal
counsel or a representative of their choosing.
      E.   The burden of going forward shall be with the appointed
Investigating Officer.
      F.   All witnesses shall testify under oath, as administered by the
Hearing Officer(s).
      G.   If requested, the Commission shall exclude the witnesses from the
hearing; however, the intervening Complainant and the Respondent shall have the
right to remain at all times.
      H.   The hearing shall proceed in accordance with the rules of
examination applicable in courts of law in the Commonwealth; however, hearsay
evidence shall be admissible unless clearly irrelevant or grossly prejudicial.
      I.   Opening and closing statements shall be allowed by both parties. The
Hearing Officer(s) shall rule upon all motions made during the course of the
hearing.
      J.   A recording or record shall be made of the hearing. A party may
obtain a copy of the transcript upon payment of the appropriate fee.
      K.   The Commission shall stay proceedings for good cause shown upon
motion of the Commonwealth Attorney or the United States Attorney having
jurisdiction in the matter.
   7.4   Decision of the Commission
   A.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer(s) shall prepare
and submit to the entire Commission findings of fact and conclusions of law;
and a recommended order.
   B.   These findings and order shall be reduced to writing and distributed to
members of the Commission within fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of the
hearing. However, if a member of the Commission has served as the Investigating
Officer, that member shall not vote on the Commission’s final decision.
   C.   The Commission may:
      (i)   Adopt the findings of fact, conclusions of law, and recommended
order in whole or in part;
      (ii)   Issue its own findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order,
including, if appropriate, any penalty; or
      (iii)   Take other action it deems necessary in order to reach a
decision.
   D.   A decision of the Commission shall be in writing; and contain a
statement of its findings of fact; conclusions of law, and order, including
penalty, if any. The decision shall be mailed to all parties.
   E.   All deliberations under this Section will be held confidentially in
executive session.
(Ord. 556, passed 3-17-2015)
APPENDIX B: FORMS
Section
   
1   Barren County Government Financial Disclosure Statement
   
2   Barren County Ethics Commission Complaint Against County Officer
   
3   Barren County Ethics Commission Request for Advisory Opinion
§ 1 BARREN COUNTY GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT.
County Officer’s Name:
                                                                                                                                                                               
               Last                  First                  Middle
Current Business/Government/Address/Phone Number:
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                               
Current Home Address:
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                               
Officer’s Title or Elected Office Sought:
                                                                                      
Occupation of Officer:
                                                                                                                    
Occupation of Officer’s Spouse:
                                                                                                    
   I.   BUSINESS INTERESTS
      If you or any member of your family (see definition of family in §
32.01), have any interest in any organization doing business with county
government or any agency or officer of County Government and
      1.   You or your family member have an interest in the organization that
is greater than 5% of the total ownership OR has a fair market value of $10,000
or more;
      2.   You or your family member received more than $5,000 compensation
from the organization in the preceding calendar year. (This does not include
compensation from ownership of, OR income derived from publicly traded
securities unless you OR your family member own more than 5% of the value of
the publicly traded securities.)
 
Business Organization Name  Address  Phone Number
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
 
   II.   REAL PROPERTY INTERESTS (Attach additional sheet(s), if necessary)
   List below the location and zoning designation of all real property within
Barren County, other than your primary residence, in which you or any member of
your family had an interest of $10,000 or more during the preceding calendar
year AND which was the subject of:
   Check appropriate box:
   ( )   Any condemnation proceeding.
   ( )   Any planning and zoning proceeding.
   ( )   Any other administrative or court proceeding wherein Barren County OR
any of its agencies is an interested party.
   ________________________________________________________________________________
   Property Location
                                                                                                                                                   
   Zoning Designation                     Identify Proceeding
   III. PRIVATE INTEREST IN PENDING PUBLIC ACTION
   Identify any contract with or matter pending before any Barren County
Government in which you or any member of your family has any private financial
interest directly or indirectly:
   NOTICE
   This financial disclosure statement must be filed annually by February 1
AND/OR within twenty-one (21) days of initial appointment/employment of
“Government Officers”. It must be amended and filed within ten (10) days of a
change in circumstances that makes the previously filed statement inaccurate or
incomplete.
   1.   Section 523.030 of the Kentucky Revised Statutes provides that “A
person is guilty of perjury in the second degree when he makes a material false
statement which he does not believe in a subscribed written instrument for
which an oath is required or authorized by law with the intent to mislead a
public servant in the performance of his official functions. Perjury in the
second degree is a Class A Misdemeanor.”
   2.   Upon receipt by the Ethics Commission, all Financial Disclosure
Statements shall be public records.
   3.   Nothing in this statement shall be construed to require any officer to
disclose any specific dollar amounts.
   4.   After written notice of failure to timely file a Financial Disclosure
Statement, any officer who fails to file within ten (10) business days of such
notice may be fined by the Ethics Commission a sum not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500).
   I,                                                                    (Print
Name), being duly sworn, do solemnly swear that all the information presented
herein is true and correct to the best of my knowledge under the pains and
penalties of perjury.
                                                                                                                                             
Signature                                 Date
STATE OF KENTUCKY
COUNTY OF BARREN
Subscribed and sworn to before me this the                 day of
                                     201    .
                                                                                              
                                 Notary Public
                                 My Commission Expires:
                         
(Ord. 556, passed passed 3-17-2015)
§ 2   BARREN COUNTY ETHICS COMMISSION COMPLAINT AGAINST COUNTY OFFICER.
   1.   Date of Complaint:
                                                                                                              
   2.   Name of Complainant:
                                                                                                         
   3.   Complainant Contact Information:
   Address:
                                                                                                                             
   Telephone:                                                 Fax:
                                                       
   Email:
                                                                                                                                
   4.   I make this complaint under oath against
                                                                             
(County Officer) who is
                                                                                 
(Describe Officer’s Title or Job     Description).
   I believe
                                                                         
(County Officer) has violated the County Ethics Ordinance,
   Section(s)
                                                                                    .
   (Attach copies of pertinent documents, dates, facts, and circumstances)
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                             
   5.   I agree to cooperate with persons assigned to investigate this
complaint.
            Yes              No
   6.   I am willing to appear and testify, if a public hearing is conducted on
these charges.
            Yes              No
   7.   The facts in this complaint are true to the best of my knowledge and
belief.
            Yes              No
   8.   I understand pursuant to KRS 523.010 et seq. a false statement made
under oath and without belief could affect the outcome of any proceeding before
the Ethics commission and may subject me to penalties including fines of up to
$500 or 12 (twelve) months imprisonment.
   VERIFICATION
Complainant
I,                                                            (the
complainant), having been duly sworn, declare under oath that the above is true
to the best of my knowledge.
                                                                                                          
                              Signature
Dated this            day of                                 , 20        .
STATE OF                                        
COUNTY OF                                    
Subscribed and sworn to before me this            day of
                                             , 20         .
                                                                                                          
                              Notary Public
                              My Commission Expires:
                                        
(Ord. 556, passed passed 3-17-2015)
§ 3   BARREN COUNTY ETHICS COMMISSION REQUEST FOR ADVISORY OPINION.
Name:
                                                                           Date:
                                                 
Job Title/Office Held or Job Description:
                                                                                      
Check One:
               I am a County Officer requesting an opinion on an anticipated
action or course of conduct.
               I am an Appointing Authority requesting an opinion on an act or
course of conduct of a County Officer.
Phone Number:                                             Email:
                                                                  
Opinion Requested
1)   Which section(s) of the Ethics Ordinance do you believe will be or has
been violated by the questioned action?
                                                                                                                                    
2)   Describe the activity or circumstance that lead you to believe this action
may result in a violation of the Ethics Ordinance. (Attach any documents
helpful to explain or demonstrate the situation.)
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                    
3)   If you need this opinion before three (3) weeks from the date of this
request, please give the date needed and explain why.
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                   
   Name (Print)                     Signature
(Ord. 556, passed passed 3-17-2015)
CHAPTER 33: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Classification and pay plan and policies and procedures
   
33.02   Selection procedures
   
33.03   Personnel and pay rate changes
Policies and Procedures
   
33.15   Affirmative action
   
33.16   Sexual harassment policy
   
33.17   Workplace violence policy
   
33.18   Drug-free workplace
   
33.19   Drivers’ motor vehicle records
   
33.20   Protection of personal information
   
33.21   Credit card policy
 
   
33.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Code of Ethics, see
Chapter 32
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 CLASSIFICATION AND PAY PLAN AND POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Judge/Executive shall be responsible for the development of a
classification and pay plan and policies procedures as approved by the County
Fiscal Court.
   (B)   All department heads shall keep on file, a written description of each
job in his or her department, including, but not limited to, characteristics of
the position; examples of duties, training, and experience needed; special
knowledge, skills, or abilities needed; and physical requirements and
environmental conditions. Each department head shall submit all job
descriptions to the County Judge/Executive to keep on file in his or her office
and to be adopted as part of this section. For job descriptions, see 
Chapter 32 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)    Records of employee work activity shall be maintained by the
supervisor or a delegated employee of each department or office of the county.
Absence from work shall be indicated on each employee’s time card (or
electronic equivalent) along with the type of leave, if any, the employee is
entitled to. If an employee is absent because of his or her own sickness, or
sickness of immediate family, and has accumulated leave, eight should be
indicated on his or her paper time card in the total hours worked column as 8s.
In a like manner leave, holiday or military time should be indicated as 8l, 8h,
and 8m respectively. If paid leave is not deserved, the space shall be left
blank. Electronic time cards will require vendor-specific methods of requesting
paid time off. The supervisor and employee shall both certify by their
signatures on each time card (or electronic equivalent) the correctness of time
shown. Cumulative records will also be maintained by the Treasurer’s Office,
based on the certified time cards furnished to his or her office. No employee
will be paid for time not deserved. Any attempt to falsify time records shall
be cause for discipline.
   (D)   The following are various types of employment practiced by the county.
Each type may be accorded different benefits.
      (1)   Salaried employee. One who is employed by the county on a salary
basis as opposed to an hourly wage, contract, fee, or other basis. Salaried
employees will be expected to work a minimum number of hours as defined by
their position job description;
      (2)   Part-time employee. One who is employed to work, on average, 23
hours or less per week at an hourly or per-diem rate of compensation. If an
employee must be hired to work 24 to 34 hours per week, he or she will be
considered part-time except in regard to the County Employees Retirement System
in which he or she must participate. Part-time employees shall be considered
at-will employees, and may be discharged by a supervisor, without cause, at any
time. Appeal of such action shall not be granted under any circumstances;
      (3)   Full-time employee. One who is employed to work 34 to 40 hours per
week at an hourly rate. A time card (or electronic equivalent) must reflect
whatever leave is used to make up time not worked up to 34 hours. However, in
special circumstances, when all paid leave is used up, an employee may retain
full-time status by working at least 28 hours per week with approval of the
County Judge/Executive; or
      (4)   Temporary employee. One who is employed for a limited period of
time, who may be discharged by a supervisor at any time, or without cause.
Appeal shall not be granted. This includes seasonal employees.
   (E)   Leave for all regular employees of the county will be as follows:
      (1)   Eight hours paid leave is earned per calendar month worked. Said
days may be taken after the end of the calendar month that they are earned,
upon approval of the supervisor. There shall be no limit to the accumulation of
leave time. A supervisor may refuse to grant an employee leave at a particular
time should the employee fail to request the leave two weeks in advance, or if
the work of the department would be seriously interrupted. Leave may be taken a
day at a time as needed or during a continuous period. Regular employees of
Barren County Fiscal Court who leave employment in good standing after December
31, 1995, and have had five or more years of experience shall have an
additional amount not exceeding statutory limits, added to their last year’s
salary as defined by the Barren County Administrative Code. This amount shall
be calculated at 30% of the value of each unused accumulated leave and sick
leave day computed from the employee’s current salary schedule. Retroactive to
January 1, 1997, in the case of employee death, 100% of earned, unused leave
and sick leave will be paid to said employee’s estate.
      (2)   An employee hired on or before the seventh of the month receives
one leave day for that month. If hired between the seventh and the twenty-
third, he or she will receive one-half day leave for that month. No time will
be accumulated if he or she is hired after the twenty-third.
      (3)   Part-time and temporary employees shall not earn leave time. Part-
time or temporary employees who are advanced to full-time employment shall
accumulate leave retroactive to the time of temporary employment not to exceed
three days if full-time hours were worked during the temporary period.
      (4)   Should an employee depart from his or her job on or prior to the
seventh of a calendar month, he or she shall not be credited with any leave for
that month; departing on the eighth of a calendar month of any day prior to and
including the fifteenth of that month, shall be credited with one- half day
leave; one departing on the sixteenth of a calendar month or any day thereafter
shall be credited with one full day leave.
      (5)   (a)   Sick leave shall be granted at eight hours for each month of
full-time employment. Sick leave shall be used for sickness of employee or
member of employee’s immediate family only. Certification shall be signed by
the employee and his or her supervisor that leave was taken for sickness of the
employee or member of employee’s immediate family.
         (b)   Use of sick leave for any purpose other than sick leave shall be
grounds for immediate suspension from the job without pay for the number of
days of abused sick leave and loss of all accumulated sick leave. Any
subsequent violation shall be grounds for immediate dismissal without appeal.
There shall be no limit to the accumulation of sick leave time. This division
(E)(5) shall become effective retroactive to January 1, 1996.
         (c)   Sick leave days may be only transferred between employees within
the same department, if employees agree to the transfer in writing and upon
approval of supervisor.
   (F)    Leave with pay may be authorized in order that employees may serve
required jury duty, military leave, or attend meetings of beneficial nature to
the county. The employee shall receive regular pay for an eight-hour day for
each day absent due to the circumstances named above in addition to the pay
received from the Court of Justice or Armed Forces for a period not to exceed
14 days (days not required to be consecutive). The supervisor and County Judge/
Executive must approve such leave in advance.
      (1)   A maximum of two working hours shall be granted to an employee who
requests it for time to vote.
      (2)   An employee shall be granted up to three paid working days off in
case of death in the immediate family. Immediate family shall include parents,
grandparents, spouse, brothers, sisters, children, grandchildren, step-family,
foster family, aunts, uncles, nieces, nephews, and immediate in- laws. Pay for
each day of bereavement leave taken will be made at the employee’s current rate
of pay for a scheduled day’s work, not to exceed the hours for which the
employee is normally scheduled to work, or his or her average hours worked per
day (normal work week divided by five), whichever is greater. Any holidays or
days of administrative closing occurring during this time will be counted as
part of the bereavement leave and recorded as holiday(s) and/or day(s) of
administrative closing pay. If additional time off is needed, the employee may
request the use of sick time, accrued vacation, or leave without pay.
Bereavement leave time shall be included in the calculation of overtime.
   (G)   If an employee is hired 30 days or less after employment has been
terminated, he or she may be reinstated and his or her absence will be treated
as unpaid leave. The Fiscal Court will continue paying the normal contribution
to benefits during said leave time.
   (H)   (1)   All employees of the county who work full-time hours during the
pay period including a holiday may be absent from duty with full pay on the
following holidays: The following holiday schedule will be adjusted accordingly
to match the State of Kentucky’s calendar year dates.
         (a)   New Year’s Day: full day (eight hours);
         (b)   Martin Luther King Jr. Day: full day (eight hours);
         (c)   President’s Day: full day (eight hours);
         (d)   Good Friday: one half day (four hours);
         (e)   Memorial Day: full day (eight hours);
         (f)   Juneteenth: full day (eight hours);
         (g)   Independence Day: full day (eight hours);
         (h)   Labor Day: full day (eight hours);
         (i)   Veteran’s Day: full day (eight hours);
         (j)   Thanksgiving Day: full day (eight hours);
         (k)   Day after Thanksgiving: full day (eight hours);
         (l)   Christmas Eve: full day (eight hours);
         (m)   Christmas Day: full day (eight hours);
         (n)   New Years Eve; full day (eight hours); and
         (o)   New Years Day; full day (eight hours).
      (2)    Employees whose attendance is required at work on the days the
county observes for holidays shall receive double the corresponding number of
holiday hours in addition to the hours actually worked. When a holiday falls on
an employee’s regular day off, he or she shall be allowed equivalent time off
or the corresponding number of hours holiday pay. Holiday hours for employees
not working on the holiday shall not be included in the tabulation of overtime.
A holiday shall not count as a leave or sick leave day.
      (3)   These employees deemed to be non-exempt salary employees, under the
provisions of the federal and state wage and hours laws, may accrue
compensatory time at a rate of one and one-half times for work performed over
and above the hours worked in a normal workweek, up to a maximum of 160 hours.
Compensatory time accrued beyond these limits shall be forfeited.
         (a)   Law enforcement, fire protection, and emergency response
personnel, and Road Department personnel may accrue up to 480 hours of comp
time.
         (b)   An employee must be permitted to use comp time on the date
requested unless doing so would "unduly disrupt" the operations of the agency.
   (I)   Normally, wage earners will be required to work an eight-hour day and
a five-day week. A lunch break will be allowed without compensation.
Corrections Center personnel, Deputy Sheriffs, Parks and Recreation personnel,
and Road Department personnel will work on a schedule determined to be best
suited to the particular situation by the supervisor and approved by the County
Judge/Executive.
   (J)   When it is necessary for a person to be late or absent from work, he
or she shall notify his or her immediate supervisor of his or her whereabouts
and approximate time of return to work. An employee’s absence from work for
three consecutive work days without notification is considered a resignation
unless circumstances are such that it is impossible to give notice. Lateness or
absenteeism without just cause is sufficient reason for discipline in the way
of suspension or termination as determined by the supervisor.
   (K)   Each new employee will be on a temporary period for three months
following his or her date of employment. A person on a temporary period as a
new employee shall not be entitled to any grievance appeal. Temporary employees
shall not accumulate leave or sick leave time until their temporary period is
over, at which time their leave and sick leave time will be retroactive to the
date they were first employed.
   (L)   The amount paid an employee will be suggested by the supervisor, in
writing, and submitted by the County Judge/Executive to the Fiscal Court.
Salary level will depend on the employee’s level of education, skill required
by the job, previous experience, and quality of work performed.
   (M)    Necessary overtime work must be authorized by supervisors. Personnel
will be compensated by equivalent time off during the work week or by payment
during the work week or by payment of time and one-half for all hours worked
over 40 hours per week. The work week for all county offices will be the
calendar week.
   (N)   County employees will be covered by worker’s compensation insurance.
Any employee injured on the job will receive regular pay for the day of the
injury. Sick leave may be used for the days he or she is away from work. Once
sick leave is exhausted, leave time may be used.
   (O)   (1)   Full-time county employees may elect to participate in a
flexible benefits plan. The county will pay, as a pre-tax benefit under I.R.C.
§ 125, a specific dollar benefit via a cafeteria plan for the benefit of the
employee. The Fiscal Court shall, by budget resolution, set the monthly amount
on or before July 1 of each year. The Fiscal Court will continue paying the
normal contribution to the benefits package for temporarily laid-off employees
and employees on sick leave for a period not to exceed six months.
      (2)   An employee will be eligible for health insurance and any other
benefits 60 days after the date of employment. However, elected officials, the
County Road Supervisor, and the County Treasurer will be eligible for all
benefits immediately upon election or appointment.
      (3)   All full-time employees must participate in the county’s health
insurance group with the following exceptions:
         (a)   They are an elected official;
         (b)   They have proof of spousal group coverage;
         (c)   They have proof of coverage with the military;
         (d)   They have proof of coverage with a retirement plan; or
         (e)   They had non-group coverage prior to June 1, 2006.
   (P)   Full-time employees of the county must participate in the County
Employees Retirement System. Contributions will be deducted from wages and
placed in the Retirement Fund. Upon termination from county employment,
contributions may be withdrawn by an employee.
   (Q)   (1)   (a)   A supervisor may for good cause discipline an employee.
         (b)   Methods of discipline shall include, but not be limited to:
            1.   Reprimand;
            2.   Suspension;
            3.   Demotion; or
            4.   Dismissal.
         (c)   The County Judge/Executive may intervene on behalf of the county
in cases where the supervisor has no knowledge of the infraction or does not
act in good faith.
      (2)   (a)    A supervisor may suspend an employee without pay for a
period not to exceed two weeks or 80 hours for disciplinary reasons. Notice of
suspension and reason for suspension shall be provided to the employee and to
the County Judge/Executive.
         (b)   A supervisor may demote an employee to a lower salary or wage, a
temporary or part-time position, and/or a less demanding position. Notice of
demotion shall be provided to the employee and to the County Judge/Executive.
         (c)   A supervisor may dismiss an employee for a severe infraction of
county policy, incompetence, or other undesirable behavior. Notice, along with
reasons for said action, shall be submitted to the County Judge/Executive for
approval or disapproval by County Fiscal Court.
         (d)   Employees must sign a witnessed statement upon their termination
giving the reason for their termination. This statement will be kept in the
Treasurer’s office.
      (3)   A supervisor may demote an employee to a lower salary or wage, a
temporary or part-time position, and/or a less demanding position. Notice of
demotion shall be provided to the County Judge/Executive. Upon written request
of the affected employee, the County Judge/Executive may reverse the
supervisor’s decision. Further appeal may be granted, upon written request by
the affected employee, before County Fiscal Court.
   (R)   Full-time salaried and full-time hourly employees shall be eligible
for all leave benefits. Elected officials are exempt. Elected officials as well
as full-time salaried and full-time hourly employees are eligible for
participation in the health insurance and flexible benefits plans.
   (S)   All employees of the County Fiscal Court will be reimbursed at a rate
not to exceed $45 daily for meals consumed during the course of out of town
travel or training required by their employment. This amount includes taxes and
tips and will exclude alcoholic beverages. Lodging for the employee only will
be reimbursed dollar for dollar excluding entertainment charges and personal
telephone calls. Parking fees shall also be reimbursed dollar for dollar.
Requests for reimbursement shall be accompanied by proper receipts signed by
the employee and supervisor.
   (T)   Every male who is at least 18 years old, but has not yet attained the
age of 26 years old, seeking employment with the County of Barren shall submit
documentation evidencing his registration or exception from registration with
the Federal Selective Service System.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995; Ord. 258, passed 2-21-1996; Ord. 326, passed 9-8-
1999; Ord. 270, passed 6-26-1996; Ord. 284, passed 5-6-1997; Ord. 290, passed
8-19-1997; Ord. 355, passed 12-5-2000; Ord. 357, passed 1-3-2001; Ord. 411,
passed 6-22-2004; Ord. 429, passed 7-19-2005; Ord. 442, passed 6-20-2006; Ord.
446, passed 9-6-2006; Ord. 460, passed 7-3-2007; Ord. 461, passed 7-3-2007;
Ord. 585, passed 11-15- 2016; Ord. 592, passed 6-20-2017; Ord. 644, passed 7-
21-2020; Ord. 698, passed 6-27-2025)
§ 33.02 SELECTION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Whenever practicable, the public shall be notified of any vacancy to
be filled by publication in the newspaper of the largest general circulation in
the county.
   (B)   All current county employees shall be notified at work of any vacancy
and positions shall be filled by promotion of such employees whenever
practicable.
   (C)   Each applicant shall fill out and sign a standard written job
application form and each application shall be kept for one year.
   (D)   Each qualified applicant shall be interviewed by the person who is to
be the immediate supervisor of such employee.
   (E)   Each elected official shall select his or her employees in his or her
sole discretion pursuant to the provisions of the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   (F)   EEO information shall be obtained from the applicant but shall not be
used to exclude any person from employment.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
§ 33.03 PERSONNEL AND PAY RATE CHANGES.
   (A)   (1)   The County Treasurer and/or Payroll Clerk are hereby authorized
to make changes in personnel and pay rate within existing budget appropriations
as directed by the County Judge/Executive, County Clerk, Sheriff, and Jailer.
      (2)   The Jailer, however, may not add to the number of Deputy positions
until directed by Fiscal Court.
   (B)   The information regarding the personnel and/or pay rate changes will
be filed with the Court at the next regular meeting following said changes. A
copy shall be placed in the Fiscal Court order book.
   (C)   The following data is required for pay rate changes:
      (1)   Employee name or position identification;
      (2)   New rate of pay; and
      (3)   Effective date of change.
   (D)   The following data is required for new employees:
      (1)   Employee name;
      (2)   Rate of pay;
      (3)   Job title; and
      (4)   Effective date of hire.
(Ord. 315, passed 4-27-1999)
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
§ 33.15 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.
   (A)   The County Judge/Executive may issue such orders by whatever name
denominated, as are reasonably necessary and proper to implement a plan of
affirmative action.
   (B)   The County Judge/Executive may maintain in a current status such
information as is necessary to monitor the progress of any affirmative action
plan adopted by the Fiscal Court.
   (C)   The County Judge/Executive may require progress reports showing
personnel actions from each agency and office of the county and may prepare a
consolidated report on equal employment opportunity progress on all county
employees for submission to the Fiscal Court.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
§ 33.16 SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY.
   (A)   It is the policy of the County Fiscal Court that sexual harassment of
employees is prohibited. The County Fiscal Court believes that every employee
has the right to a work environment free from sexual harassment. Any employee
found to have acted in violation of this policy will be subject to appropriate
disciplinary action, which may include termination.
   (B)   SEXUAL HARASSMENT includes unwelcome sexual advances, requests for
sexual favors, sexually motivated physical contact, or other verbal or physical
conduct or communication of a sexual nature when:
      (1)   Submission to that conduct or communication is made a term or
condition, either explicitly or implicitly, of an individual’s employment;
      (2)   Submission to or rejection of that conduct or communication by an
individual is used as a factor in decisions affecting that individual’s
employment;
      (3)   Conduct or communication has the purpose or effect of substantially
interfering with an individual’s employment or creates an intimidating,
hostile, or offensive work environment, and the employer knows or should know
of the existence of the harassment and fails to take timely and appropriate
action; or
      (4)   Such conduct is based on sex and would have not occurred but for
the sex of the victim even though it is not clearly sexual in nature or an
explicit sexual advance.
   (C)   (1)   Any claims of sexual harassment should be reported to the
employee’s supervisor, the County Judge/Executive, or anyone else in a position
of authority at the County Fiscal Court. Any claims of sexual harassment or
violations of the sexual harassment policy will be reported to and investigated
by the County Judge/Executive, or his or her designee.
      (2)   If the facts appear to support the allegations of sexual harassment
or violation of this policy, disciplinary action, up to and including
termination, may result. All reports of harassment will be handled as
confidentially as possible by the County Fiscal Court.
      (3)   This policy applies to all county personnel while performing their
duties as employees within or outside the workplace.
(Ord. 313, passed 4-6-1999)
§ 33.17 WORKPLACE VIOLENCE POLICY.
   The Fiscal Court shall furnish to each county employee employment and a
place of employment that are free from recognized hazards that are causing or
are likely to cause death or serious harm to county employees.
(Ord. 351, passed 9-19-2000)
§ 33.18 DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE.
   (A)   Purpose. To establish a drug-free workplace program which will be in
compliance with 803 KAR 25.280, the governing administrative service regulation
for the commonwealth’s drug-free workplace certification program in the
Commonwealth Department of Worker’s Claims.
   (B)   Scope. This section is applicable to all regular and part-time
employees of the County Fiscal Court.
   (C)   Policy statement.
      (1)   The County Fiscal Court is committed to providing a safe work
environment and to fostering the well-being and health of its employees as well
as all citizens of the county.
      (2)   Commitment is jeopardized when any employee uses alcohol or illegal
drugs on the job, comes to work under their influence, or possesses,
distributes, or sells drugs in the workplace. The goal of this section is to
balance respect for individual employees with the need to maintain a safe,
productive, and drug-free work environment; while helping to ensure the safety
of all citizens of the county and/or those people who may make use of the
county’s facilities. The intent of the policy is to offer assistance to those
who need it, while providing clear notice that the unlawful manufacture,
distribution, dispensation, possession, or use of alcohol or a controlled or
illicit drug in the workplace is incompatible with employment with the County
Fiscal Court.
      (3)   Therefore, the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation,
possession, or use of alcohol or a controlled or illicit drug is prohibited in
the workplace.
      (4)   Violations of this section are subject to disciplinary action up to
and including termination of employment.
   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirit of wine,
produced from any source or process.
      CONSORTIUM. An entity, which may involve varied pools of employers and
their employees, established to provide cost-effective services to employers to
help the employers comply with drug-free workplace program requirements, and
may provide employer education, supervisor training, and drug and alcohol
testing at a reduced cost to the employers who choose to participate.
      DRUG. A controlled substance as defined in KRS 218A.010(6) and as
established in 802 KAR Ch. 55, including:
         (a)   Amphetamines;
         (b)   Cannabanoids/THC;
         (c)   Cocaine;
         (d)   Opiates;
         (e)   Phencyclidine (PCP);
         (f)   Benzodiazepines;
         (g)   Propoxyphene;
         (h)   Methaqualone;
         (i)   Methadone;
         (j)   Barbiturates;
         (j)   Synthetic narcotics;
         (k)   Illicit substances; and
         (l)   Volatile substances as defined in KRS 217.900(1), including any
glue, cement, or paint or other substance containing a solvent or chemical
having the property of releasing toxic vapors or fumes which when inhaled may
cause a condition of intoxication, inebriation, stupefaction, dulling of the
brain or nervous system, or distortion or disturbance of the auditory, visual,
or mental processes.
      DRUG OR ALCOHOL REHABILITATION PROGRAM. A service provider that provides
confidential, timely, and expert identification, assessment, treatment, and
resolution of employee drug or alcohol abuse.
      DRUG TEST or TEST. A chemical, biological, or physical instrumental
analysis administered by a qualified laboratory for the purpose of determining
the presence or absence of a drug or its metabolites or alcohol pursuant to
standards, procedures, and protocols established by the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services’ Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA).
      EMPLOYEE. Any person who works for salary, wages, or other remuneration
for the County Fiscal Court.
      EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM. An established program providing:
         (a)   Professional assessment of employee personal concerns;
         (b)   Confidential and timely services to identify employee alcohol or
drug abuse;
         (c)   Referral of employees for appropriate diagnosis, treatment, and
assistance with regard to employee alcohol or substance abuse; and
         (d)   Follow-up services for employees who participate in a drug or
alcohol rehabilitation program and are recommended for monitoring after
returning to work.
      EMPLOYER. The County Fiscal Court.
      ILLICIT SUBSTANCE. As defined in KRS 351.010(m), means a prescription
drug used illegally or in excess of therapeutic levels and also means an
illegal drug.
      MEDICAL REVIEW OFFICER or MRO. A licensed physician with knowledge of
substance abuse disorders, laboratory testing, chain of custody, collection
procedures, and the ability to verify positive, confirmed test results. The MRO
shall possess the necessary medical training to interpret and evaluate a
positive test result in relation to the person’s medical history or any other
relevant biomedical information.
      QUALIFIED LABORATORY. A laboratory certified in accordance with the
National Laboratory Certification Program (NLCP), by the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services’ Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA).
      REASONABLE SUSPICION TESTING. Drug or alcohol testing that meets the
requirements in division (G) below.
      SUBSTANCE. Drugs or alcohol.
   (E)   Employee/supervisor alcohol and substance abuse education and
awareness training.
      (1)   All employees, including supervisors, shall receive at least one
hour of initial alcohol and substance abuse education and awareness training.
Thereafter, all employees shall receive at least 30 minutes of refresher
training each year. All training shall include, at a minimum, information
concerning:
         (a)   The dangers of alcohol and drug abuse in the workplace;
         (b)   The employer’s policy of maintaining a drug-free workplace;
         (c)   The effects of alcohol and drug use on an individual’s health,
work, and personal life;
         (d)   The disease of alcohol or drug addiction;
         (e)   Signs and symptoms of an alcohol or drug problem;
         (f)   Alcohol and drug testing;
         (g)   The role of coworkers and supervisors in addressing alcohol or
drug abuse;
         (h)   Available drug counseling, rehabilitation, and employee
assistance programs;
         (i)   Referrals to an employee assistance program; and
         (j)   Penalties for violation of the drug-free workplace policy.
      (2)   All supervisors shall receive, in addition to the training
specified in division (A) above, at least 30 minutes each year of alcohol and
substance abuse education and awareness training which shall include, at a
minimum, information on:
         (a)   Recognizing the signs of employee alcohol or substance abuse;
         (b)   How to document signs or employee alcohol or substance abuse;
         (c)   How to refer employees to an employee assistance program or
other alcohol or substance abuse treatment program; and
         (d)   Legal and practical aspects of reasonable suspicion testing for
the presence of drugs and alcohol.
      (3)   Written materials explaining the policies and procedures of the
drug-free workplace program shall be provided to employees as part of the
training program.
      (4)   The employer shall annually verify that the frequency and duration
of each employee and supervisor training session meets the requirements of this
section.
      (5)   The employer shall annually verify that all employees have
participated in the required alcohol and substance abuse education and
awareness training program.
   (F)   Breath, alcohol, and urine testing.
      (1)   Job applicants and employees shall be required to submit for breath
alcohol testing at the following times:
         (a)   After conditional offer of employment;
         (b)   Upon reasonable suspicion of prohibited alcohol use;
         (c)   Following an accident on the premises of the employer or in the
course of employment on behalf of the employer that results in an injury
requiring off-site medical attention; and
         (d)   At follow-up testing at least once per quarter for one year
after the employee’s successful completion of an employee assistance program
for alcohol-related problems, or an alcohol rehabilitation program, or as
recommended by the person administering the alcohol rehabilitation program.
      (2)   Job applicants and employees shall be required to submit for urine
drug testing at the following times:
         (a)   After conditional offer of employment;
         (b)   After being selected using a statistically valid, unannounced
random method;
         (c)   Upon reasonable suspicion of prohibited drug use;
         (d)   At follow-up testing at least once per quarter for one year
after the employee’s successful completion of an employee assistance program
for drug-related problems, or a drug rehabilitation program, or recommended by
the person administering the drug rehabilitation program; and
         (e)   Following an accident on the premises of the employer or in the
course of employment for the employer that results in an injury requiring off-
site medical attention.
   (G)   Reasonable suspicion training. Reasonable suspicion testing shall be
based on a belief that an employee is using or has used drugs or alcohol in
violation of the employer’s drug-free workplace policy or drawn from specific
objective and articulable facts and reasonable inferences drawn from those
facts in light of experience, training, or education. Objective criteria
include:
      (1)   While at work, direct observation of drug or alcohol use or of the
physical symptoms or manifestations of being under the influence of a drug or
alcohol;
      (2)   While at work, abnormal conduct, erratic behavior, or a significant
deterioration in work performance;
      (3)   A report of drug or alcohol use provided by a reliable and credible
source;
      (4)   Evidence that an employee has tampered with a drug or alcohol test
during employment with the current employer;
      (5)   Information that an employee has caused, contributed to, or has
been involved in an accident while at work; or
      (6)   Evidence that an employee has used, possessed, sold, solicited, or
transferred illegal or illicit drugs or used alcohol while on the employer’s
premises or while operating the employer’s vehicle, machinery, or equipment.
   (H)   Testing procedures.
      (1)   All drug and alcohol testing in the drug-free workplace program
shall be conducted in accordance with applicable federal and state
requirements, including requirements for participation in the drug-free
workplace program set forth in 803 KAR 25.280.
      (2)   The collection of samples and administration of drug and alcohol
tests shall follow all standards, procedures, and protocols set forth by the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Administration (SAMHSA).
      (3)   Test results will be obtained by a qualified laboratory as defined
in division (D) above.
      (4)   The alcohol and drug testing program shall include the following
minimum testing protocol.
         (a)   A breath alcohol concentration of .04 shall be the maximum
acceptance level of concentration.
         (b)   An 11-panel urine test that shall include testing for the
following substances:
            1.   Amphetamines;
            2.   Cannabanoids/THC;
            3.   Cocaine;
            4.   Opiates;
            5.   Phencyclidine (PCP);
            6.   Benzodiazepines;
            7.   Propoxyphene;
            8.   Methaqualone;
            9.   Methadone;
            10.   Barbiturates; and
            11.   Synthetic narcotics.
   (I)   Medical review officer.
      (1)   All test results shall be submitted for medical review by the
medical review officer (MRO), who shall consider the medical history of the job
applicant or employee, as well as other relevant biomedical information.
      (2)   If there is a positive test result, the job applicant or employee
shall be given an opportunity to report to the MRO the use of any prescription
or over-the-counter medication.
      (3)   If the MRO determines there is a legitimate medical explanation for
a positive test result, the MRO may certify that the test result does not
indicate the unauthorized use of alcohol or drugs.
      (4)   If the MRO determines, after appropriate review, there is not a
medical explanation for the positive test result other than the unauthorized
use of alcohol or drugs, the MRO shall refer the individual tested to an
employee assistance program or to a personnel or administrative officer for
further proceedings in accordance with the employer’s drug-free workplace
program.
      (5)   Determinations concerning the use of alcohol or a controlled or
illicit substance shall comply with all procedures outlined in the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services’ Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration (SAMHSA) “Medical Review Officer Manual for Federal
Agency Workplace Drug Testing Programs”.
   (J)   Employee assistance program.
      (1)   The drug-free workplace program shall include an employee
assistance program (EAP) for employees and supervisory personnel as defined in
division (D) above.
      (2)   The employee assistance program may be provided as part of the
employer’s personnel services, by an entity with which the employer contracts
that provides EAP services or by participation in a consortium as defined in
division (D) above.
      (3)   The employee assistance program shall provide services regardless
of race, color, religion, national origin, disability, sex, or age.
   (K)   Consequences for violation of drug-free workplace policy.
      (1)   The employer shall allow all employees who receive a positive
confirmed test for use of alcohol and/or drugs the opportunity to explain the
test results to the appropriate medical review officer prior to taking an
adverse action.
      (2)   Violation of the drug-free workplace policy may result in
disciplinary action, including possible termination.
   (L)   Confidentiality of test results. Records of drug or alcohol test
results, written or otherwise, received by the employer shall be confidential
communications and shall not be disclosed by the employer to any party unless a
written release of information is signed by the employee or release is ordered
by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (M)   Maintenance of records. The employer shall maintain controlled access
at its place of business of the following records for review by the
Commonwealth Labor Cabinet, Office of Worker’s Claims:
      (1)   Names and position titles of all employees and supervisory
personnel trained under the drug-free workplace program; and
      (2)   The names of all persons who presented alcohol and substance abuse
training for the program.
   (N)   Drug-free workplace statement.
      (1)   Each employee shall be provided a copy of a drug-free workplace
statement.
      (2)   The statement shall:
         (a)   Notify employees that the unlawful manufacture, distribution,
dispensation, possession, or use of alcohol or a controlled or illicit
substance is prohibited in the workplace;
         (b)   Identify methods that may be used by the employer to determine
if an employee has violated the prohibition;
         (c)   Specify actions that will be taken against employees for
violation of the prohibition; and
         (d)   Each employee must acknowledge receipt and understanding of the
statement
   (O)   Adoption of the county’s drug-free workplace program. The county’s
drug-free workplace policy, which is similar in language to this section but
contains more specific information regarding the overall operation of the
county’s drug-free workplace program, is hereby adopted as a part of this
section.
(Ord. 481, passed 6-17-2009; Ord. 564, passed 8-18-2015)
§ 33.19 DRIVERS’ MOTOR VEHICLE RECORDS.
   (A)   The county shall maintain a central driver’s file for all county
employees who drive county- owned vehicles.
   (B)   Motor vehicle records shall be ordered and evaluated at least every
two years.
(Ord. 351, passed 9-19-2000)
§ 33.20 PROTECTION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Purpose. To minimize the risk of disclosing personal information and
setting practical guideline for effectively responding to security incidents.
Having a policy is important because it promotes consistent response procedures
and practices pursuant to KRS 61.932 for Barren County Fiscal Court to follow
in order to:
      (1)   Identify vulnerabilities;
      (2)   Eliminate or mitigate those vulnerabilities;
      (3)   Recognize when an incident has occurred;
      (4)   Notify appropriate personnel in the event of an incident;
      (5)   Respond to information security threats; and
      (6)   Recognize events that require special handling due to their
potential impact or special reporting due to legal or other concerns.
   (B)   Policy. Non-digital media contacting personal information shall be
physically controlled and securely stored in a manner meant to ensure that the
media cannot be accessed by unauthorized individuals. This may require storing
media in locked containers such as cabinets, drawers, rooms, or similar
locations if unauthorized individuals. Such information must be protected by
software that prevents unauthorized individuals. Such information must be
protected by software that prevents unauthorized access. If personal
information is transmitted via e-mail or other electronic means, it must be
send using encryption mechanisms.
   (C)   (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMPUTER SECURITY INCIDENT' or INCIDENT. A violation or imminent threat
of violation of computer security policies, acceptable use policies, or
standard security practices.
      COT. The Commonwealth Office of Technology.
      DIGITAL MEDIA. Physical, electronic media, used to store information,
including, but not limited to: diskettes, magnetic tapes, desktop computers,
laptops, hard drives, random access memory, read only memory, compact discs,
network equipment, other forms of optical and magnetic media, and any other
electronic media on which information may be stored. This definition includes
forms of media existing at the time these regulations are promulgated and also
any such forms or formats as may be invented.
      DIG. The Department for Local Government.
      LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL UNIT. or LGU. Every group, governmental entity and
governmental subdivision identified by KRS 61.931(1)(b) and (c) that are not
organizational units of the executive branch of state government of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky.
      NON-DIGITAL MEDIA. A hard copy or physical representation of information,
including, but not limited to, paper copies, printer ribbons, drums, microfilm,
platens, and other forms of preserved or preservable information.
      PORTABLE COMPUTING DEVICE. Electronic devices on which personal
information is stored, or may be stored, designed, used or intended to be used
in multiple physical locations or capable of being used while traveling, such
as laptops, tablet computers, personal digital assistants (PDAs), digital
cameras, portable telephones, and similar devices.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, all terms not otherwise defined are
used consistent with the definitions set forth in KRS 61.932.
   (D)   Point of contact. Every LGU shall designate a Point of Contact
("POC"). The POC shall serve the following functions:
      (1)   Maintain the LGU's adopted Information Security Policy and be
familiar with its requirements;
      (2)   Ensure the LGU's employees and others with access to personal
information are aware of and understand the Information Security Policy;
      (3)   Serve as contact for inquiries from other agencies regarding its
Information Security Policy and any incidents;
      (4)   Be responsible for ensuring compliance with the Information
Security Policy; and
      (5)   Be responsible for responding to any incidents.
   (E)   Software.
      (1)   Security software used to protect personal information must provide
user identification, authentication, data access controls, integrity, and audit
controls.
      (2)   Security software should be adequately tested to confirm
functionality and to ensure that it is minimally disruptive to all associated
operating systems, communications, applications, and other associated software
systems. Contractual provisions must also ensure that the supplier's software,
by design or configuration, will not introduce any security exposures.
      (3)   The level of protection afforded by security software should be
commensurate with the sensitivity of the data. For example, if data resides in
a database that is deemed highly confidential, stringent access controls to the
database should be employed. The level of protection along with the methods to
implement that protection should be addressed before any personal information
is stored on a device.
      (4)   Systems, networks and application software used to process personal
information must adhere to the highest level of protection reasonably
practical. LGU shall use Intrusion Detection and Prevention software approved
by COT. A list of approved software is available on the COT website. As an
alternative, LGU may use software not approved by COT, provided that such
software provides comparable, or superior, protection.
   (F)   Encryption. Information stored on digital media shall be encrypted in
accordance with contemporary standards.
   (G)   Access control. Only authorized individuals are permitted access to
media containing personal information. In addition to controlling physical
access, user authentication should provide audit access information. Any access
must comply with applicable regulatory requirements.
   (H)   Portable computing devices.
      (1)   This policy prohibits the unnecessary placement (download or input)
of personal information on portable computing devices. However, users who in
the course of LGU business must place personal information on portable
computing devices must be made aware of the risks involved and impact to the
affected person/entities in the event of actual or suspected loss or disclosure
of personal information. If personal information is placed on a portable
computing device, reasonable efforts must be taken, including physical controls
and encryption, to protect the information from unauthorized access.
Additionally, each person using the portable computing device must sign a form
approved by the LGU indicating acceptance of the information and acknowledging
his/her understanding of the responsibility to protect the information. In the
event the portable computing device is lost or stolen, the LGU should be able
to accurately recreate the personal information and must be able to provide
notification to all affected persons/entities.
   (2)   When it is determined that personal information must be placed on a
portable computing device, every effort should be taken to minimize the amount
of information required. If possible, information should be abbreviated to
limit exposure (e.g., last four digits of the social security number).
   (I)   Physical security procedures.
      (1)   Given the broad variety of sizes and types of LGU, each will have
different security challenges and resources available to address those
challenges. This policy does not specifically address physical security needs
and threats, such as natural disasters, electrical outages, fire, or other
physical threats to personnel or information resources. LGU are responsible for
establishing and maintaining their own physical security procedures.
      (2)   The Information Security Policy adopted by an LGU shall include
provisions calculated to ensure that its information resources are protected by
physical security measures that address physical tampering, damage, theft, or
unauthorized physical access. Where applicable, the Information Security Policy
should address the circumstances under which identification badges must be worn
and establish parameters for access to restricted areas containing information
technology resources or other sources of personal information.
      (3)   When feasible, information technology equipment should be marked
with some form of identification that clearly indicates it is the property of
the LGU. During transport, media shall be protected and controlled outside of
secured areas and activities associated with transport of such media restricted
to authorized personnel. Tracking methods shall be developed and deployed to
ensure media reaches its intended destination.
   (J)   Protection of personal information.
      (1)   LGU shall secure and, when applicable, appropriately dispose of
non-digital media. Non-digital media containing personal information must be
properly stored and secured from view by unauthorized persons.
      (2)   Secure measures must be employed by the LGU and all permissive
users to safeguard personal information contained on all LGU technology
resources.
      (3)   LGU shall ensure that all authorized personnel are familiar with
and comply with the Information Security Policy. LGU shall ensure that only
authorized personnel may hold and have access to personal information.
   (K)   Types of incidents. Threats to the security of personal information
arise in many different ways. LGU are encouraged to be aware of the different
types of threats and to enact reasonable measures to protect against each.
Attacks on personal information may arise from:
      (1)   External/removable media. an attack executed from removable media
(e.g. flash drive, CD) or a peripheral device.
      (2)   Attrition. An attack that employs brute force methods to
compromise, degrade, or destroy systems, networks, or services.
      (3)   Web. An attack executed from a website or web-based application.
      (4)   Email. An attack executed via an email message or attachment.
      (5)   Improper usage. Any incident resulting from violation of an
organization's acceptable usage policies by an authorized user, excluding the
above categories.'
      (6)   Loss or theft of equipment. The loss or theft of a computing device
or media used by the organization, such as a laptop or smart phone.
      (7)   Other. An attack that does not fit into any of the other
categories.
   (L)   Destruction of records containing personal information.
      (1)   A media retention schedule shall be defined for all media in
accordance with regulatory requirements. LGU are encouraged to adopt a
retention schedule consistent with the Kentucky Department of Libraries and
Archives General Records Retention Schedule for State Agencies.
      (2)   Every LGU shall have a document/information retention policy. When
records containing personal or confidential information are ready for
destruction, LGU shall destroy the information completely to ensure that the
information cannot be recognized or reconstructed. In addition, any personal or
confidential data contained on the computer media must be obliterated and/or
made indecipherable before disposing of the tape, diskette, CD-ROM, zip disk,
or other type of medium.
      (3)   Each LGU must provide appropriate methods and equipment to
routinely destroy personal or confidential information. The methods set forth
below are listed in priority order with the most highly recommended safeguard
listed first. One of the following safeguards must be implemented:
         (a)   Hire a document disposal contractor to dispose of the material.
The contractor should be certified by a recognized trade association and should
use disk sanitizing software and/or equipment approved by the United States
Department of Defense. The LGU should review and evaluate the disposal
company's information security policies and procedures. The LGU should review
an independent audit of a disposal company's operations and/or its compliance
with nationally recognized standards.
         (b)   Secure and utilize shredding equipment that performs cross-cut
or confetti patterns.
         (c)   Secure and utilize disk sanitizing or erasing software or
equipment approved by the United States Department of Defense. .
         (d)   Modify the information to make it unreadable, unusable or
indecipherable through any means.
   (M)   Reporting of incidents involving personal information.
      (1)   Each LGU must disclose a security breach in which personal
information is disclosed to, or obtained by, an unauthorized person.
Notification of the incident must be made in the most prompt and expedient
manner after the incident has been discovered. Within 35 days, a letter
notifying affected individuals of actual or suspected loss or disclosure of
personal information must be sent by the LGU describing the types of
information lost and recommended actions to be taken to mitigate the potential
misuse of their information.
      (2)   When a LGU identifies that a security breach has occurred in which
personal information has been disclosed to, or obtained by, an unauthorized
person, within three business days it shall notify Kentucky State Police, the
Auditor of Public Accounts, the Attorney General and the Commissioner of the
Department for Local Government and complete form COT-F012. The LGU shall
document the following:
         (a)   Preliminary reporting and description of the incident;
         (b)   Response, including evidence gathered;
         (c)   Final assessment and corrective action taken; and
         (d)   Final reporting.
      (3)   Incident response procedures can be a reaction to security
activities such as:
         (a)   Unauthorized access to personnel, data, or resources;
         (b)   Denial of service attacks;
         (c)   Actual or anticipated widespread malware infections;
         (d)   Data breaches;
         (e)   Loss/theft of equipment;
         (f)   Significant disruption of services; and
         (g)   Significant level of unauthorized scanning activity to or from
hosts on the network.
   (N)   Investigation. LGU shall make reasonable efforts to investigate any
security breaches in which personal information is disclosed to, or obtained
by, an unauthorized person and shall take appropriate corrective action.
   (O)   Disclosure communications. LGU must comply with all federal and state
laws and policies for information disclosure to media or the public. In some
circumstances, communication about an incident is necessary, such as contacting
law enforcement. LGU should use discretion in disclosing information about an
incident. Such information includes network information, type of incident,
specific infection type (if applicable), number of assets affected, specific
detail about applications affected, applications used to employ corrective
action/investigate, etc. LGU may proactively share relevant incident indicator
information with peers to improve detection and analysis of incidents. Within
the parameters of the law, minimal disclosure regarding incidents is preferred
to prevent unauthorized persons from acquiring sensitive information regarding
the incident, security protocols and similar matters, in an effort to avoid
additional disruption and financial loss.
(Ord. 591, passed 6-20-2017)
§ 33.21 CREDIT CARD POLICY.
   (A)   The county shall maintain a credit card with a credit limit of
$10,000.
   (B)   The county credit card will be locked in a fireproof safe located in
the County Treasurer's office.
   (C)   The County Treasurer will be the authorized user of the county credit
card, and anyone with a need for its use shall make a written request to the
County Treasurer.
   (D)   Use of the county credit card must be pre-approved by an elected
official, supervisor or department head and follow guidelines set out in the
Administrative Code.
   (E)   County credit card use must follow all guidelines set out in the
Barren County Administrative Code.
   (F)   All charges made to the county credit card shall be accompanied by a
detailed receipt. The receipt must then be attached to a purchase voucher.
Purchase vouchers must be completely filled out. Any charge made to the county
credit card without a detailed receipt and purchase voucher will be considered
a violation of this policy.
   (G)   Credit card receipts must be turned in to the Treasurer's office when
they are received.
   (H)   When traveling to training or conference, a travel and expense voucher
must be used. You may attach all receipts to one voucher per trip.
   (I)   Fraudulent use of the county credit card is terms for immediate
dismissal. Restitution will be sought for any fraudulent use of the county
credit card.
   (J)   Failure to follow these guidelines will result in loss of privilege to
use the county credit card and/or other sanctions, including termination of
employment.
(Ord. 664, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Financial Management
   
34.01   Budget preparation procedures
   
34.02   Budget hearing procedures
   
34.03   Budget amendments and fund transfers
   
34.04   Procedures for administration of the budget by the County Judge/
Executive
   
34.05   Fiscal Administration/County Treasurer
   
34.06   Receipt of funds
   
34.07   Claims against the county
   
34.08   Disbursement of funds
   
34.09   Accounting of funds
   
34.10   Financial reporting
   
34.11   Investment of county funds
   
34.12   Fee pooling system
Purchases and Contracts
   
34.25   Sealed bidding procedures
   
34.26   Negotiated procedures
   
34.27   Small purchase procedures
   
34.28   Storage and inventory control
   
34.29   Procedures for disposition of surplus property
Funds
   
34.40   County Land and Building Fund
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
§ 34.01 BUDGET PREPARATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Judge/Executive shall annually prepare a proposed budget for the
expenditure of all funds, including those from state and federal sources, which
are to be expended by the Fiscal Court in the next fiscal year.
   (B)   The proposed budget shall be classified into budget units as outlined
in division (C) below and shall include or concern the following:
      (1)   The Judge/Executive shall obtain budget proposals prepared by each
county office or agency receiving funds from the Fiscal Court, including the
County Clerk, Sheriff, and Jailer;
      (2)   The Judge/Executive shall prepare a report of anticipated revenue
from intergovernmental transfers from city, state, and federal governments;
      (3)   The Judge/Executive shall review the expenditures in each
classification of each fund for the preceding year and for the current year;
      (4)   The Judge/Executive shall obtain from the County Treasurer a
statement of receipts for actual expenditures made during the current fiscal
year;
      (5)   An estimate shall be made of expenditures for the remainder of the
current year and of any surplus, by fund, which will remain;
      (6)   The Judge/Executive shall obtain from the Sheriff an annual
settlement, showing county taxes collected, not later than May 1 of the current
year;
      (7)   Prepare the actual county budget from the proposals submitted by
each county office or agency;
      (8)   Add temporary borrowing, estimated surplus, and transfer of funds
to anticipated revenue to determine the amount available for the year; and
      (9)   In the event the estimated expenditures exceed the estimated amount
available, an adjustment shall be made by reducing the expenditures as the
Judge/Executive finds in the best interest of the county to bring the budget
into balance.
   (C)   (1)   The Fiscal Court, at a meeting or meetings held no later than
June 1 of each year, shall make a detailed investigation of each separate
activity of the county for which the Judge/Executive proposes that county funds
are to be expended by the Fiscal Court.
      (2)   All expenditures shall be classified into budget units, including:
         (a)   The General Fund;
         (b)   The Jail Fund;
         (c)   The Road Fund; and
         (d)   The LGEA Fund.
   (D)   The county budget shall include such budget units as may be required
by the activities of the county. When necessary, the county budget may be
subdivided into separate budget funds so that the cost of each class of
expenditures can be ascertained at any time and regulated according to the
financial condition and needs of the county.
   (E)   The funds set apart in the county budget for a budget unit, or any
subdivision thereof, shall constitute a separate Budget Fund and shall be
appropriated and accounted for separately.
   (F)   The proposed budget shall be submitted to the Fiscal Court for
tentative approval and any changes the Fiscal Court deems reasonably necessary
shall be made by the Judge/Executive.
   (G)   Following action by the Fiscal Court, but not later than June 10, the
budget shall be submitted to the Commonwealth Local Finance Office for approval
as to form and classification.
   (H)   (1)   If the Commonwealth Local Finance Officer finds the proposed
budget is uniform with the budgets of other counties of the same class in
classification of units and conforms to the budget laws, he or she shall
approve the classifications, return the original copy to the Judge/Executive,
and retain the duplicate copy as part of his or her records.
      (2)   If the Commonwealth Local Finance Officer finds the proposed budget
is not uniform with the budgets of other counties in classification of units,
the County Judge/Executive shall notify Fiscal Court and shall schedule a
meeting as needed.
   (I)   (1)   The proposed county budget tentatively approved by the Fiscal
Court and approved by the Commonwealth Local Finance Officer as to form and
classification shall be submitted to the Fiscal Court for adoption not later
than July 1 of each year or within ten days after receipt of the certified
assessment from the Department of Revenue, as provided in KRS 122.180,
whichever shall be the later.
      (2)   The Judge/Executive shall cause a copy of the proposed budget to be
posted in a conspicuous place in the Courthouse near the front door, and be
published pursuant to KRS Ch. 424, at least ten days before final adoption by
the Fiscal Court.
   (J)   Any taxpayer or group of taxpayers may petition the Fiscal Court in
respect to the budget or any part thereof before final adoption.
   (K)   If the Fiscal Court rejects any part of the proposed budget, it shall
make the changes in the nature and amount of funds a majority of the Court
considers desirable; but it has no power to make any change in the form or
classification of the budget units or subdivision of units.
   (L)   Within 15 days after the budget is adopted by the Fiscal Court, the
Judge/Executive shall certify to the Commonwealth Local Finance Officer a copy
of the original budget as approved by the Commonwealth Local Finance Officer,
indicating clearly all changes made by the Fiscal Court.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
§ 34.02 BUDGET HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)    Prior to adoption of the budget, a public hearing shall be conducted
by the Judge/Executive on the proposed use of state funds.
   (B)   Notice of public hearing shall be published in at least two newspapers
of general circulation not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing.
   (C)   Every person desiring to speak on the subject of the use of funds by
the county shall be given the opportunity to do so.
   (D)   Minutes of the proceedings shall be taken in writing and maintained by
the Judge/Executive as public records.
      (1)   The budget shall be published in a newspaper of the largest general
circulation in the county not less than seven, nor more than 21, days before
final adoption by Fiscal Court.
      (2)   The Judge/Executive shall maintain a copy of the budget as adopted,
together with any amendments adopted thereafter, for public inspection.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
§ 34.03 BUDGET AMENDMENTS AND FUND TRANSFERS.
   (A)   The Fiscal Court may make provisions for the expenditure of receipts
unanticipated in the original budget by preparing an amendment to the budget,
showing the source and amount of the unanticipated receipts, and specifying the
budget funds that are to be increased thereby. The amendment shall be submitted
to the Commonwealth Local Finance Officer subject to the same provisions as the
original budget.
   (B)   The Fiscal Court may transfer money from one Budget Fund to another to
provide for emergencies or for regular operation. The order of the Fiscal Court
making the transfer shall show the nature of the emergency and the reason for
making the transfer. The Fiscal Court shall not have any power to transfer any
money from any sinking fund or special fund raised for a specific purpose until
the obligation or purpose for which the fund was raised has been satisfied.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995; Ord. 290, passed 8-19-1997)
§ 34.04 PROCEDURES FOR ADMINISTRATION OF THE BUDGET BY THE COUNTY JUDGE/
EXECUTIVE.
   (A)   At the beginning of each fiscal year, the total amount of the
appropriation represents the free balance, or unused appropriations amount for
each account.
   (B)   As expenditures are made during the year, the amount of the
expenditure is subtracted from the free balance to keep an accurate record of
the exact amount of the unused appropriation at any time.
   (C)   The Judge/Executive shall write and sign all warrants directing the
Treasurer to make a payment authorized by the Fiscal Court and maintain a
record of such warrants.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
§ 34.05 FISCAL ADMINISTRATION/COUNTY TREASURER.
   (A)   The County Judge/Executive shall appoint, pending Fiscal Court
approval, a County Treasurer at its regular June term every four years. If for
any reason the County Treasurer is not appointed at the June term, the Judge/
Executive shall call the Fiscal Court to meet immediately after the adjournment
of the term on a day fixed by order entered in the order book of the Court. The
meeting shall be held within two weeks after the adjournment of the June term.
   (B)   The County Treasurer shall take office on July 1, immediately
following his or her appointment.
   (C)   No persons shall be eligible to be County Treasurer unless at the time
of his or her appointment, he or she is a citizen of the commonwealth, at least
25 years old, and has been, for two years preceding his or her appointment, a
resident of the county for which he or she is appointed. The County Treasurer
shall take the constitutional oath of office before the County Fiscal Court,
and shall execute the bond with surety as required, to be approved by the
County Fiscal Court. The Fiscal Court may pay the premium on the bond from the
county funds.
   (D)   The Fiscal Court may remove the County Treasurer at any time for
neglect of duty, incompetency, or dishonesty.
   (E)   The following are the procedures for the County Treasurer:
      (1)   County funds shall be paid out only on order of the Fiscal Court;
      (2)   No expenditures may be made in excess of revenues or for purposes
other than appropriated;
      (3)   No appropriations may be made which exceed adopted budget amounts;
      (4)   The Treasurer shall keep a record of each budget appropriation, all
expenditures from that appropriation, and each Budget Fund. This record is
called the appropriation expenditure ledger;
      (5)   The Treasurer shall maintain general ledger in which all
transactions are entered, either in detail or in summary. Control accounts are
established for the cash receipts register and the appropriation expenditure
ledger;
      (6)   The Treasurer shall maintain a cash receipts register containing
columns for total cash received, source of revenue, and miscellaneous revenue
for each fund;
      (7)   The Treasurer shall maintain an appropriation expenditure ledger.
This ledger is a group of accounts supporting in detail the appropriation and
expenditure accounts of the general ledger. An account must be provided for
each appropriation made in the budget. The original appropriation shall be
entered and all amendments and transfers authorized by order of the Fiscal
Court. All expenditures shall be charged to an appropriation expenditure
account;
      (8)   The Treasurer shall maintain a record of all warrants paid (except
payroll) in chronological order in a warrant distribution register;
      (9)   The Treasurer shall maintain a payroll authorization book which is
designed to facilitate convenient preparation and certification of the payroll.
One order of the Fiscal Court may be made to authorize payment for all
employees for more than one payroll period;
      (10)   The Treasurer shall maintain an individual earnings record for
each employee;
      (11)   The Treasurer shall maintain a notes payable register which
provides information on notes for temporary loans in anticipation of the
current year’s revenue;
      (12)   The Treasurer shall maintain a bond register which records the
history and authorization of each bond issue, whether general obligation bonds,
revenue bonds, or special levy bonds. A separate sheet shall be prepared for
each issue; and
      (13)   All records of the Treasurer shall be kept in accordance with
standard accepted accounting principles.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995; Ord. 544, passed 4-15-2014)
§ 34.06 RECEIPT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The County Treasurer shall receive and hold all money due the county
subject to orders of the Fiscal Court.
   (B)   The County Treasurer may, and when directed by the Fiscal Court shall,
institute actions in the name of the county against all delinquent collecting
officers and anyone having money belonging to the county who fails or refuses
to pay it on demand when due. He or she shall keep a record of allocations he
or she is directed to institute on behalf of the county, showing their
condition, and the money collected thereunder.
Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
§ 34.07 CLAIMS AGAINST THE COUNTY.
   (A)   The Finance Officer shall account for all claims against the county.
      (1)   Anyone with a claim for payment from the county shall file in
writing.
      (2)   Each claim shall be recorded by date or receipt and presented to
the Fiscal Court at its next meeting.
      (3)   Each order of the Fiscal Court approving a claim shall designate
the Budget Fund and classification from which the claim will be paid and each
warrant shall specify the Budget Fund and classification.
      (4)   The payroll for county officials and regular county employees, as
well as several known recurring payments such as interest and principal on
bonded debt, are not required to have monthly Fiscal Court approval.
   (B)   The County Treasurer and County Judge/Executive are authorized and
directed to pay the following:
      (1)   Pay monthly, as same is billed, any and all utility bills owed by
the following:
         (a)   County Courthouse;
         (b)   County Corrections Center;
         (c)   County Road Department-Building and Garage;
         (d)   County Coroner;
         (e)   County Disaster and Emergency Services;
         (f)   Victim Advocate Office;
         (g)   Barlow and Rich Buildings; or
         (h)   Security light at Austin Boat Ramp.
      (2)   All county employees and officers will be paid monthly or biweekly
in amounts as provided in the budget adopted each fiscal year;
      (3)   Transfer to the imprest payroll account a sufficient amount to
cover all payroll and fringe benefits computed thereon and pay from the payroll
account all amounts withheld plus the amount required to be paid by the
employer, the county, directly to the agencies involved together with
appropriate reports to such agencies;
      (4)   Monthly expense allowance to each County Magistrate per KRS 64.530
(6);
      (5)   Monthly expense allowance to the County Court Clerk per KRS 64.017
(1);
      (6)   Election Precinct Officers shall be paid $125 per diem for working
election day and $25 for attending election school, or such other amounts as
may be prescribed by Kentucky Revised Statutes, plus mileage as incurred at the
U.S. Government’s current rate;
      (7)   Rental of polling places in the sum of $40 per diem;
      (8)   Members of the County Board of Elections will be paid $100 per diem
and $25 for attending election school or such other amounts as may be
prescribed by Kentucky Revised Statutes, plus mileage as incurred at the U.S.
Government’s current rate;
      (9)   Pay the Glasgow Post Office for the county’s postage, as needed;
      (10)   Transporting costs of felony prisoners from out of state by the
County Sheriff’s Office;
      (11)   Vehicle or evidence storage bills incurred by the County Sheriff’s
Office;
      (12)   Interest and principal on bonded debt;
      (13)   County employees will be reimbursed for mileage incurred at the
same rate as the U.S. Government’s allowance; and
      (14)   Bank service fees.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995; Ord. 267, passed 6-26-1996; Ord. 279, passed 12-3-
1996; Ord. 290, passed 8-19-1997; Ord. 322, passed 7-6-1999; Ord. 375, passed
5-21-2002; Ord. 459, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 34.08 DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The County Treasurer shall disburse all money received in such manner
and for such purpose as may be authorized by appropriate authority of the
Fiscal Court.
   (B)   The County Treasurer shall not disburse any money received by him or
her for any purpose other than that for which it was collected and paid over to
him or her. Restricted funds must be expended on the restriction and must be
expended prior to other funds.
   (C)   Any appropriation made or claim allowed by the Fiscal Court in excess
of any budget fund, and any warrant or contract not within the budget
appropriation, shall be void. The County Treasurer shall have the duty to
notify each Fiscal Court member of any claim made in excess of any Budget Fund
and any warrant or contract not within the budget appropriation. No member of
the Fiscal Court shall vote for any such illegal appropriation or claim. The
County Treasurer shall be liable for the amount of any county warrant willfully
or negligently signed or countersigned by him or her in excess of the budget
fund out of which the warrant is payable.
   (D)   The Fiscal Court shall not in any year expend any money in excess of
the amount annually levied and collected for that year or levied, collected, or
appropriated for any special purpose. Nothing in this section shall prevent the
Fiscal Court from spending surplus funds.
   (E)   The Fiscal Court shall not expend, permit, or authorize to expend any
county revenue raised by taxes levied for one purpose or for any other purpose
than that specified in the order or resolution levying the tax.
   (F)   No member of the Fiscal Court shall knowingly vote for any
appropriation or contract in violation of this section or KRS 68.100, and no
county officer shall knowingly act to impose upon the county any pecuniary
liability in excess of the limitations of this section or by statute.
   (G)   Except in the case of an emergency where the Judge/Executive, Fiscal
Court, and Commonwealth Local Finance Officer agree in writing, no county may,
during the first half of any fourth fiscal year, encumber or expend more than
65% of all its current funds, taken as a unit, budgeted for that fiscal year.
Payments of principal and interest on bonded indebtedness are not considered
current funds.
   (H)   All warrants for the payment of funds from the County Treasury shall
be issued consistent with the requirements of KRS 68.020.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995; Ord. 290, passed 8-19-1997; Ord. 521, passed 6-5-
2012)
§ 34.09 ACCOUNTING OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The County Treasurer shall keep an accurate detailed account of all
money received and disbursed by him or her for the county.
   (B)   The books of account of the county’s financial transactions shall be
kept in the manner required by the uniform system of accounts prescribed by the
Finance and Administration Cabinet.
   (C)   The County Treasurer shall, when required by the Fiscal Court, settle
his or her accounts as County Treasurer. In addition, he or she shall make a
full and complete settlement for the preceding fiscal year with the Fiscal
Court within 30 days after the close of the fiscal year.
   (D)   Each settlement made by the County Treasurer shall be approved by the
Fiscal Court in open court and shall, by order of the Court, be recorded by the
County Clerk in a book kept for that purpose. The original shall be filed in
the County Clerk’s office and preserved as a record of the Court. All
statements, vouchers, and other papers relating to the annual settlement shall
be filed in the office of the County Clerk, to be disposed of as the Fiscal
Court directs.
   (E)   In case of a vacancy, the Judge/Executive shall call a special meeting
which shall proceed in the manner he or she deems proper to settle the accounts
of the County Treasurer.
   (F)   Where the special purpose for which a tax was levied has been
accomplished, any amount remaining in the special fund shall become a part of
the General Revenue Fund of the county. In a case where all or part of a
special fund so transferred to the General Fund remains unexpended and has not
been combined with other funds in such a way as to lose its identity, the
county may return the funds to a special reserve fund for a purpose similar to
that which the fund was originally accumulated. The county may place these
funds in investments to which other funds of the county may lawfully be
invested until such a time as it is necessary to expend the funds for their
purpose.
Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
§ 34.10 FINANCIAL REPORTING.
   (A)   The County Treasurer shall balance his or her books on the first day
of each month, so as to show the correct amount on hand in each fund on the day
the balance is made, and shall within ten days file with the Judge/Executive a
monthly statement. The list shall show all cash receipts and disbursements and
the cash balance at the beginning and the end of the month, certifying that
each is within the budget constraints.
   (B)   The Judge/Executive shall, within 15 days after the end of each fiscal
quarter, prepare a statement of showing for the current fiscal year to date
actual receipts from each county revenue source, the totals of all encumbrances
and the expenditures charged against each Budget Fund, the unused balance of
the Fund, and any transfers made to or from the Fund. The Judge/Executive shall
post the statement in a conspicuous place in the Courthouse near the front door
for at least ten consecutive days, transmit a copy to the Fiscal Court, and to
the Commonwealth Local Finance Officer.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995; Ord. 290, passed 8-19-1997)
§ 34.11 INVESTMENT OF COUNTY FUNDS.
   The county hereby authorizes the County Treasurer and the County Judge/
Executive to invest the county’s funds, pursuant to the terms and conditions of
this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed to deprive the Fiscal
Court of the power to specifically direct the investment of the county’s funds
pursuant to KRS 66.480.
   (A)   Funds not needed for current expenses or obligations of the county may
be invested in any of the following:
      (1)   Obligations and contracts for future delivery or purchase of
obligations backed by the full faith and credit of the United States or a U.S.
Government agency, including but not limited to:
         (a)   The U.S. Treasury;
         (b)   The Export-Import Bank of the U.S.;
         (c)   The Farmers Home Administration;
         (d)   The Government National Mortgage Corporation; and
         (e)   The Merchant Marine bonds.
      (2)   Obligations of any corporation of the U.S. Government, including
but not limited to:
         (a)   The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation;
         (b)   The Federal Farm Credit Banks;
         (c)   The Bank for Cooperatives;
         (d)   The Federal Intermediate Credit Banks;
         (e)   The Federal Land Banks;
         (f)   The Federal Home Loan Banks;
         (g)   The Federal National Mortgage Association; and
         (h)   The Tennessee Valley Authority.
      (3)   Certificates of deposit or other interest-bearing accounts of any
bank or savings and loan institution which are insured by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation or similar entity and which are collateralized to the
extent uninsured, by any obligations permitted by KRS 41.240(4);
      (4)   Bonds or certificates of indebtedness of the commonwealth and of
its agencies and instrumentalities; and
      (5)   Securities issued by a state or local government, or any
instrumentality or agency thereof, in the United States, and rated in one of
the three highest categories by a nationally-recognized rating agency.
   (B)   The investment authority outlined above shall be subject to the
following limitations:
      (1)   The amount of money invested at any time by the county in one or
more of the categories of investments authorized by divisions (A)(3) through
(A)(5) above shall not exceed 50% of the total amount of money invested by the
county; and
      (2)   The county shall not purchase any investment on a margin basis or
through the use of any similar leveraging technique.
   (C)   (1)   The county hereby adopts the standards for written agreements
pursuant to which investments are made.
      (2)   The following are the standards for written agreements pursuant to
which investments are made.
         (a)   Authorization is hereby given that written agreement shall be
signed by the County Judge/Executive or County Treasurer.
         (b)   The signatories shall be granted hereby the sole authority to
execute said written agreements.
         (c)   All such agreements shall be presented to the County Fiscal
Court at the next meeting following the execution of said agreement.
   (D)   The county hereby adopts the following procedures for monitoring
controls, deposit, or retention of investments and collateral.
      (1)   The County Treasurer shall make quarterly reports to Fiscal Court
on the status of the investments.
      (2)   The depository for items in divisions (A)(3) through (A)(5) above
shall be an account established directly with the Federal Reserve Bank or a
local institution agreed upon by the County Judge/Executive and County
Treasurer.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995; Ord. 218, passed 3-15-1995)
§ 34.12 FEE POOLING SYSTEM.
   (A)   The County Fiscal hereby establishes (or re-affirms) a fee pooling
system for the Offices of the County Clerk and the Barren County Sheriff.
   (B)   That all net income and net fees from the offices of the County Clerk
and Sheriff shall be paid over to the County Treasurer on a monthly basis not
later than the tenth day for each month for the net income and net fees
collected in the preceding month.
   (C)   NET INCOME and NET FEES shall mean all income and all fees collected
less approved transmittals to government agencies, applicable customer refunds
and small purchases that are considered "petty" in nature.
   (D)   All other expenditures of the Offices of the County Clerk and Sheriff
shall be pre-approved and paid by the County Treasurer in accordance with the
current purchase order system previously established by the County Fiscal
Court. Provided, however, the County Clerk and Sheriff shall certify to the
Treasurer for payment on a bi-weekly basis the names and hours of each employee
of their respective offices who worked during such pay period, and the
Treasurer shall pay such payrolls without the necessity of any purchase order.
   (E)   The ordinary bills of the County Clerk and the County Sheriff shall be
paid after approval by the Court.
   (F)   No salaries or expenses of the County Clerk or County Sheriff or their
employees shall be paid if the fee officer is delinquent in the payment of one
month's fee income. In the case of delinquencies, said salaries and expenses
shall only be paid at such time as the delinquencies have been corrected.
   (G)   In order to operate under the true intent of a fee pooling
arrangement, the Clerk and Sheriff will submit all expenditures to the
Treasurer for payment. The Clerk and/or Sheriff may, however, directly and
without fee pooling or Court approval, pay for any office expenses from which
his/her fees could otherwise be expended and which could not have reasonably
been foreseen or anticipated, or payment of which cannot be delayed until the
next regularly-scheduled fiscal court meeting.
(Ord. 600, passed 10-17-2017)
PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS
§ 34.25 SEALED BIDDING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Sealed bidding procedures shall be followed under the circumstances,
conditions, and in the manner as set forth in Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   (B)   The agency, department, official, or person requiring a contract or
purchase from county funds not covered by small purchase procedures shall
submit to the Judge/Executive a written request containing specification,
quantities, and delivery desired.
   (C)   The Judge/Executive shall report the request to Fiscal Court with a
statement of the need, the approximate cost, and whether or not the expenditure
is provided for in the budget.
   (D)   The Fiscal Court shall examine the request and approve or reject it.
If the request is approved, the Fiscal Court shall set any evaluation factors
to be considered in bid selection.
   (E)   The Judge/Executive shall place an appropriate advertisement in the
newspaper of the largest general circulation within the county, and shall open
all bids publicly at the time and place stated in the advertisement.
   (F)   The Judge/Executive shall submit all responsive bids to the Fiscal
Court which shall select the lowest or the lowest evaluated bid by a qualified
bidder. The Clerk of the Fiscal Court shall notify all bidders of the award.
   (G)   The Judge/Executive, or his or her designee, shall issue a purchase
order with the one receiving the award.
   (H)   Contractors and subcontractors performing work for the county shall
present proof of insurance showing a specified minimal level of insurance which
will act as the primary remedy should a claim occur.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995; Ord. 351, passed 9-19-2000)
§ 34.26 NEGOTIATED PROCEDURES.
   Negotiated procedures shall be followed under the circumstances, conditions,
and in the manner as set forth in Kentucky Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
§ 34.27 SMALL PURCHASE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Small purchase procedures are hereby determined to be the procedures
to be followed and used for any purchase by any agency, employee, or elected
official of the county, which purchase shall be paid for out of the county
budget as approved by the Fiscal Court, and which purchase of a single item or
aggregate thereof in any fiscal year, is not expected to exceed $10,000.
Purchases as used in this section, shall include but not be limited to
supplies, services, construction, or any other item. This section shall also
include training sessions, seminars, meetings, and conventions that pertain to
county functions and the related expenses for those items.
   (B)   The County Judge/Executive, or his or her designee, shall be the
person responsible for performance and administration of the small purchase
procedure for county government. SMALL PURCHASES are those purchases of from
$0.01 to $5,000 for a single item.
   (C)   For purposes of the small purchase procedure, the County Road
Supervisor shall be considered an elected county official for purposes of
requesting purchases on behalf of the County Road Department.
   (D)   No purchase shall be made for an amount that exceeds the sum budgeted
and appropriated by the Fiscal Court for such purpose to such elected
officials’ office or the County Road Department.
   (E)   All purchases made from $0.01 to $5,000 shall be credited to the
proper budget appropriation.
   (F)   All purchases within this category shall be from vendors under the
commonwealth’s purchasing contracts, or upon an evaluated basis, at the
discretion of each county official. Three price quotes shall be obtained from
other vendors whenever practical. Where two or more local suppliers offer the
same product at substantially the same price, the person designated in charge
of procurement may purchase from each on a rotating basis. A purchase order
shall be issued by the County Judge/Executive, or his or her designee, prior to
any purchase within this category and immediately upon purchase, a copy of the
vendor’s invoice shall be delivered to the County Treasurer.
   (G)   Upon receipt of a requisition signed by a county official, the County
Judge/Executive or his or her designee, may issue a purchase order, so long as
all other conditions of this procedure have been met. Should the County Judge/
Executive or his or her designee decline to issue a purchase order, the Fiscal
Court shall be notified at its next meeting. The Court may then review the
request and approve or disapprove the purchase order.
    (H)   All purchases from $5,000.01 to $10,000 will require approval of the
County Fiscal Court, prior to the issuance of a purchase order.
   (I)   No rubber stamps or facsimile signatures shall ever be used. Any such
use shall invalidate a purchase order and no claim shall be paid against such
purchase order.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995; Ord. 690, passed 12-19-2023)
§ 34.28 STORAGE AND INVENTORY CONTROL.
   (A)   Each item shall be inspected upon receipt and all items which do not
conform to specification shall be rejected with a written notice of such
rejection given to the vendor.
   (B)   All supplies shall be stored in a safe and secure location.
   (C)   The purchasing officer may use a method of inventory control and
accounting designed to ensure the maintenance of sufficient stores of supplies
to meet the anticipated needs of all departments.
   (D)   Sufficient stores of supplies shall be maintained to meet the
anticipated needs of all departments.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
§ 34.29 PROCEDURES FOR DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS PROPERTY.
   (A)   The County Fiscal Court shall declare as surplus any unneeded
property, said declaration including a description of the property, date of
acquisition if known, and its intended use at the time;
   (B)   The statement shall include the proposed disposition of the property
and the reasons such disposition are in the public interest;
   (C)   The statement shall include the present use of the property and
evidence of consultation with the person having custody or control;
   (D)   The commonwealth’s method of disposition, whether it is to be
transferred to another governmental agency or to a private concern,
compensation, if any, to be received, and whether it is to be sold at public
auction, by sealed bids, or through negotiations; and
   (E)   If the property is to be sold through negotiations, the property shall
be appraised by at least two competent and independent appraisers and the
appraisals attached. No property shall be sold on a negotiated basis for less
than the appraised value.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
FUNDS
§ 34.40 COUNTY LAND AND BUILDING FUND.
   (A)   The Fiscal Court is authorized and empowered to establish a Fund to be
designated as a Land and Building Fund and set aside in said Fund and acquire
therein from year to year funds for the purpose of acquiring lands and
improving same, and for the erection, maintenance, improvement, and
reconstruction of necessary buildings and other improvements for the use of the
county. This Fund has been established as a permanent fund of the county.
   (B)   The Fiscal Court, whenever it shall determine, may use the money in
the Fund to acquire and purchase land as it may see fit, title thereto being
taken in the name of the county, and may erect improvements on these or other
lands as the Court may deem necessary and proper for the use of the county.
   (C)   The Fiscal Court, at the time of fixing the rate of the tax levies,
may fix a tax levy to be part of and included in the General Fund levy, the
amount realized from this levy to be set aside for and become part of the
Building Fund, but in no event shall the Fund become a part of the General
Revenue Fund of the county under the provisions of KRS 68.120.
   (D)   All money in the Land and Building Fund shall be kept as other county
funds, but shall be invested by the County Treasurer only in obligations of the
U.S. Government.
   (E)   The Fiscal Court shall have the power upon the approval of the
majority of the members to receive any funds by gift or devise to be placed in
the Land and Building Fund upon terms and conditions as the Fiscal Court shall
deem proper.
   (F)   The Fiscal Court may authorize personal service contracts for
architectural, engineering, or financial service of certain projects. Upon
authorization of such contracts, the County Judge/Executive shall contact
qualified contractors or individuals and inform Fiscal Court of his or her
selection. The Fiscal Court may then approve the contract award.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995)
CHAPTER 35: FEES
Section
   
35.01   License fees
   
35.02   Franchise fees on bank deposits
   
35.03   Enhanced 9-1-1 fees
   
35.04   Volunteer Fire Department subscriber fees
   
35.05   Bail bond fee
   
35.06   Inmate medical expense fee
   
35.07   Out of county prisoner’s fees
   
35.08   Court costs
 
   
35.99   Penalty
§ 35.01 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   License fees. The following license fees on occupations, activities,
and businesses within the county are hereby imposed pursuant to the laws of the
Fiscal Court, and the same shall be effective, beginning July 1, 1994, for the
fiscal year and until the same is modified or rescinded.
      (1)   A license fee of $10 per annum is imposed on each restaurant
serving meals.
      (2)   A license fee of $10 per annum is imposed on each retail outlet of
soft drinks and/or ice cream, and soft drinks are sold by the same retail
outlet then on license of $5 per annum is hereby imposed.
      (3)   A license fee of $30 per annum of the first table or alley and $5
per annum for each additional table or alley is imposed on each billiard or
pool hall or bowling alley irrespective or size, where a fee is charged and
collected, directly or indirectly.
      (4)   A license fee of $10 per annum is imposed on each place where
tobacco products are sold at retail.
      (5)   All license fees shall be payable to the County Clerk and be
credited to the General Fund of the county to be used for county purposes only,
pursuant to KRS 137.115(2). The County Clerk is hereby allowed a commission of
5% of the license fee, collected and accounted for by him or her and a $1.50
fee for license issuance as the Clerk’s sole compensation for issuance of said
licenses and keeping the records thereof.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      RESTAURANT. Any business establishment serving food heated on the
premises.
(Ord. 199, passed 6-8-1994) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.02 FRANCHISE FEES ON BANK DEPOSITS.
   (A)   General provisions. Pursuant to KRS Ch.136, there is hereby imposed on
each financial institution, as defined in division (B) below, located within
the jurisdiction of the county, a franchise tax measured by the deposits in
such institutions. All moneys collected pursuant to these sections shall be
paid into the General Fund of the county to be used for the payment of proper
expenditures as determined by the Fiscal Court.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DEPOSITS. All demand and time deposits, excluding deposits of the U.S.
Government, state and political subdivisions, other financial institutions,
public libraries, educational institutions, religious institutions, charitable
institutions, and certified officers’ checks.
      FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.
         (a)   A national bank organized and existing as a national bank
association pursuant to the provisions of the National Bank Act, 12 U.S.C. §§
21 et seq., exclusive of any amendments made subsequent to that date, or a
national bank organized after December 31, 1995, that meets the requirements of
the National Bank Act in effect on December 31, 1995;
         (b)   Any bank or trust company incorporated or organized under the
laws of any state, except a banker’s bank organized under KRS 287.135;
         (c)   Any corporation organized under the provisions of 12 U.S.C. §§
611 to 631, exclusive of any amendments made subsequent to that date, or any
corporation organized after December 31, 1995, that meets the requirements of
12 U.S.C. §§ 611 to 631, in effect on December 31, 1995; or
         (d)   Any agency or branch of a foreign depository as defined in 12
U.S.C. § 3101, exclusive of any amendments made subsequent to that date, or any
agency or branch of a foreign depository established after December 31, 1995,
that meets the requirements of 12 U.S.C. § 3101.
   (C)   Rate of franchise tax.
      (1)   The rate of the franchise tax imposed on financial institutions
shall be 0.025% of the deposits located in the jurisdiction of the county.
      (2)   The amount and location of deposits in the financial institutions
shall be determined by the method used for filing the summary of deposits
report with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
      (3)   The accounting method used to allocate deposits for completion of
the summary of deposits shall be the same as has been utilized in prior
periods.
   (D)   Administration.
      (1)   The Commonwealth Revenue Cabinet shall certify to the local
jurisdiction the amount of deposits within the jurisdiction and amount of the
tax due.
      (2)   The county shall issue bills to the financial institution by
December 1 of each year.
      (3)   In the transition year 1996, the tax bills shall be issued to
financial institutions no later than May 1, 1997.
   (E)   Due date.
      (1)   The tax bill shall be due January 31 of the next year after it has
been issued; thereafter, the bill shall be delinquent and subject to a penalty
of 10% and interest of 10% per annum.
      (2)   The financial institution shall be allowed a 2% discount if the tax
bill is paid by December 31 of the same year as the tax bill is issued.
      (3)   The 2% discount shall be allowed on bills paid by May 31, 1997 for
the transitional year. All other bills during this year shall be due June 1,
1997; thereafter, the bill shall be delinquent and subject to a penalty of 10%
and shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per annum.
      (4)   The county shall have a lien for taxes upon any and all property
subject to the tax imposed by these sections, which lien shall be superior to
all encumbrances prior or subsequent.
   (F)   Records.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the County Sheriff to collect and account
for the franchise taxes imposed by this section. The County Sheriff shall keep
records of the amount received from each financial institution and the date of
receipt.
      (2)   The Revenue Cabinet shall be notified of the tax rate imposed upon
adoption of this section and of any subsequent rate changes.
   (G)   Effective date. The provisions of this section shall become effective
upon passage.
(Ord. 276, passed 10-15-1996; Ord. 343, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 35.03 ENHANCED 9-1-1 FEE.
   (A)   There is hereby established an enhanced 9-1-1 fee which is levied as a
special tax, license, and/or fee to be paid by each exchange telephone
subscriber in the local area on an individual exchange- line basis limited to a
maximum of 25 exchange lines per account.
   (B)   Each exchange telephone subscriber will pay a fee of $1 per month per
exchange line-up to the maximum.
   (C)   Phone companies shall collect the 9-1-1 fee from the subscriber and
remit said fee to the county according to terms of the agreement.
   (D)   The enhanced 9-1-1 system shall be governed by a board as provided for
in the interlocal agreement establishing the Barren-Metcalfe Emergency
Communications Center or any amendments.
   (E)   The net enhanced 9-1-1 fees received by the county from the phone
companies shall be paid to the board. These funds shall only be used for the
establishment, maintenance, and operation of enhanced 9-1-1 services. All
receipts and expenditures of enhanced 9-1-1 funds shall be audited as required
of counties and cities of the commonwealth.
   (F)   The Board shall continuously monitor the procedures established for
the operation of the enhanced 9-1-1 system for effective implementation of the
emergency telephone system.
(Ord. 189, passed 9-1-1993)
§ 35.04 VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT SUBSCRIBER FEES.
   (A)   Collection and enforcement.
      (1)   Upon passage of this section, it shall be the duty of the County
Property Valuation Administration’s Office to add the Volunteer Fire Department
annual membership charges or subscriber fees to the tax bills of property
owners in the county in the manner prescribed in division (A)(3) below.
      (2)   The Volunteer Fire Department membership charges or subscriber fees
shall be collected and distributed by the County Sheriff’s Department. The
County Sheriff’s Department shall make distribution of the collected fees to
all rural volunteer fire departments whose districts lie totally or partially
in the county. The distribution described above will be conducted as prescribed
in numerical division (A)(3) below. Unpaid fees or charges shall bear the same
penalty as general state and county taxes. This shall be a lien on the property
against which it is levied from the time of the levy.
      (3)   The amount of such fees charged shall be determined by each
Volunteer Fire Department Board of Directors or Governing Board and approved by
the County Fire Chief’s Association by majority vote. For each mailbox address,
the fee determined by the Volunteer Fire Department Board of Directors and the
County Fire Chief’s Association shall be added to the property owner’s tax
bill. Some property owner’s tax bills may have more than one mailbox address
and thus may have more than one Volunteer Fire Department fee. The County
Sheriff’s Department will distribute to each Volunteer Fire Department the fee
collected from mailbox addresses located in the Volunteer Fire Department’s
district.
      (4)    In accordance with KRS 75.450(7), the Sheriff is entitled to
retain a collection fee of 2.7% of the membership charges or subscriber fees
collected.
      (5)   (a)   The following mailing addresses are excepted and waived from
the fee requirement, established by this section:
            1.   Churches;
            2.   Schools; and
            3.   Publicly-owned utility companies.
         (b)   Due to the fact that residents of the Cities of Glasgow, Cave
City, and Park City are already assessed a fire district tax, mailing addresses
located in the city limits of Glasgow, Cave City, and Park City are excepted
and waived from the fee requirement established by this section.
   (B)   Effective dates and duration. This section is to take effect
immediately upon passage by the County Fiscal Court on second reading and
publication, according to law. The membership charges or subscriber fees shall
be effective with the 2003 tax year and shall be placed on the 2003 property
tax bills and on all subsequent years tax bills unless changed by a future
ordinance of this Fiscal Court.
(Ord. 385, passed 4-1-2003; Ord. 470, passed 5-6-2008; Ord. 686, passed 10-20-
2023)
§ 35.05 BAIL BOND FEE.
   (A)   The County Jailer be and hereby is authorized to prepare or accept
bail bonds.
   (B)   For every bail bond processed by the Jailer, he or she shall collect a
fee of $5 from the defendant and shall furnish the defendant with a written
receipt for same.
   (C)   The accounting and reporting of said funds shall be dealt with
pursuant to HB 408, § 4 of the 1992 regular session of the Kentucky General
Assembly.
   (D)   This section shall be in full force and effect upon signature,
recordation, and publication.
(Ord. 172, passed 7-15-1992)
§ 35.06 INMATE MEDICAL EXPENSE FEE.
   (A)   The County Jailer is hereby authorized to collect a co-payment for
medical expenses of Jail inmates.
   (B)   For every medical expense incurred by a prisoner, the Jailer may
collect a fee of $3 from the Commissary Funds from those prisoners who have
funds available.
(Ord. 261, passed 4-3-1996)
§ 35.07 OUT OF COUNTY PRISONER’S FEES.
   (A)   A per diem fee of $12.50 per prisoner is hereby issued for all out of
county prisoners incarcerated in the County Jail.
   (B)   The transferring county wishing to lodge a prisoner in the County Jail
must first have the permission of the County Jailer and must be responsible for
transporting the prisoner to and from the County Jail.
   (C)   The transferring county shall remain fully responsible for any special
or unusual expenses incurred by the county in housing their prisoner, including
but not limited to medical, dental, and hospital treatment as well as for the
repair or replacement of any property damaged or destroyed by said prisoner.
   (D)   The transferring county shall immediately pick up and remove from the
County Jail any prisoner upon notification by the County Jailer.
   (E)   The County Jailer shall have complete authority in the acceptance,
supervision, and removal of any out of county prisoner, and the decision of the
County Jailer shall be considered as final.
   (F)   All fees and expenses and claims owed to the county are payable upon
presentation of a bill from the County Fiscal Court to the Fiscal Court of the
county of the prisoner’s origin.
   (G)   Prisoners shall include juveniles.
   (H)   Because of the involvement of Hart, Metcalfe, and Monroe Counties, in
the construction phase of the County Jail, in the event of overcrowded
conditions, prisoners from the Counties of Hart, Metcalfe, and Monroe shall be
given priority.
   (I)   The effective date of this section shall be July 1, 1982.
(Ord. 46, passed 6-16-1982)
§ 35.08 COURT COSTS.
Court Costs Fees
Court Costs                             Fees
                                        An additional fee of $25 shall be added
Circuit criminal cases                  to the court costs that the defendant
                                        is required to pay
Civil cases                             An additional fee of $25 shall be added
                                        to filing fees
Civil cases appealed from Circuit Court An additional fee of $25 shall be added
to the Court of Appeals                 to the filing fees
                                         
District civil cases                    An additional fee of $10 shall be added
                                        to all filing fees
Fees normally charged by the County     An additional fee of $10 shall be added
Sheriff for the service of a civil      to the cost paid to the County Sheriff
summons
Fees normally charged by the County     An additional fee of $10 shall be added
Sheriff for the service of a subpoena   to the cost paid to the County Sheriff
Misdemeanor cases                       An additional fee of $20 shall be added
                                        to the court costs
Small claims cases                      An additional fee of $10 shall be added
                                        to all filing fees
Traffic offense cases                   An additional fee of $10 shall be added
                                        to the court costs
 
(Ord. 378, passed 6-18-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Authority for additional court costs, see KRS 23A.220, 24A.185 and 64.091
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm, partnership, or cooperation charged with a duty
under §
35.01 but fails to or refuses to comply herewith shall be fined not less than
$10 nor more than $500 with each day of noncompliance constituting a separate
offense. All fines to be remitted to the General Fund of the county within ten
days after issuance of citation for noncompliance. In the event the citation is
not paid within the time, then this penalty shall be enforced by County
District Court. The County Sheriff shall enforce §
35.01.
(Ord. 199, passed 6-8-1994)
CHAPTER 36: PUBLIC RECORDS
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   Definitions
Procedures for Requesting Public Records
   
36.15   Initial request with immediate inspection
   
36.16   Referral to proper custodian
   
36.17   Public records not immediately available
   
36.18   Refusal of unreasonable requests
   
36.19   Time limitation; denial of inspection
   
36.20   Concealing or destroying records prohibited
   
36.21   Access to records relating to particular individual
   
36.22   Format of copies
   
36.23   Fees for copies
   
36.24   Misstatement of purpose prohibited
   
36.25   Online access to public records in electronic form
   
36.26   Public records protected from disclosure
   
36.27   Notification of the Attorney General
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL PURPOSE. The direct or indirect use of any part of a public
record or records, in any form, for sale, resale, solicitation, rent, or lease
of a service, or any use by which the user expects a profit either through
commission, salary, or fee. COMMERCIAL PURPOSE shall not include:
      (1)   Publication or related use of a public record by a newspaper or
periodical;
      (2)   Use of a public record by a radio or television station in its news
or other informational programs; or
      (3)   Use of a public record in the preparation for prosecution or
defense of litigation, or claims settlement by the parties to the action, or
the attorneys representing the parties.
(KRS 61.870(4))
   COUNTY. The government of this county.
   CUSTODIAN.  
      (1)   The official custodian or any authorized person having personal
custody and control of public records.
(KRS 61.870(6))
      (2)   The CUSTODIAN having personal custody of most of the public records
of this county is the County Clerk.
   MECHANICAL PROCESSING. Any operation or other procedure which is transacted
on a machine, and which may include, but is not limited to a copier, computer,
recorder or tape processor, or other automated device.
(KRS 61.870(8))
   MEDIA. The physical material in or on which records may be stored or
represented, and which may include but is not limited to paper, microform,
disks, diskettes, optical disks, magnetic tapes, and cards.
(KRS 61.870(7))
   OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN.  
      (1)   The chief administrative officer or any other officer or employee
of a public agency who is responsible for the maintenance, care, and keeping of
public records, regardless of whether the records are in his or her actual
personal custody and control.
(KRS 61.870(5))
      (2)   The OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN of this county shall be the County Judge/
Executive.
   PERSON. A human being who makes a request for inspection of public records.
   PRESCRIBED FEE or FEE. The fair payment required by the county for making
copies of public records and for mailing public records, which shall not exceed
the actual cost thereof and shall not include the cost of required staff time.
   PUBLIC AGENCY.  
      (1)   Every state or local government officer;
      (2)   Every state or local government department, division, bureau,
board, commission, and authority;
      (3)   Every state or local legislative board, commission, committee, and
officer;
      (4)   Every county governing body, council, school district board,
special district board, and municipal corporation;
      (5)   Every state or local court or judicial agency;
      (6)   Every state or local government agency, including the policy-making
board of an institution of education, created by or pursuant to state or local
statute, executive order, ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act;
      (7)   Any body created by state or local authority in any branch of
government;
      (8)   Any body which, within any fiscal year, derives at least 25% of its
funds expended by it in the Commonwealth of Kentucky from state or local
authority funds. However, any funds derived from a state or local authority in
compensation for goods or services that are provided by a contract obtained
through a competitive procurement process shall not be included in the
determination of whether a body is a public agency under this division (8);
      (9)   Any entity where the majority of its governing body is appointed by
a public agency as defined in this division; by a member or employee of the
public agency; or by any combination thereof;
      (10)   Any board, commission, committee, subcommittee, ad hoc committee,
advisory committee, council, or agency, except for a committee of a hospital
medical staff, established, created, and controlled by a public agency as
defined in this division; and
      (11)   Any interagency body of two or more public agencies where each
public agency is defined in this division.
(KRS 61.870(1))
   PUBLIC RECORD. All books, papers, maps, photographs, cards, tapes, discs,
diskettes, recordings, software, or other documentation regardless of physical
form or characteristics, which are prepared, owned, used, in the possession of
or retained by the public agency. PUBLIC RECORD shall not include any records
owned or maintained by or for a body discussed in division (8) of the
definition of PUBLIC AGENCY, above that are not related to functions,
activities, programs, or operations funded by state or local authority.
(KRS 61.870(2))
   REQUEST. An oral or written application by any person to inspect public
records of the agency.
   SOFTWARE. The program code which makes a computer system function, but does
not include that portion of the program code which contains public records
exempted from inspection as provided by KRS 61.878 or specific addresses of
files, passwords, access codes, user identifications, or any other mechanism
for controlling the security or restricting access to public records in the
public agency’s computer system. SOFTWARE consists of the operating system,
application programs, procedures, routines, and subroutines such as translators
and utility programs, but does not include that material which is prohibited
from disclosure or copying by a license agreement between a public agency and
an outside entity which supplied the material to the agency.
(KRS 61.870(3))
PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTING PUBLIC RECORDS
§ 36.15 INITIAL REQUEST WITH IMMEDIATE INSPECTION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to inspect or copy the public records of this
county shall make a request for inspection at the office of the County Clerk
during regular office hours, except during legal holidays. The official
custodian, or the custodian acting under the authority of the official
custodian, may require a request to inspect public records to be in writing,
signed by the applicant and with the applicant’s name printed legibly on the
application. A written request to inspect public records may be presented by
hand delivery, mail or via facsimile, if one is available.
   (B)   If the custodian determines that a person’s request is in compliance
with this chapter and the open records law, and the requested public records
are immediately available, the custodian shall deliver the records for
inspection. A person may inspect public records at the designated office of the
county during the regular office hours, or in appropriate cases, by receiving
copies of the records through the mail.
   (C)   If the public records are to be inspected at the offices of the
county, suitable facilities shall be made available in the office of the County
Clerk or in another office of the county as determined by the official
custodian or custodian for the inspection. No person shall remove original
copies of public records from the offices of the county without the written
permission of the official custodian of the record. When public records are
inspected at the county offices, the person inspecting the records shall have
the right to make abstracts and memoranda of the public records and to obtain
copies of all written public records. When copies are requested, the custodian
may require advance payment of the prescribed fee.
   (D)   Upon proper request, the county shall mail copies of the public
records to a person whose residence or principal place of business is located
outside of the county after the person precisely describes the public records
which are readily available and after the person pays in advance the prescribed
fee.
Statutory reference:
   Right to inspection, limitations, see KRS 61.872(1) - (3)
§ 36.16 REFERRAL TO PROPER CUSTODIAN.
   If the County Clerk does not have custody or control of the public record or
records requested, the County Clerk shall notify the applicant and shall
furnish the name and location of the official custodian of the agency’s public
records.
(KRS 61.872(4))
§ 36.17 PUBLIC RECORDS NOT IMMEDIATELY AVAILABLE.
   If the public record is in active use, in storage, or not otherwise
available, the official custodian shall immediately notify the applicant and
shall designate a place, time, and date for inspection or mailing of the public
records, not to exceed three days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays) from receipt of the application, unless a detailed explanation of the
cause is given for further delay and the place, time, and earliest date on
which the public record will be available for inspection or duplication.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see KRS 61.872(5)
§ 36.18 REFUSAL OF UNREASONABLE REQUESTS.
   If the application places an unreasonable burden in producing public
records, or if the custodian has reason to believe that repeated requests are
intended to disrupt other essential functions of the public agency, the
official custodian may refuse to permit inspection of the public records or
mail copies thereof. However, refusal under this section must be sustained by
clear and convincing evidence.
(KRS 61.872(6))
§ 36.19 TIME LIMITATION; DENIAL OF INSPECTION.
   Each public agency, upon any request for records made under this chapter,
shall determine within five days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays) after the receipt of any request whether to comply with the request
and shall notify in writing the person making the request within the five-day
period of its decision. Any agency response denying, in whole or in part,
inspection of any record shall include a statement of the specific exception
authorizing the withholding of the record and a brief explanation of how the
exception applies to the record withheld. The response shall be issued by the
official custodian or under his or her authority and shall constitute final
agency action.
(KRS 61.880(1))
§ 36.20 CONCEALING OR DESTROYING RECORDS PROHIBITED.
   No official of the county shall willfully conceal or destroy any record with
the intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or these rules and
regulations.
§ 36.21 ACCESS TO RECORDS RELATING TO PARTICULAR INDIVIDUAL.
   Any person shall have access to any public record relating to him or her or
in which he or she is mentioned by name, upon presentation of appropriate
identification, subject to the provisions of § 36.26.
(KRS 61.884)
§ 36.22 FORMAT OF COPIES.
   (A)   Upon inspection, the applicant shall have the right to make abstracts
of the public records and memoranda thereof, and to obtain copies of all public
records not exempted by the terms of §
36.26. When copies are requested, the custodian may require a written request
and advance payment of the prescribed fee, including postage where appropriate.
If the applicant desires copies of public records other than written records,
the custodian of the records shall duplicate the records or permit the
applicant to duplicate the records; however, the custodian shall ensure that
the duplication will not damage or alter the original records.
(KRS 61.874(1))
   (B)   (1)   Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial purposes shall
be available for copying in either standard electronic or standard hard copy
format, as designated by the party requesting the records, where the agency
currently maintains the records in electronic format. Nonexempt public records
used for noncommercial purposes shall be copied in standard hard copy format
where agencies currently maintain records in hard copy format. Agencies are not
required to convert hard copy format records to electronic formats.
      (2)   The minimum standard format in paper form shall be defined as not
less than eight and one- half inches by 11 inches in at least one color on
white paper, or for electronic format, in a flat file electronic American
Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) format. If the public agency
maintains electronic public records in a format other than ASCII, and the
format conforms to the requestor’s requirements, the public record may be
provided in this alternate electronic format for standard fees as specified by
the public agency. Any request for a public record in a form other than the
forms described in this section shall be considered a nonstandardized request.
(KRS 61.874(2))
§ 36.23 FEES FOR COPIES.
   (A)   Noncommercial purposes.  The public agency may prescribe a reasonable
fee for making copies of nonexempt public records requested for use for
noncommercial purposes which shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction,
including the costs of the media and any mechanical processing cost incurred by
the public agency, but not including the cost of staff required. If a public
agency is asked to produce a record in a nonstandardized format, or to tailor
the format to meet the request of an individual or a group, the public agency
may at its discretion provide the requested format and recover staff costs as
well as any actual costs incurred.
(KRS 61.874(3))
   (B)   Commercial purposes.
      (1)   Unless an enactment of the General Assembly prohibits the
disclosure of public records to persons who intend to use them for commercial
purposes, if copies of nonexempt public records are requested for commercial
purposes, the public agency may establish a reasonable fee.
      (2)   The public agency from which copies of nonexempt public records are
requested for a commercial purpose may require a certified statement from the
requestor stating the commercial purpose for which they shall be used, and may
require the requestor to enter into a contract with the agency. The contract
shall permit use of the public records for the stated commercial purpose for a
specified fee.
      (3)   The fee provided for in division (B)(1) of this section may be
based on one or both of the following:
         (a)   Cost to the public agency of media, mechanical processing, and
staff required to produce a copy of the public record or records; and
         (b)   Cost to the public agency of the creation, purchase, or other
acquisition of the public records.
(KRS 61.874(4))
Cross-reference:
   Fees for online access to public records, see §
36.25
§ 36.24 MISSTATEMENT OF PURPOSE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to obtain a copy of any part of a public
record for a:
   (A)   Commercial purpose, without stating the commercial purpose, if a
certified statement from the requestor was required by the public agency
pursuant to §
36.23(B)(2);
   (B)   Commercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the use of
the public record for a different commercial purpose; or
   (C)   Noncommercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the use
of the public record for a commercial purpose. A newspaper, periodical, radio
or television station shall not be held to have used or knowingly allowed the
use of the public record for a commercial purpose merely because of its
publication or broadcast, unless it has also given its express permission for
that commercial use.
(KRS 61.874(5)) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 36.25 ONLINE ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS IN ELECTRONIC FORM.
   (A)   Online access to public records in electronic form may be provided and
made available at the discretion of the public agency. If a party wishes to
access public records by electronic means and the public agency agrees to
provide online access, a public agency may require that the party enter into a
contract, license, or other agreement with the agency, and may charge fees for
these agreements.
   (B)   Fees shall not exceed:
      (1)   The cost of physical connection to the system and reasonable cost
of computer time access charges; and
      (2)   If the records are requested for a commercial purpose, a reasonable
fee based on the factors set forth in §
36.23(B).
(KRS 61.874(6))
§ 36.26 PUBLIC RECORDS PROTECTED FROM DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   The following public records are excluded from the application of this
chapter and these rules and regulations and shall be subject to inspection only
upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction, except that no court shall
authorize the inspection by any party of any materials pertaining to civil
litigation beyond that which is provided by the Rules of Civil Procedure
governing pretrial discovery:
      (1)   Public records containing information of a personal nature where
the public disclosure thereof would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion
of personal privacy;
      (2)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency and compiled and
maintained for scientific research. This exemption shall not, however, apply to
records the disclosure or publication of which is directed by other statute;
      (3)   (a)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency, or required by
an agency to be disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or
proprietary, which if openly disclosed would permit an unfair commercial
advantage to competitors of the entity that disclosed the records;
         (b)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency or required by an
agency to be disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or
proprietary, which are compiled and maintained:
            1.   In conjunction with an application for or the administration
of a loan or a grant;
            2.   In conjunction with an application for or the administration
of assessments, incentives, inducements, and tax credits as described in KRS
Chapter 154;
            3.   In conjunction with the regulation of commercial enterprise,
including mineral exploration records, unpatented, secret commercially valuable
plans, appliances, formulae, or processes, which are used for the making,
preparing, compounding, treating, or processing of articles or materials which
are trade commodities obtained from a person; or
            4.   For the grant or review of a license to do business.
         (c)   The exemptions provided for in divisions (A)(3)(a) and (b) above
shall not apply to records the disclosure or publication of which is directed
by statute;
      (4)   Public records pertaining to a prospective location of a business
or industry where no previous public disclosure has been made of the business’
or industry’s interest in locating in, relocating within, or expanding within
the Commonwealth. This exemption shall not include those records pertaining to
applications to agencies for permits or licenses necessary to do business or to
expand business operations within the state, except as provided in division (A)
(3) above;
      (5)   Public records which are developed by an agency in conjunction with
the regulation or supervision of financial institutions, including but not
limited to, banks, savings and loan associations, and credit unions, which
disclose the agency’s internal examining or audit criteria and related
analytical methods;
      (6)   The contents of real estate appraisals or engineering or
feasibility estimates and evaluations made by or for a public agency relative
to acquisition of property, until such time as all of the property has been
acquired. The law of eminent domain shall not be affected by this provision;
      (7)   Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data used to
administer a licensing examination, examination for employment, or academic
examination before the exam is given or if it is to be given again;
      (8)   Records of law enforcement agencies or agencies involved in
administrative adjudication that were compiled in the process of detecting and
investigating statutory or regulatory violations if the disclosure of the
information would harm the agency by revealing the identity of informants not
otherwise known or by premature release of information to be used in a
prospective law enforcement action or administrative adjudication. Unless
exempted by other provisions of this chapter, public records exempted under
this provision shall be open after enforcement action is completed or a
decision is made to take no action; however, records or information compiled
and maintained by county attorneys or Commonwealth’s attorneys pertaining to
criminal investigations or criminal litigation shall be exempted from the
provisions of this chapter and shall remain exempted after enforcement action,
including litigation, is completed or a decision is made to take no action. The
exemptions provided by this division (A)(8) shall not be used by the custodian
of the records to delay or impede the exercise of rights granted by this
chapter;
      (9)   Preliminary drafts, notes, or correspondence with private
individuals, other than correspondence which is intended to give notice of
final action of a public agency;
      (10)   Preliminary recommendations and preliminary memoranda in which
opinions are expressed or policies formulated or recommended;
      (11)   All public records or information, the disclosure of which is
prohibited by federal law or regulation or state law;
      (12)   Public records or information the disclosure of which is
prohibited or restricted or otherwise made confidential by enactment of the
General Assembly, including any information acquired by the Department of
Revenue in tax administration that is prohibited from divulgence or disclosure
under KRS 131.190;
      (13)   (a)   Public records the disclosure of which would have a
reasonable likelihood of threatening the public safety by exposing a
vulnerability in preventing, protecting against, mitigating, or responding to a
terrorist act and limited to:
            1.   Criticality lists resulting from consequence assessments.
            2.   Vulnerability assessments;
            3.   Antiterrorism protective measures and plans;
            4.   Counterterrorism measures and plans;
            5.   Security and response needs assessments;
            6.   Infrastructure records that expose a vulnerability referred to
in this division (A)(13) through the disclosure of the location, configuration,
or security of critical systems, including public utility critical systems.
These critical systems shall include but not be limited to information
technology, communication, electrical, fire suppression, ventilation, water,
wastewater, sewage and gas systems.
            7.   The following records when their disclosure will expose a
vulnerability referred to in this division (A)(13): detailed drawings,
schematics, maps, or specifications of structural elements, floor plans, and
operating, utility or security systems of any building or facility owned,
occupied, leased or maintained by a public agency; and
            8.   Records when their disclosure will expose a vulnerability
referred to in this division (A)(13) and that describe the exact physical
location of hazardous chemical, radiological, or biological materials.
         (b)   As used in this division (A)(13), TERRORIST ACT means a criminal
act intended to:
            1.   Intimidate or coerce a public agency or all or part of the
civilian population;
            2.   Disrupt a system identified in division (A)(13)(a)6.; or
            3.   Cause massive destruction to a building or facility owned,
occupied, leased, or maintained by a public agency.
         (c)   On the same day that a public agency denies a request to inspect
a public record for a reason identified in this division (A)(13), that public
agency shall forward a copy of the written denial of the request, referred to
in KRS 61.880(1), to the Executive Director of the Kentucky Office of Homeland
Security and the Attorney General;
         (d)   Nothing in this division (A)(13) shall affect the obligations of
a public agency with respect to disclosure and availability of public records
under state environmental, health, and safety programs;
         (e)   The exemption established in this division (A)(13) shall not
apply when a member of the Kentucky General Assembly seeks to inspect a public
record identified in this division (A)(13) under the Open Records Law; and
      (14)    Public or private records, including books, papers, maps,
photographs, cards, tapes, discs, diskettes, recordings, software, or other
documentation regardless of physical form or characteristics, having historic,
literary, artistic, or commemorative value accepted by the archivist of a
public university, museum, or government depository from a donor or depositor
other than a public agency. This exemption shall apply to the extent that
nondisclosure is requested in writing by the donor or depositor of such
records, but shall not apply to records the disclosure or publication of which
is mandated by another statute or by federal law;
      (15)   Records of a procurement process under KRS Chs. 45A or 56. This
exemption shall not apply after:
         (a)   A contract is awarded; or
         (b)   The procurement process is canceled without award of a contract
and there is a determination that the contract will not be resolicited; and
      (16)   Client and case files maintained by the Department of Public
Advocacy or any person or entity contracting with the Department of Public
Advocacy for the provision of legal representation under KRS Chapter 31;
      (17)   Communications of a purely personal nature unrelated to any
governmental function; and
      (18)   Except as provided in KRS 61.168, photographs or videos that
depict the death, killing, rape, or sexual assault of a person. However, such
photographs or videos shall be made available by the public agency to the
requesting party for viewing on the premises of the public agency, or a
mutually agreed upon location, at the request of;
         (a)   1.   Any victim depicted in the photographs or videos, his or
her immediate family, or legal representative;
            2.   Any involved insurance company or its representative; or
            3.   The legal representative of any involved party;
         (b)   Any state agency or political subdivision investigating official
misconduct; or
         (c)   A legal representative for a person under investigation for,
charged with, pled guilty to, or found guilty of a crime related to the
underlying incident. The person under investigation for, charged with, pled
guilty to, or found guilty of a crime related to the underlying incident or
their immediate family shall not be permitted to have access to the photographs
or videos.
      (19)   Records confidentially maintained by a law enforcement agency in
accordance with a wellness program, including an early intervention system, as
described in state law.
(KRS 61.878(1))
   (B)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to prohibit
disclosure of statistical information not descriptive of any readily
identifiable person.
(KRS 61.878(2))
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall in no way prohibit or limit the
exchange of public records or the sharing of information between public
agencies when the exchange is serving a legitimate governmental need or is
necessary in the performance of a legitimate government function.
   (D)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to deny, abridge,
or impede the right of a municipal employee, an applicant for employment, or an
eligible on a register to inspect and copy any record, including preliminary
and other supporting documentation, that relates to him or her. These records
shall include but not be limited to work plans, job performance, demotions,
evaluations, promotions, compensation, classification, reallocation, transfers,
layoffs, disciplinary actions, examination scores, and preliminary and other
supporting documentation. A county employee, applicant, or eligible shall not
have the right to inspect or copy any examination or any documents relating to
ongoing criminal or administrative investigations by any agency.
(KRS 61.878(3))
   (E)   In addition, if any public record contains material which is not
excepted under this section, the public agency shall separate the excepted and
make the nonexcepted material available for examination, subject to the
possible applicability of §
36.18.
(KRS 61.878(4))
§ 36.27 NOTIFICATION OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
   The official custodian shall notify the Attorney General of any actions
filed against the county in circuit court regarding the enforcement of the Open
Records Law, KRS 61.870 to 61.884.
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE
      
51.   OPEN DUMPING
      
52.   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL RESPONSE
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
Disposal of Solid Waste
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Designated disposal site
   
50.03   Prohibited practices
   
50.04   Effective date
Collection and Transportation of Solid Waste
   
50.15   Title
   
50.16   Definitions and tense
   
50.17   Application of this subchapter
   
50.18   Regulations governing the conduct of business
   
50.19   Notice
   
50.20   Effective date
Solid Waste at Landfills
   
50.35   Solid waste disposal at Glasgow City Landfill
 
   
50.99   Penalty
DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE. Solid waste resulting from the operation of any
commercial, industrial, institutional, or agricultural establishment.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, political subdivision, or organization of any kind, or
their legal representative, agent, or assigns.
   RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE. Solid waste resulting from the maintenance and
operation of dwelling units.
   SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, sludge, or other discarded material,
including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting
from industrial, commercial, mining (excluding coal mining waste, coal mining
by-products, refuse, and overburden), and agricultural operations and from
community activities, but does not include solid or dissolved material in
domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or
industrial discharges.
(Ord. 93, passed 2-4-1987)
§ 50.02 DESIGNATED DISPOSAL SITE.
   Presently, the only permitted solid waste disposal site in the county is in
the City of Glasgow and that site is herein designated the legally-recognized
site for the disposal of solid waste in the aforesaid county.
(Ord. 93, passed 2-4-1987)
§ 50.03 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   It shall be prohibited for any person to do any of the following:
   (A)   Dispose of any solid waste, as defined §
50.01, by dumping same on any premises within the county other than an approved
disposal site, with or without the consent of the owner of the premises;
   (B)   Dump or permit the dumping of solid waste on public rights-of-way of
county roads or streams;
   (C)   Deposit solid waste in any container not his or her own, or to add to
another person’s waste with the intent of avoiding payment of service charges
for collection by an authorized collector of solid waste;
   (D)   Dispose of dead animals except as provided by laws of the
commonwealth;
   (E)   Own or operate a dump except under permit from the Cabinet for Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection; and/or
   (F)   Engage in the business of collection and transfer of waste within the
county except as provided by ordinance of the Fiscal Court when enacted, or of
the incorporated cities of the county.
(Ord. 93, passed 2-4-1987) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter becomes effective immediately upon passage upon second
reading and publication.
(Ord. 93, passed 2-4-1987)
COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION OF SOLID WASTE
§ 50.15 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Barren County Waste
Hauler’s License Ordinance”.
(Ord. 126, passed 5-17-1989)
§ 50.16 DEFINITIONS AND TENSE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BUSINESS. The collection, and/or hauling, of solid waste for ultimate
disposal for persons other than one’s self, for any kind of return or
remuneration (the rendering of assistance for cleaning up of property and/or
the assemblage of waste as a handy man or yard worker is excluded from this
definition).
      COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE. Solid waste resulting from operation of any
commercial, industrial, institutional, or agricultural establishment.
      PERMIT. An authorization to engage in the business of collecting and
transporting solid waste under regulations established in this subchapter. May
also be referred to as a LICENSE.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, joint
stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, or organization of any
kind, or their legal representative, agent, or assigns.
      RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE. Solid waste resulting from the maintenance and
operation of dwelling units.
      SHALL. The act referred to is always mandatory and not merely directory.
      SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, sludge, or other discarded material,
including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting
from industrial, commercial, mining (excluding coal mining waste, coal mining
by-products, refuse, and overburden), and agricultural operations and from
community activities, but does not include solid or dissolved material in
domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or
industrial discharges .
      VEHICLE. Any truck, trailer, or other conveyance used in the collection
and/or transport of solid waste.
   (B)   Tense; singular and plural. When not inconsistent with the context,
words in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number
include the singular number, and words in singular number include the plural
number.
(Ord. 126, passed 5-17-1989)
§ 50.17 APPLICATION OF THIS SUBCHAPTER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
collecting or transporting solid waste without a permit for the conduct of such
business issued upon the approval and authority of the County Fiscal Court.
   (B)   Permits shall be issued for a period of one year, beginning each July
1, subject to continued conformance with the regulations governing the
collection and transportation of solid waste in the county.
   (C)   All applications for a permit, or license, to engage in the business
of waste collection and transport must be made on the official form which may
be obtained at the office of the County Court Clerk. Failure to complete any
portion of the application form, or the giving of false information in the
application shall be grounds for denial of the requested permit.
   (D)   The application form appended to this subchapter, and embodied
therein, shall be the official application form of the county. Exact
reproduction by copies is permissible.
   (E)   A license fee of $10 per annum is imposed for each business.
   (F)   All license fees shall be payable to the County Clerk and be credited
to the General Fund of the county to be used for county purposes only. The
County Clerk is hereby allowed a commission of 5% of the license fee, collected
and accounted for by him or her and a $1.50 fee for license issuance as the
Clerk’s sole compensation for issuance of said licenses and keeping the records
thereof.
(Ord. 126, passed 5-17-1989) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.18 REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Any vehicle used for the collection and transportation of solid waste
must be in sound operating condition, and must be licensed as a commercial
vehicle in conformance with the laws of the commonwealth.
   (B)   Vehicles known as “packers” are to be preferred. If other vehicles are
used, that portion of the vehicle used for the containment of waste shall be
solid on the sides and end, and appropriately covered at the top to prevent the
loss of waste in transit.
   (C)   Persons engaged in the business of solid waste collection and hauling
must carry liability insurance, and must furnish proof of such coverage when
applying for a permit.
   (D)   All waste collected in the county must be disposed of in an approved,
permitted waste facility. The approved site for disposal is the City of Glasgow
Landfill or any permitted site in any county other than the county.
   (E)   Solid waste set out for pick-up at agreed-to locations must be in
either:
      (1)   Thirty-gallon cans of plastic or metal with tightly fitting tops;
      (2)   Plastic bags with secure ties;
      (3)   In containers provided by the hauler; or
      (4)   Otherwise secured against the ravages of weather, dogs, or other
animals.
   (F)   Any person or firm holding a county-wide permit must make service
available to any householder requesting it.
   (G)   Permit holders must make annual reports concerning the average number
of households served and the total area being serviced.
(Ord. 126, passed 5-17-1989)
§ 50.19 NOTICE.
   The County Clerk shall advertise annually that said permits for hauling and
collection of solid waste hereunder are due on July 1, beginning August, and
said advertisements shall be published in the newspaper having the greatest
county-wide circulation, not less than ten days prior to July 1 each year. In
the event the Clerk’s notice hereunder is not advertised to the public at least
ten days prior to July 1, enforcement of this subchapter shall not commence
until 30 days after said notice is in fact first published as provided herein.
(Ord. 126, passed 5-17-1989)
§ 50.20 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter becomes effective immediately upon passage upon second
reading and publication.
(Ord. 126, passed 5-17-1989)
SOLID WASTE AT LANDFILLS
§ 50.35 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AT GLASGOW CITY LANDFILL.
   Effective February 6, 2001, all solid waste generated in the county,
excluding composted and recycled items, shall be deposited at the Glasgow City
Landfill.
(Ord. 440, passed 4-18-2006)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
50.01 through
50.04, or any lawful rules or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, upon
conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $500,
provided that each day’s violation thereof shall be a separate offense for the
purpose hereof. Violators of §§
50.01 through
50.04 may be issued a citation by the Sheriff of the county or by a duly-
authorized official.
   (C)   (1)   The Sheriff of the county shall enforce §§
50.15 through
50.20.
      (2)   Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation charged with a duty
under §§
50.15 through
50.20 but fails to or refuses to comply with §§
50.15 through
50.20 shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $500 with each day of
noncompliance constituting a separate offense. All fines shall be remitted to
the General Fund of the county within ten days after issuance of citation for
noncompliance. In the event the citation is not paid within that time then this
penalty shall be enforced by the County District Court.
   (D)   Failure to comply with §
50.35 shall be punishable of a fine no greater than $500 per day.
(Ord. 93, passed 2-4-1987; Ord. 126, passed 5-17-1989; Ord. 440, passed 4-18-
2006)
CHAPTER 51: OPEN DUMPING
Section
   
51.01   Title
   
51.02   Definitions
   
51.03   Prohibition
   
51.04   Applicability; exemptions
   
51.05   Notice of violation; demand to abate
   
51.06   Service of notice
   
51.07   Abatement of county government; lien for costs
   
51.08   Hearing
   
51.09   Effective date
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Barren County Open Dumping”.
(Ord. 294, passed 10-21-1997)
§ 51.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNTY. The County of Barren including but not limited to the unincorporated
areas of Barren County.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a structure and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or intended to
be used, for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. Said structures may be
single-family structures, including mobile homes, or multi-family structures.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who, alone, jointly, or severally with others, shall be
in actual possession of any dwelling unit or of any improved real property,
either as owner or tenant.
   OPEN DUMP. Any facility or site used for the disposal of solid waste which
has not been awarded a permit to function as a site for the disposal of solid
waste.
   PROPERTY UNDER CULTIVATION OR OTHERWISE USED FOR AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES.
Property or portion thereof used for the cultivation of corn, wheat, tobacco,
soybeans, or any other legal marketable crop, or being used as pasture land.
   SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, sludge, or otherwise discarded material
including, but not limited to, the following.
      (1)   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS. Including any material related
to the construction, remodeling, or demolition of property but not including
hazardous materials.
      (2)   MISCELLANEOUS SOLID WASTE. Including, but not limited to, solid
waste such as junk automobiles and automobile parts, tires, and boats that
cannot be collected through typical solid waste collection procedures.
      (3)   OVERSIZED SOLID WASTE. Including, but not limited to, items of
household solid waste such as refrigerators and appliances, washers and dryers,
mattresses, furniture, and air conditioning units that cannot be collected
through typical solid waste collection procedures.
      (4)   RESIDENTIAL YARD WASTE. Including, but not limited to, leaves,
brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, and other vegetative matter
resulting from residential landscape maintenance which has been diverted or
separated from the residential solid waste stream.
   SUBDIVISION. Any area designated by plat, zoning ordinance, or deed, and
consisting of single- or multi-family dwellings.
(Ord. 294, passed 10-21-1997)
§ 51.03 PROHIBITION.
   No persons owning, occupying, or otherwise charged with the maintenance of
real property located in the county shall permit the dumping or accumulation of
solid waste, as defined §
51.02, on their premises. Any dumping of solid waste on property not designated
as a site for the disposal of solid waste shall constitute a material violation
of this chapter and render the violator liable for the penalties set forth
herein.
(Ord. 294, passed 10-21-1997) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.04 APPLICABILITY; EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter shall apply to the following:
   (A)   All residential subdivisions located within the county;
   (B)   All properties not located within a residential subdivision but which
consists of less than five acres of land; and
   (C)   In no instance shall this chapter apply to solid waste originating
from cultivation or agricultural activities and deposited on property under
cultivation or otherwise being used for agricultural purposes.
(Ord. 294, passed 10-21-1997)
§ 51.05 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; DEMAND TO ABATE.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   The County Judge/Executive, or his or her designated agent or any
other designated agent of the county, may take it upon his or her own
initiative, or upon the written request of complainant that has an adjacent,
adjoining, or across from property from the location, to determine whether a
violation of this chapter has occurred.
      (2)   The results of the investigation shall be disclosed forthwith to
the County Judge/Executive and the County Attorney. If, based upon the
investigation, there is probable cause to believe a violation exists, abatement
may be accomplished as follows.
   (B)   Notice of violation; demand to abate. It shall be the duty of the
County Judge/Executive or his or her designated agent or any other designated
agent of the county to serve or cause to be served upon the alleged violator,
notice which shall describe the violation so maintained and demand abatement
within 14 days of the date of notice. If, however, the violation constitutes an
immediate danger to the health and well-being of the community, said notice
shall demand abatement within 72 hours.
   (C)   Contents of notice of violation. The notice shall include the
following:
      (1)   A statement that if the violation is not remedied within the
prescribed time, the county government may proceed, on its own initiative, to
abate the violation;
      (2)   A brief description of the procedures required for the county to
accomplish abatement and an estimate as to the costs necessary to remedy the
violation;
      (3)   A statement that the alleged violator shall be deemed personally
liable for costs incurred by the county government to abate the violation. The
alleged violator shall be informed that the county government may bring a civil
action to collect the costs incurred in abating the violation; and
      (4)   A statement that the alleged violator shall be afforded a hearing
before the County Fiscal Court or other body so designated to conduct such a
hearing, if requested, in writing, within seven days of issuance of the notice
of violation and demand for abatement.
(Ord. 294, passed 10-21-1997; Am. Ord. 637, passed 3-17-2020)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   Any person violating this chapter shall be notified of the violation by
hand-delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested, at the subject’s
last known address, or the address appearing on the current tax assessment
roll. Refusal to accept delivery of the notice of violation is tantamount to
receipt.
(Ord. 294, passed 10-21-1997)
§ 51.07 ABATEMENT OF COUNTY GOVERNMENT; LIEN FOR COSTS.
   If the alleged violator, so served, fails to abate the violation or request
a hearing within the period prescribed, the county government may proceed to
abate the violation as follows.
   (A)   Failure to bring one’s property into compliance within the time period
provided in the notice of violation shall constitute permission to an official
of the county, or its designee, to enter onto the offending property for the
purpose of making preparations to abate the violation.
   (B)   If the county or its designee must act to abate the violations of this
chapter, the county government shall keep an account of the cost incurred to
abate the violation. Such account shall be charged to and paid by the violator.
In addition to any other remedy allowed by law, the county government may bring
a civil action against the alleged violator and shall have the same remedies as
provided for in the recovery of a debt owed.
   (C)   Upon the violator’s failure to reimburse the county for expenses
incurred in abating violations of this chapter, the county may cause to be
filed, in the office of the County Clerk, a lien against the offending property
for the actual cost incurred in abating the violation, including administrative
expenses plus interest at the rate of 12% per annum. Said lien may be enforced
by a foreclosure proceeding as provided by law, and in such event, the violator
shall be liable for recording fees, recoverable court costs, and reasonable
attorney fees.
(Ord. 294, passed 10-21-1997) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.08 HEARING.
   (A)   The hearing shall be scheduled within 21 days of the request for
hearing.
   (B)   Notice of the hearing shall be given by regular mail and shall include
the date, time, and place said hearing will be conducted.
   (C)   Such notice shall be mailed to the alleged violator at least seven
days prior to the date of the hearing.
   (D)   The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner with the alleged
violator being given the opportunity to present his or her interests to the
court.
   (E)   The County Fiscal Court or other body conducting said hearing shall
have a reasonable time in which to render a decision and shall notify the
alleged violator, in writing, of its decision and action to be taken.
(Ord. 294, passed 10-21-1997)
§ 51.09 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective immediately upon passage and
publication.
(Ord. 294, passed 10-21-1997)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter. An officer charged with enforcing this
chapter may issue a citation for the violation. Persons violating this chapter
shall be subject to the following penalties. A fine to be paid to the county of
not less than $250 nor more than $500, a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90
days, or both.
   (B)   Each day the property’s condition remains in violation of this chapter
shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 294, passed 10-21-1997)
CHAPTER 52: HAZARDOUS MATERIAL RESPONSE
Section
   
52.01   Cost recovery for emergency responses dealing with hazardous materials
   
52.02   Response outside service areas or pursuant to mutual aid agreements
§ 52.01 COST RECOVERY FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSES DEALING WITH HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   (A)   Any person causing an unauthorized release of any hazardous substance
which requires the county, any county volunteer fire department, any county
agency, or any agent of the county to expend public funds for the response to
the release, its abatement, or the cleanup or removal of such hazardous
substance, shall be liable to the county for all recoverable costs as outlined
herein below incurred by the county, any county volunteer fire department, any
county agency, or any agent of the county for such response, cleanup, and
removal.
   (B)   In the event of a hazardous substance release or threatened releases
involving materials in transit, the shipper or carrier, the owner of the
substances, and all other responsible persons, jointly and severally, shall be
responsible for all costs incurred by the county, any county volunteer fire
department, any county agency, any agent of the county, or any other dispatched
emergency response team responding to the incident or providing mutual aid to
the county or any county volunteer fire department including, but not limited
to, personnel costs incurred in responding to the release or threatened
release, replacement costs of supplies and equipment contaminated as a result
of the release or threatened release, and proper disposal of contaminated
materials, release and proper disposal of contaminated materials, cleanup,
evacuation, and administrative and other expenses that result from the release
or threatened release, including legal expenses, incurred in recovering these
costs. The County Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to initiate such
proceedings, in the name of the county in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters as are necessary to cover costs incurred as described herein.
   (C)   In the event of a hazardous substance release or threatened release
involving a fixed facility, the operator, owner, and all other persons
responsible for the presence of hazardous substances shall be responsible for
all costs incurred by the county, any county volunteer fire department, any
county agency, any agent of the county, or any other dispatched emergency
response team responding to the incident or providing mutual aid to the county
or any county volunteer fire department including, but not limited to,
personnel costs incurred in responding to the release or threatened release,
replacement costs of supplies and equipment contaminated as a result of the
release or threatened release, and proper disposal of contaminated materials,
cleanup, evacuation, and administrative and other expenses that result for the
release or threatened release including legal expenses incurred in recovering
these costs. The County Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to initiate
such proceedings in the name of the county in any court having jurisdiction
over such matters as are necessary to cover costs incurred as described herein.
   (D)   Any hazardous substance or material release shall be considered a
public health hazard and for those responses by the county, any county
volunteer fire department, any county agency, any agent of the county, or any
other dispatched emergency response team responding to the incident or
providing mutual aid to the county or any county volunteer fire department,
including a fixed facility within the county, the county shall have a lien
against the property for the recoverable costs described herein. The affidavit
of the County Judge/Executive shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
amount of the lien and shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk. The
lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording and shall
bear interest thereafter at the rate of 12% until paid. The lien created shall
take priority over all other subsequent liens, except those asserted by any
city or other taxing district, which has priority under KRS 134.420, and may be
enforced by judicial proceeding. The owner of property upon which a lien has
been attached under this chapter shall also be personally liable for the amount
of the lien, including all interest, civil penalties, and other charges, and
the county shall have the same remedies as provided for the recovery of a debt
owed.
(Ord. 370, passed 2-5-2002)
§ 52.02 RESPONSE OUTSIDE SERVICE AREAS OR PURSUANT TO MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   The county, any county volunteer fire department, any county agency,
any agent of the county, or any other dispatched emergency response team
responding to an incident shall respond to releases or threatened releases
outside its service area or jurisdiction only if written agreements are
executed with the handler, user, or other public entity requesting assistance,
prior to the response. Said agreements are to be approved by the County Fiscal
Court.
   (B)   In the event that the county, any county volunteer fire department,
any county agency, any agent of the county, or any other dispatched emergency
response team responding to an incident respond to a release or threatened
release outside its service area or jurisdiction under the conditions described
above, the handler, user, or other public entity requesting assistance shall
assume responsibility to the county or any county volunteer fire department or
any other dispatched emergency response team for all personnel costs incurred
in responding to the release or threatened release, replacement costs of
supplies and equipment contaminated as a result of the release or threatened
release, and proper disposal of contaminated materials, cleanup, evacuation,
and administrative and other expenses that result for the release or threatened
release. The County Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to initiate such
proceedings against the handler, user, or other public entity in the name of
the county in any court having jurisdiction over such matters as are necessary
to recover the costs described herein.
(Ord. 370, passed 2-5-2002)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
72.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Vehicles of the constable
   
70.02   County road survey
   
70.03   Specifications for county roads
   
70.04   Accuracy of county road designations for 9-1-1 purposes
   
70.05   Advertising signs and billboards on county roads
   
70.06   Maintenance and upkeep of signage on private roadways abutting public
roadways
   
70.07   Street-legal special purpose vehicles
§ 70.01 VEHICLES OF THE CONSTABLE.
   (A)   A constable in the county shall have the authority to equip the
vehicle used by him or her with one or more flashing, rotating, or oscillating
blue lights, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500
feet to the front of such vehicle, and a siren, capable of emitting a sound
audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet,
under the following terms and conditions.
      (1)   The constable shall comply with the provisions of KRS 304.39-110
(2). On or before January 1 of each year, commencing with January 1, 1985, said
constable shall exhibit to the Fiscal Court, or any designated officer, proof
of said liability coverage for a period of not less than one year, with the
provision that all constables duly elected and serving at the time of the
passage of this section on second reading shall be required to exhibit proof of
such coverage commencing with the date of the enactment of this section through
and including January 1, 1985, before they shall be allowed to affix such
emergency equipment to their respective vehicles.
      (2)   At no time while the constable’s vehicle is equipped with such
emergency equipment shall the vehicle be painted or marked in any way similar
or identical to the vehicles utilized by the County Sheriff’s Department.
      (3)   At no time while the constable’s vehicle is equipped with such
emergency equipment shall the constable wear a uniform similar or identical in
color or markings to the uniforms worn by the County Sheriff’s officers.
      (4)   The constable shall use such emergency equipment only in the
district in which he or she was elected unless he or she is authorized by the
County Sheriff or any one or more of the County Sheriff’s deputies to use such
emergency equipment outside the district in which he or she was elected.
   (B)   Any constable who violates any provision of this section shall, at the
request of the Fiscal Court, immediately remove the emergency equipment from
his or her vehicle. Any such constable shall be entitled to an administrative
hearing before the County Fiscal Court, conducted in accordance with the policy
and procedures manual of the county.
   (C)   This section becomes effective immediately upon passage.
(Ord. 68, passed 9-5-1984)
§ 70.02 COUNTY ROAD SURVEY.
   The County Fiscal Court adopts the map attached to the ordinance codified
herein as the official county road survey of the county.
(Ord. 232, passed 9-6-1995)
§ 70.03 SPECIFICATIONS FOR COUNTY ROADS.
   (A)   For the purpose of adopting new county roads, there shall be three
classes of county roads, local, collector, and arterial that meet the following
minimum specifications.
        Local              Collector          Arterial
Purpose Access to Property Distribute Traffic Connects Towns and Facilities
                     Local               Collector          Arterial
Purpose              Access to Property  Distribute Traffic Connects Towns and
                                                            Facilities
Base and thickness   3-inch DGA/         4-inch DGA/        6-inch DGA/
                     equivalent          equivalent         equivalent
Gross weight limit   44,0000 pounds      44,000 pounds      44,000 pounds
Length               Generally under one 0.3-3.5 miles      0.7 miles and over
                     mile
Pavement/surface     10 feet             14 feet            18 feet
width
R/W width            60-foot minimum     60-foot minimum    60-foot minimum
Roadway width with   12-foot minimum     18-foot minimum    22-foot minimum
shoulders
Shoulder width       1-foot minimum      2-foot minimum     2-foot minimum
Speed limit          55 mph              55 mph             55 mph
Surface thickness if N/A                 2-inch surface BIT 4-inch base and 2-
Bituminous                                                  inch surface BIT
Surface type         TBM (gravel)        Chip and seal      Bituminous
NOTE TO TABLE:
BIT= Bituminous hot mix
 
   (B)   Roads may be accepted into the county road system by the Fiscal Court
in accordance with KRS 179.470 and the minimum specifications set forth in this
section.
   (C)   Prior to Fiscal Court consideration of a road for acceptance into the
county road system, the County Road Engineer shall certify that the following
minimum specifications have been met or exceeded:
      (1)   A copy of all property owners’ deeds and a certification of title
certifying good, marketable, and fee simple title in the property owners
proposing to deed the road right-of-way to the county; and
      (2)   Certification by the property owners and the County Road Supervisor
that fences, buildings, gates, and cattle gates have been removed from the
proposed county road and the rights-of-way or other provisions have been made
on a case by case basis as approved by Fiscal Court.
   (D)   In addition to other requirements and specifications, a road may be
considered for acceptance into the county road system only if three of the
following five conditions are met:
      (1)   The road has, in any combination, at least five occupied houses or
property owners per mile, or ratio thereof;
      (2)   The road serves as a farm to market road for cash crops;
      (3)   The road is served by city water;
      (4)   The road serves as a mail route by the U.S. Post Office; and
      (5)   The road serves as a school bus route.
   (E)   A county road shall be adopted in its entirety, for its full length.
No fractional or partial length adoptions shall be made.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995; Ord. 333, passed 11-16-1999)
§ 70.04 ACCURACY OF COUNTY ROAD DESIGNATIONS FOR 9-1-1 PURPOSES.
   (A)   The name of any private road can be assigned or changed, as necessary,
by an order of the County Judge/Executive. Such order may be issued on a
petition in which 75% or more of the property owners abutting on the road have
joined in the petition.
   (B)   By similar proceeding, a public road which has not been adopted into
the county road system may be named or renamed.
   (C)   By similar proceeding, an order may be issued designating a name for
any unnamed private or public road in the county.
   (D)   The Fiscal Court may cause signs bearing the name of each road as
fixed by the County Judge/Executive, to be placed on the roads, or it may, by a
resolution duly recorded, authorize any person or organization to erect signs,
approved as to form by the Fiscal Court, bearing the name designated to the
road by the County Judge/Executive.
   (E)   No person or organization shall remove or damage any sign erected as
hereinabove provided for, or erect or place, or cause to be erected or placed,
upon a road, any sign or signs, indicating, marking, or designating a road by
any other name than as hereinabove provided for.
(Ord. 213, passed 1-18-1995; Ord. 257, passed 2-21-1996) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.05 ADVERTISING SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS ON COUNTY ROADS.
   (A)   Beginning, January 1, 2000, the erection and/or maintenance of
permanent advertising signs and/or billboards on county roads and roads with
county rights-of-way, including any such sign or billboard already in existence
on January 1, 2000, other than those specifically permitted below is
prohibited.
   (B)   The erection and/or maintenance of any of the following signs or
billboards shall not be a violation of the above prohibition:
      (1)   An advertising sign or billboard erected or maintained on property
for the purpose of setting forth or indicating:
         (a)   The name and address of the owner, lessee, or occupant of such
property;
         (b)   The name or type of business or profession conducted on such
property; or
         (c)   Information required or authorized by law to be posted or
displayed thereon.
      (2)   An advertising sign or billboard which is not visible from any
traveled portion of a county road or road with a county right of way.
      (3)   An advertising sign or billboard indicating the sale or leasing of
the property upon which it is placed.
      (4)   A political sign or signs if authorized by the owner of the
property upon which it is placed.
   (C)   Any advertising sign or billboard which impedes mowing or otherwise
maintaining a county road or road with a county right-of-way, or which impedes
motorists' view entering traffic or otherwise such as to be a hazard is
prohibited.
   (D)   Any advertising sign or billboard prohibited by this section is hereby
declared to be, and is, a public nuisance. The process for removal shall be as
follows:
      (1)   The county shall send a notification letter by certified mail to
the owner of such advertising sign or billboard.
      (2)   If the owner is not readily ascertainable, then a notification
letter shall be placed on such advertising sign or billboard.
      (3)   Notification letters shall indicate that action is being taken by
the county and that such advertising sign or billboard shall be removed
immediately, and if the owner does not do so the County Road Supervisor or his
designee and the Sheriff Department will remove such advertising sign or
billboard.
      (4)   When ten days from the date a notification letter has been received
or refused, or if the owner of an advertising sign or billboard is not readily
ascertainable, ten days from the date a notification letter has been placed on
such advertising sign or billboard, the County Road Supervisor or his designee
and the Sheriff Department shall remove the advertising sign or billboard.
   (E)   Any person who willfully violates this ordinance shall be fined not
less than $100 nor more than $500.
   (F)   Permanent advertising signs or billboards as stated above means any
billboard, sign, notice, poster, display, or other device intended to attract
the attention of operators of motor vehicles on County roads and roads with
County rights-of-way, which is on a steel, concrete, or solid metal post, or
any semblance thereof, and shall include a structure erected or used in
connection with the display of any device and all lighting or other attachments
used in connection therewith. Also, permanent signs or billboards means any
other advertising sign or billboard which remains in a certain spot or within a
1,500 foot radius for 30 days. However, it does not include directional road
signs or official signs, or signals erected by the State, County, or other
public agencies having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 329, passed 11-16-1999)
§ 70.06 MAINTENANCE AND UPKEEP OF SIGNAGE ON PRIVATE ROADWAYS ABUTTING PUBLIC
ROADWAYS.
The Barren County Fiscal Court will maintain and upkeep signage of private
roadways abutting public roadways KRS 67.083(g).
(Ord. 622, passed 4-16-2019)
§ 70.07 STREET-LEGAL SPECIAL PURPOSE VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. The definitions set forth in Section 1(1) of the 2025 Ky.
Acts Ch. 89 (hereinafter "the Act"), and as may be amended in the future by the
Kentucky General Assembly, are adopted and incorporated by reference as if set
forth fully herein.
   (B)   Designated highways. Street-legal special purpose vehicles shall be
allowed to the extent permitted by the Act on all highways that are located
within the jurisdictional limits of the county except for those roads listed in
division (C).
   (C)   Exceptions. Street-legal special purpose vehicles shall not be allowed
to operate:
      (1)   On any highway, or portion thereof, located within the
jurisdictional limits of the county unless allowed by this section.
      (2)   On any highway, or portion thereof, that is a controlled access
system, including but not limited to an interstate or parkway; or
      (2)   On any highway, or portion thereof, where the United States
Department of Agriculture prohibits special purpose vehicles.
   (D)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   Street-legal special purpose vehicles are prohibited from traveling
a distance greater than 20 miles on a highway displaying centerline pavement
markings.
      (2)   Mini-trucks shall not be operated as street-legal special purpose
vehicles on a highway that has been constructed pursuant to a federal highway
program.
   (E)   Street-legal special purpose vehicles must be operated by an
individual with a valid driver’s license.
(Ord. 700, passed 10-21-2025)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Weight restrictions
   
II.   Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The gross vehicle weight of any vehicle using Frontage Road shall not
exceed 18,000 pounds unless granted by special permit issued by the
commonwealth.
   (B)   Violation of this schedule shall be punishable by a fine of no less
than $50 nor more than $100 for each offense.
(Ord. 216, passed 3-1-1995)
SCHEDULE II. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Speed limits on densely populated county roads.
      (1)   All county roads located in the county, which have a population
density of 30 houses or more within one mile, shall have a maximum speed limit
of 35 mph.
      (2)   The fines for speeding in violation of this division (A) shall be
the same as are set forth in KRS 189.394.
      (3)   Speed limit signs shall be posted under the direction of the County
Road Supervisor after its inspection following a request by an affected
resident.
      (4)   This division (A) shall become effective 30 days after the second
reading.
   (B)   Speed limits generally.
      (1)   The following are speed limits as ordained by the county.
Street Speed Limit Ord. No. Date Passed
Street                       Speed Limit                   Ord. No. Date Passed
A portion of Lohden Road,
beginning at the
intersection of Glenview     Maximum speed limit of 25 mph 451      12-19-2006
Drive and going north for
approximately 0.6 of a mile
A portion of Old
Munfordville Road, beginning
at the intersection of       Maximum speed limit of 35 mph 514      11-1-2011
Highway 70 and going south
to the intersection of
Pewitt Road
A portion of Old
Munfordville Road, beginning
from the Basil Chapel Church Maximum speed limit of 35 mph 534      6-18-2013
going north to the Glasgow
city limits
A portion of Poplar School
Road located from Kentucky
Highway 63 (Thompkinsville   Maximum speed limit of 35 mph 419      10-19-2004
Road) to Kentucky Highway
820 (Etoile Road)
                             Maximum speed limit of 35 mph
A.M. Harmon Road             for the entire length of said 417      10-5-2004
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 35 mph
Arnett Grove Road            for the entire length of said 344      7-6-2000
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 20 mph
Beaver Valley Road           for the entire length of said 523      8-7-2012
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 45 mph
Beechtree Lane               for the entire length of said 434      10-4-2005
                             road
Clubhouse Lane               Maximum speed limit of 25 mph 529      12-18-2012
                             for entire length
Coral Hill-Lecta Road,
starting at the intersection
of Old Highway 68-80 and     Maximum speed limit of 35 mph 234      8-2-1995
then north for approximately
0.75 of a mile
Dunedin Way in Highlander    Maximum speed limit of 25 mph 634      12-17-2019
Farms Subdivision
Golden Pond Circle           Maximum speed limit of 25 mph 445      8-15-2006
Farmer Road                  Maximum speed limit of 35 mph 332      11-16-1999
                             Maximum speed limit of 15 mph
Farm View Avenue             for the entire length of said 653      1-19-2021
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 35 mph
Flowers Road                 for the entire length of said 596      7-18-2017
                             road
Fox Trail                    Maximum speed limit of 25 mph 528      12-18-2012
                             for entire length
                             Maximum speed limit of 25 mph
Frontage Road                for the entire length of said 676      12-20-2022
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 25 mph
Gorby Road                   for the entire length of said 388      6-3-2003
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 25 mph
Greenlawn Drive              for the entire length of said 391      6-3-2003
                             road
                             Maximum speed of 25 mph for
Groce Cemetery Road          the entire length of said     673      11-17-2022
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 35 mph
Harry King Road              for the entire length of said 361      5-30-2001
                             road
                              
Herbert Turner Road, one     Maximum speed limit of 45 mph 331      11-16-1999
mile from the city limits
Herbert Turner Road, .25     Maximum speed limit of 35 mph 331      11-16-1999
miles from the city limits
                             Maximum speed limit of 20 mph
J. Birge Road                for the entire length of said 438      2-22-2006
                             road
J. Brown Road, one mile from Maximum speed limit of 45 mph 330      11-16-1999
the city limits
J. Brown Road, .25 miles     Maximum speed limit of 35 mph 330      11-16-1999
from the city limits
                             Maximum speed limit of 25 mph
Little Work Acres Road       for the entire length of said 503      5-17-2011
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 25 mph
Moss Way                     for the entire length of said 390      6-3-2003
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 35 mph
Oil City Road                for the entire length of said 379      7-16-2002
                             road
Old Scottsville Road, Loop   Maximum speed limit of 35 mph
#1                           for the entire length of said 626      7-16-2019
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 25 mph
Paul Hood Road               for the entire length of said 550      9-16-2014
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 35 mph
Pritchardsville Road         for the entire length of said 395      8-19-2003
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 35 mph
Ritters Mill Road            for the entire length of said 413      8-24-2004
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 35 mph
Siloam Road                  for the entire length of said 648      9-15-2020
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 25 mph
Skaggs Creek Road            for the entire length of said 537      8-20-2013
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 10 mph
Soccer Way                   for the entire length of said 435      11-1-2005
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 35 mph
South Toohey Ridge Road      for the entire length of said 397      9-16-2003
                             road located in the county
                             Maximum speed limit of 25 mph
Thoroughbred Lane            for the entire length of said 389      6-3-2003
                             road
Whitney Woods Road, starting
at the intersection of
Highway 31-E North and
ending at the intersection   Maximum speed limit of 35 mph 234      8-2-1995
of Old Munfordville Road,
being approximately 0.6 of a
mile
                             Maximum speed limit of 35 mph
Willie Groce Road            for the entire length of said 580      7-19-2016
                             road
                             Maximum speed limit of 35 mph
Yoder Hills Road             for the entire length of said 354      11-21-2000
                             road
 
      (2)   The fines for speeding in violation of the roads listed in division
(B)(1) above shall be the same as set forth in KRS 189.394.
      (3)   Speed limit signs shall be posed under the direction of the County
Road Supervisor for all roads listed in division (B)(1) above.
      (4)   (a)    The present speed limit of 50 mph established by KRS 189.390
and applicable on Barren County Road No. 1097A, New Munfordville Road, is
greater than necessary for the safe operation of vehicles. Therefore, the
County Fiscal Court hereby declares that it shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of 30 mph on Barren County Road No.
1097A from U.S. 31 E. to Barren County Road No. 1069, Old Munfordville Road.
         (b)   In every charge for a violation of the speed limit specified in
division (B)(4)(a) above, the warrant or citation shall specify the speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven and the lawful speed limit
applicable at the location where the violation is charged to have occurred.
         (c)   The provisions of KRS 189.940 exempting emergency vehicles from
speed limitations shall be applicable to the provisions of division (B)(4)(a)
above.
         (d)   The County Road Engineer is hereby directed to install a
sufficient number of speed and caution signs, to be paid for by the Fiscal
Court out of the county levy, on Barren County Road No. 1097A pursuant to the
provisions of division (B)(4)(a) above.
         (e)   The Clerk of the Fiscal Court is hereby directed to place notice
of the provisions of this division (B)(4) in a local newspaper of general
circulation.
         (f)   This division (B)(4) shall become effective upon the
installation of the road signs by the county and the County Road Engineer
prescribed by division (B)(4)(d) above.
      (5)   (a)   The present speed limit of 50 mph established by KRS 189.390
and applicable on Barren County Road No. 1087, the Tick Ridge Road, is greater
than necessary for the safe operation of vehicles. Therefore, the County Fiscal
Court hereby declares that it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
vehicle at a speed in the excess of 30 mph on Barren County Road No. 1087, the
Tick Ridge Road, from U. S. 31 E. to Barren County, Road No. 1088, the
Hutcherson Road, a distance of approximately one mile.
         (b)   In every charge for a violation of the speed limit specified in
division (B)(5)(a) above, the warrant or citation shall specify the speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven and the lawful speed limit
applicable at the location where the violation is charged to have occurred.
         (c)   The provisions of KRS 189.940 exempting emergency vehicles from
speed limitations shall be applicable to the provisions of division (B)(5)(a)
above.
         (d)   The County Road Engineer is hereby directed to install a
sufficient number of speed and caution signs, to be paid for by the Fiscal
Court out of the county levy, on Barren County Road No. 1087, the Tick Ridge
Road, pursuant to the provisions of division (B)(5)(a) above.
         (e)   The Clerk of the Fiscal Court is hereby directed to place notice
of this division (B)(5) in a local newspaper of general circulation.
         (f)   This division (B)(5) shall become effective upon the
installation of the road signs by the County Road Engineer prescribed by
division (B)(5)(d) above and publication as prescribed in division (B)(5)(e)
above.
   (C)   Penalty.
      (1)   Any person violating any provision of this schedule, for which no
other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
      (2)   Any person who violates the provisions of division (B)(4)(a) above
shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each offense.
      (3)   Any person who violates the provisions of division (B)(5)(a) above
shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each offense.
(Ord. 73-1, passed 7-3-1973; Ord. 74-1, passed 3-5-1974; Ord. 8, passed 7-18-
1979)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Parking restrictions
SCHEDULE I. PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Based upon a traffic investigation and study that it is unsafe to park
motor vehicles on or along the road leading to Barren River Lake at the Austin
Boat Ramp, there shall be established “No Parking” areas on and along said
highway.
   (B)   The fines for parking in violation of this schedule shall be the same
as are set forth in KRS 189.990(1).
   (C)   “No Parking” signs shall be posted under the direction of the County
Road Supervisor.
   (D)   This schedule shall become effective 30 days after the second reading.
(Ord. 59, passed 8-17-1983)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   NUISANCES
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
93.   FAIR HOUSING
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Animal Control
   
90.01   Definition
   
90.02   Rabies control
   
90.03   Desertion of animals
   
90.04   Owner to exercise control
   
90.05   Reserved
   
90.06   Impoundment of animals
   
90.07   Disposition of impounded animal
   
90.08   Impoundment fee and reclaiming of animals
   
90.09   Humane treatment of animals
   
90.10   Citations for violations
   
90.11   License agreements with landowners for Court inspection for diseased
birds, animals, and the like
   
90.12   License tags for dogs
   
90.13   Wildlife
Exotic Wildlife, Protected Wildlife, and Dangerous Species
   
90.25   Definitions
   
90.26   Prohibitions generally
   
90.27   Prohibitions on dangerous or exotic species
   
90.28   Scientific and educational exceptions to prohibitions
   
90.29   Indemnification and bond
   
90.30   Seizure and impoundment; notice
   
90.31   Costs
 
   
90.99   Penalty
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 90.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of the subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON OR ABANDONMENT. Leaving an animal for a period in excess of 24 hours
without the animal's owner, or the owner's designated caretaker, providing all
provisions of necessity as defined in this chapter and checking on the animal's
condition.
   ANIMAL. Any live, vertebrate, domestic creature, not including domestic or
feral cats and wildlife.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. An employee hired to enforce Animal Control laws and
regulations in Glasgow-Barren County.
   CRUELTY. Failing to provide adequate food and water; failing to detect the
need for or withholding veterinary care, creating or allowing unhealthful
living conditions, kicking, dragging, choking, causing pain/injury/death by the
use of an object or weapon, injury/death by means of caustic, flammable,
boiling or heated substances, causing suffering, injury or death by suffocation
or drowning; failure to provide health-related grooming. For purposes of this
chapter the definition of CRUELTY shall not include the acts as described in
KRS 525.130(2) and (3).
   LIVESTOCK. Horses, stallions, colts, geldings, mares, sheep, rams, lambs,
bulls, bullocks, steers, heifers, cows, calves, mules, jacks, jennets, burros,
goats, kids and swine.
   NON-DOMESTIC ANIMAL. All felines (other than the domestic house cat),
wildlife (such as skunk, raccoons, opossums, groundhogs, beaver, deer and
squirrels), non-human primates, bears, wolves, coyotes, foxes, venomous
reptiles and any crossbreed of such animals which have similar characteristics
of the animals specified herein. In order to properly administer the provisions
of this section, the Barren County Fiscal Court may add to or remove from the
classification of non-domestic animal any bird, mammal, reptile (aquatic and
amphibious forms or other members of the animal's kingdom). Additions to the
list may be made only if the Barren County Fiscal Court determines, after
public hearing, that such species, because of habit mode of life or natural
instinct, is incapable of being domesticated, requires the exercise of art,
force or skill to keep them safely in subjection and would create a reasonable
likelihood of hazard to the public. Each determination by the legislative body
as to additions or deletions shall become effective when filed with the Barren
County Judge-Executive.
   OWNER. Any person having a right of property in the animal and every person
who keeps or harbors an animal or has the animal in their care, or any person
who permits the animal to remain on their premises, including premises they own
or occupy.
   SHELTER. A structure of confinement consisting of three solid sides, a top
and a floor, which is dry and constructed of material which provides insulation
or the floor augmented with resting boards, and during inclement weather
extremes, said structure shall also include insulating bedding materials.
   TETHER. A rope or chain that is used to restrict an animal, so that it will
stay in a particular area. No tether shall weigh more than l/18th of the
animal's weight.
(Ord. 269, passed 7-16-1996; Am. Ord. 638, passed 5-19-2020)
§ 90.02 RABIES CONTROL.
   (A)   Every dog and cat owner that resides within the county shall have his
or her dog or cat initially vaccinated by the age of four months and
revaccinated against rabies at the expiration of the immunization period as
certified by a veterinarian.
   (B)   Animal Control shall secure an animal that has bitten a human being or
is suspected of being rabid and report the incident to the local health
department in order to collaborate and determine if a quarantine period is
needed.
   (C)   Physicians shall report persons bitten by dogs, cats and ferrets and
other animals to the local health department within 12 hours of treatment in
accordance with KRS 258.065. In the event that the health department is closed,
physicians must report the incident on the next business day pursuant to KRS
258.065. In the event that a child is bitten and does not receive medical care,
the parents or guardians of that child shall report to the local health
department pursuant to KRS 258.065.
   (D)   In accordance with KRS 258.085, a health officer shall have the
authority to quarantine for a period not to exceed:
      (1)   One hundred eighty days any animal has been bitten by another
animal known or suspected to have rabies;
      (2)   Ten days any dog, cat or ferret that has bitten a human being; or
      (3)   Ten days any dog, cat or ferret that exhibits symptoms of rabies.
   (E)   In lieu of the quarantine, a health officer may order an animal to be
destroyed and tested for rabies. If an animal dies or is destroyed because of
having been suspected of being rabid, the head shall be sent to a laboratory
approved by the secretary for health and family services to be tested for
rabies pursuant to KRS 258.085.
   (F)   If a wild or exotic animal bites a human being or exhibits symptoms of
rabies, that animal shall be destroyed and tested for rabies pursuant to KRS
258.085.
   (G)   The owner of any animal quarantined or tested under this section shall
be liable for any expenses incurred as a result of the quarantine or testing.
Any owner who destroys or disposes of an animal that has bitten a human being
shall be liable for any rabies post-exposure treatment if the destruction or
disposal occurs in a manner that does not allow for rabies testing or
quarantine pursuant to KRS 258.085.
   (H)   Service animals, as defined in KRS 525.010 and service animals in
training, that are vaccinated in accordance with KRS 258.015, are under the
control of a law enforcement agency, and are acting in the line of duty, shall
be exempt from the quarantine period pursuant to KRS 258.085.
   (I)   If a local board of health has reason to believe or has been notified
by the Cabinet for Health and Family Services that there is a danger that
rabies may spread within the county, the local board of health shall publish a
notice requiring owners of specified animals of the county to confine the
animals for any periods that may be necessary to prevent the spread of rabies
pursuant to KRS 258.055.
   (J)   Any person who violated KRS 258.015, 258.035, 258.055, 258.065 or
258.085 shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense pursuant to KRS 258.990. All
fines collected shall after costs and commissions have been deducted, be paid
to the department to be credited to the animal control and care fund pursuant
to KRS 258.990.
(Ord. 269, passed 7-16-1996; Am. Ord. 662, passed 10-19-2021) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 DESERTION OF ANIMALS.
   No person shall abandon any animal, as defined in §
90.01. In the event that an animal is found so abandoned, such animal may be
taken by a Glasgow-Barren County Animal Control Officer or peace officer and
impounded in a shelter, and there confined in a humane manner. Such animal, if
taken from private property, shall be kept for not less than the prescribed
period in accordance with the procedures set forth in the impoundment section
of this chapter. In the event that an animal is so abandoned, the owner or
keeper, if any, whom the officer has charged with the animal's care, shall be
subject to a citation for abandonment.
(Ord. 269, passed 7-16-1996; Am. Ord. 638, passed 5-19-2020)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 OWNER TO EXERCISE CONTROL.
   (A)   No owner of any animal shall fail to exercise proper care and control
of his or her animals so as to prevent said animals from damaging property of
another or attacking people or other animals which are the property of another.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to allow a female dog to be exposed during estrus
(in season, in heat) so as to attract male dogs. Every female that is in season
shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such
female dog can not come in contact with a male dog except for planned breeding.
Females shall not be tethered (as defined in §
90.01) and left unattended while in season.
(Ord. 269, passed 7-16-1996; Am. Ord. 638, passed 5-19-2020)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 RESERVED.
§ 90.06 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS.
   The Animal Control officers employed by the county or the City of Glasgow
are empowered and directed to apprehend any dog or cat that appears to be a
stray wandering at large, in need of nourishment, sick or injured, behaving
aggressively, damaging property, or constituting a nuisance including excessive
barking between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., or a hazard to persons or property.
(Ord. 269, passed 7-16-1996)
§ 90.07 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMAL.
   Any adult dog of unknown ownership picked up and impounded by an Animal
Control officer or turned in by a citizen shall be kept for a minimum of five
days, during which time the animal may be reclaimed by the owner and the animal
shall be licensed. If the animal is not claimed within that time, the animal
shall become the property of BRAWA and may be destroyed in a human manner or
offered for adoption. The five-day holding period shall not apply to the
disposition of sick or hurt animals where the owner is not known or can not be
located. Animals may be euthanized at any time to prevent suffering or to
protect the health and safety of the other animals at BRAWA. Animals
surrendered to BRAWA by the owner may be offered for adoption immediately.
(Ord. 269, passed 7-16-1996; Ord. 346, passed 8-15-2000; Am. Ord. 638, passed
5-19-2020)
§ 90.08 IMPOUNDMENT FEE AND RECLAIMING OF ANIMALS.
   Any person reclaiming an impounded animal shall provide evidence of
ownership. Before animals can be returned to owner, the animal shall be
vaccinated against rabies, any veterinary expense incurred in treatment of the
animal shall be paid and dogs shall be licensed. No veterinary expenses shall
be incurred until first trying to locate the owner of the animal and advising
the owner of the animal's injury. The owner may elect to decline veterinary
care.
(Ord. 269, passed 7-16-1996; Am. Ord. 638, passed 5-19-2020)
§ 90.09 HUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS.
   No owner shall fail to provide food, water, shelter or veterinary care to
prevent suffering and humane care and treatment to their dog or cat. Any owner
of a dog or cat shall maintain a clean shelter and living area which shall be
kept free of accumulated waste so that the animal shall be free to walk or lie
down without coming into contact with the waste. If any dog is tethered, the
tether shall be designed to present choking or tangling. Such tether shall not
be less than ten feet in length and shall be on a swivel or a chain-run. The
tether must be attached to the dog's collar or harness and not directly to the
dog's neck, and the tether shall weigh no more that 1/18th of the animal's
weight so that the animal is not prevented from moving about freely.
(Ord. 269, passed 7-16-1996; Am. Ord. 638, passed 5-19-2020)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 CITATIONS FOR VIOLATIONS.
   The Animal Control officers of the City of Glasgow and Barren County are
authorized and empowered to issue citations for the violations of this chapter;
however, this section is not to be construed to empower the Animal Control
officers to make physical arrests or to give them the general arrest power of a
peace officer.
(Ord. 269, passed 7-16-1996; Am. Ord. 638, passed 5-19-2020)
§ 90.11 LICENSE AGREEMENTS WITH LANDOWNERS FOR COURT INSPECTION FOR DISEASED
BIRDS, ANIMALS, AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The Fiscal Court is hereby authorized to enter into license agreements
with landowners authorizing entrance onto his, her, or their property in order
to take whatever action is necessary to control the spread of disease carried
by birds, animals, rodents, or any living species that may endanger the health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the community.
   (B)   Having entered into such agreements, the Fiscal Court may direct the
County Judge/Executive or other proper official, agent, or employee to enter
upon such lands to take whatever action is necessary to protect the citizens of
the county and the commonwealth including, but not limited to, control or
eradication methods.
(Ord. 75-, passed 7-1-1975)
§ 90.12 LICENSE TAGS FOR DOGS.
   (A)   All dogs housed at Barren River Animal Welfare Association (BRAWA)
shall be licensed before being released or adopted.
   (B)   It is recommended that every dog six months of age or older be
licensed. An owner of a dog six months of age or older may annually purchase a
county dog license at the Barren River Animal Welfare Association or by a mail-
in application. Mail-in applications will be available at all veterinary
offices within the county and at other facilities designated by the Fiscal
Court or may be downloaded and printed from BRAWA's website. The cost of the
license for an altered (spayed or neutered) dog will be $5 per year. The cost
of a license for any unaltered dog will be $10 per year. Owners of more than
three dogs may elect the purchase of a multi-dog license for $15 per year if
all dogs are altered, or $30 per year if any dogs are unaltered, with the
exception of registered kenneled animals whose owners will pay $15 for three or
more dogs.
(Ord. 418, passed 10-5-2004; Am. Ord. 639, passed 5-19-2020; Am. Ord. 647,
passed 8-18-2020)
§ 90.13 WILDLIFE.
   Kentucky is known for its abundance of wildlife. The presence of wildlife in
your neighborhood may delight some citizens and may be a nuisance to others.
Glasgow-Barren County Animal Control Officers are not authorized to handle
nuisance wildlife problems but can evaluate and advise on the situation. If
necessary, a nuisance wildlife control professional may be called to assist.
(Ord. 639, passed 5-19-2020)
EXOTIC WILDLIFE, PROTECTED WILDLIFE, AND DANGEROUS SPECIES
§ 90.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS SPECIES. Those, except bees, which are capable of producing and
transmitting poisonous venom through biting or stinging.
   EXOTIC WILDLIFE. Living terrestrial wildlife species which have never
existed in the wild of the commonwealth or been extirpated from the state and
could not be reasonable expected to survive in the wild if introduced.
   PROTECTED WILDLIFE. As defined by KRS 150.010(25).
   WILDLIFE. As defined by KRS 150.010(41).
(Ord. 403, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 90.26 PROHIBITIONS GENERALLY.
   Except as specified in §
90.28, a person shall not import or possess:
   (A)   Baya weaver (Plocius phillipinus);
   (B)   Blackbirds (Genus Agelaius), except native species;
   (C)   Cape sparrow (Passer melanurus);
   (D)   Cowbirds (Genus Molothrus), except native species;
   (E)   Cuckoo (Family Cuculidae), except native species;
   (F)   Dioch or red-bellied quelea (Quelea quelea);
   (G)   European blackbird (Turdus merula);
   (H)   Fieldfare (Turdus pilar);
   (I)   Flying fox or fruit bat (Genus Pteropus);
   (J)   Gambian giant pouched rat (Cricetomys gambianus);
   (K)   Giant or marine toad (Bufo marinus);
   (L)   Hawaiian lice bird or spotted munia (Lonchura punctalata nisoria);
   (M)   Jack rabbit (Genus Lepus);
   (N)   Java sparrow (Padda oryzivora);
   (O)   Madagascar weaver (Foudia madagascariensis);
   (P)   Mistle thrush (Turdus viscivorus);
   (Q)   Monk or Quaker parakeet (Myiopsitta monachus);
   (R)   Multimammate rat (Subgenus Mastomys);
   (S)   Mute swan (Cygnus olor);
   (T)   Nutria (Myocastor coypus);
   (U)   Prarie dog (Cynomys spp.);
   (V)   Racoon dog (Nyctereutes procyonoides);
   (W)   San Juan rabbit (Nyctereutes procyonoides);
   (X)   Sky lark (Alauda arvensis);
   (Y)   Song thrush (Turdus philomelus); and/or
   (Z)   Starlings (Family Sturnidae) including pink starlings or rosy pastors
(Sturmus roseus), except for Indian Hill mynahs (Graclua refigiosa):
      (1)   Suricate or slender-tailed meerkat (Genus Suricata);
      (2)   Tongueless of African clawed frog (Aenopus laevis);
      (3)   Weaver finches (Genus Passer), except Passer domesticus;
      (4)   White eyes (Genus Zosterops);
      (5)   Wild European rabbit (also called the San Juan Rabbit) not
distinguishable morphologically from native wild rabbits;
      (6)   Yellowhammer (Emberiza citrinella); and/or
      (7)   A member of the following families:
         (a)   Suidae (pigs or hogs), except for domestic swine;
         (b)   Vivenidae (civits, genets, lingsangs, mongooses, and fossas);
and/or
         (c)   Tayassuidae (peccaries and javelinas).
(Ord. 403, passed 3-2-2004) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.27 PROHIBITIONS ON DANGEROUS OR EXOTIC SPECIES.
    The possession or importation of the following dangerous exotic species is
prohibited:
   (A)   African buffalo (Syncerus caffer);
   (B)   Hippopotamus (Hippopotamus amphibious);
   (C)   Hyenas (family Hyaenidae), all except species aardwolves (proteles
cristatus);
   (D)   Old world badger (Meles meles);
   (E)   Lions, jaguars, leopards, or tigers (genus Panthera);
   (F)   Clouded leopard (Neofelis nebulosa);
   (G)   Cheetah (Acononyx jubatus);
   (H)   Elephants (family Rhinocerotidae);
   (I)   Rhinoceroses (family Rhinocerotidae);
   (J)   Gorillas (family Pongidae);
   (K)   Baboons, drills, or mandrills (genus Papio);
   (L)   Gelada baboon (Theropithecus gelada);
   (M)   Gavials (family Gavialidae);
   (N)   Crocodiles (family Crocodylidea);
   (O)   Alligators or caimans (family Alligatoidae);
   (P)   Sea snakes (family Hydrophidae);
   (Q)   Cobras or coral snakes (family Elapidae);
   (R)   Adders or vipers (family Viperae);
   (S)   Venomous rear-fanged species (family Colubridae);
   (T)   Gila monsters or beaded lizards (family Hilodermatidae);
   (U)   Komodo dragon (Varanus Komodoensis);
   (V)   Wolverine (Gulo gulo);
   (W)   Bears (family Ursidae);
   (X)   Wolf or wolf hybrids; and/or
   (Y)   Cougar or mountain lion (Felis noncolor).
(Ord. 403, passed 3-2-2004) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.28 SCIENTIFIC AND EDUCATIONAL EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITIONS.
   The Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources Commissioner may allow the
importation or possession of the species listed in §§
90.26 and
90.27 for legitimate scientific or educational purposes by:
   (A)   A zoo that is:
      (1)   A member of the American Zoo and Aquarium Association; and/or
      (2)   Designated as the official zoo of the municipality.
   (B)   A government agency;
   (C)   A college, university, or similar educational or research institution;
and/or
   (D)   A circus, which means a traveling public entertainment show consisting
of acrobats, clowns, and trained animals, but shall not include a show
including wrestling bears or other direct contact between members of the public
and inherently dangerous animals.
   (Ord. 403, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 90.29 INDEMNIFICATION AND BOND.
   Animals of the type described in this subchapter may be kept by a licensed
veterinary hospital for treatment, federally-licensed educational or medical
institution, museum, or any other place where they are kept as live exhibits
for study; or a circus, carnival, or other events for entertainment, provided a
proper bond or insurance be posted to indemnify those who may be injured or
killed by dangerous animals. The type and amount of such bond or insurance
shall be determined and approved by the County Judge/Executive.
(Ord. 403, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 90.30 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT; NOTICE.
   (A)   Upon the written complaint of any person who owns or is keeping or
harboring a poisonous reptile or dangerous animal of the type in this
subchapter described in the county, the Sheriff shall cause the matter to be
investigated, and if after investigation the facts indicate that a poisonous
reptile or dangerous animal is in fact being kept in violation of this
subchapter, the Sheriff shall deliver written notice to such person requiring
that person to safely remove said animal from the county within 72 hours after
delivery of notice.
   (B)   Notice provided by this section shall not be required where such
poisonous reptile or dangerous animal has previously caused physical injury to
any person, or has escaped and is at large, in which case the animal may be
immediately seized and impounded or if in the course of seizing and impounding,
the Sheriff deems it necessary, said reptile or animal may be killed.
   (C)   The Sheriff shall seize and impound any poisonous reptile or dangerous
animal where the person owning, keeping, or harboring such animal failed to
comply with the notice described in this section. Upon seizure and impoundment,
said poisonous reptile or dangerous animal shall be delivered to a suitable
place of confinement. If during the course or seizing and impounding any such
poisonous reptile or dangerous animal poses a risk of serious physical harm or
death to any person, and if the Sheriff deems it necessary, said reptile or
animal may be killed.
   (D)   Before the Sheriff attempts seizure of any type of dangerous animal, a
zoo or rescue/sanctuary shall be contacted so that the chances of the animal
being destroyed are reduced.
(Ord. 403, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 90.31 COSTS.
   Any reasonable costs incurred by the Sheriff in the seizing, impounding, and
for confining any poisonous reptile or dangerous animal shall be charged
against the owner, keeper, or harborer of such animal and shall be collected by
the County Attorney. Such charge shall be in addition to any fine or penalty
provided for violating this subchapter.
(Ord. 403, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Penalties for violations of §§
90.01 through
90.11 shall be deemed a violation and any person violating §§
90.01 through
90.11, upon his or her conviction, shall be fined not less than $50 nor more
than $250 for each offense plus court costs in the County District Court. The
Animal Control officers at their option may designate the citation as a payable
offense. A payable offense shall be a $50 fine payable as a designated office
in the Glasgow City Building. The proceeds of all fines shall be allocated
between city and county government in relation to the place of the occurrence
of the offense. Citations shall be paid within the time limit specified on the
citation.
   (C)   Any person, partnership, or corporation violating any provisions of §§
90.25 through
90.31 shall be fined not less than $500 and not more than $1,000 for each
offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 269, passed 7-16-1996; Ord. 403, passed 3-2-2004)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
   
91.01   Code Official
   
91.02   Right-of-entry
   
91.03   Modifications
   
91.04   Definitions
   
91.05   Common law and statutory nuisances
   
91.06   Certain conditions declared a nuisance
   
91.07   Standards and procedures
§ 91.01 CODE OFFICIAL.
   (A)   The Solid Waste Coordinator of the county shall be charged with the
enforcement of this chapter. The Code Official or any county employee assisting
the Code Official with the enforcement of this chapter, while acting for the
county, in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
required by this chapter or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby
be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act
or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any
suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by
that official or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and underthe
provisions of this chapter shall be defended by the legal representative of the
county until the final termination of the proceedings. The Code Official or any
subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that
is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 575, passed 7-19-2016)
§ 91.02 RIGHT-OF-ENTRY.
   Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, or whenever the Code Official has reasonable cause to believe
that there exists in a structure of upon a premises a condition in violation of
this code, the Code Official is authorized to enter the structure or premises
at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. 575, passed 7-19-2016)
§ 91.03 MODIFICATIONS.
   Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter, the Code Official shall have the authority to grant
modifications for individual cases provided that the Code  Official shall find
that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this chapter
impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose
of this chapter and that such modification does not lessen health, life and
fire safety requirements.
(Ord. 575, passed 7-19-2016)
§ 91.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLES. Any vehicles or parts thereof left on public or private
property under circumstances indicating desertion, relinquishment, non-use, or
divestment of the vehicle.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. Any buildings other than a dwelling.
   DISCARDED ITEMS. Includes, but is not limited to, items for or used in
recycling, motor vehicle parts, tires, boats, home appliances and furniture in
a dilapidated or apparently inoperable condition and left in open storage or
discarded on private property for more than ten consecutive days. This
definition shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Any discarded item or part thereof which is enclosed within a
building, such as a garage or other fully enclosed building.
      (2)   Any discarded item not visible from an adjacent or abutting
property owner, street, road, or public park.
      (3)   Any discarded item stored on private property in a lawful manner in
connection with a business of auto body, auto repair, dismantler, vehicle
dealer, appliance repair and junk and salvage yard, provided that outside
storage of discarded items be within a privacy fence constructed of materials
designed for the construction of permanent fences.
      (4)   The preceding exceptions shall not authorize the maintenance of a
public or private nuisance as defined by law.
   DWELLING. Any part of any building or its premises used as a place of
residence or habitation or for sleeping by any person.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   LITTER. Refuse which is not contained or disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this act.
   NUISANCE. Public nuisance.
   OBNOXIOUS GROWTH. Any plant growth exceeding 12 inches in height, other than
crops, trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants; it is not the intent
of this provision to cause a change in the character of any geographical area
(s), e.g. (vacant) farm, road rights-of-way, or undeveloped land of ten acres
or more.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid waste (except body waste)
including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned vehicles and industrial wastes.
   UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. Dangerous or detrimental to life or health
because of want of repair, defects in the drainage, plumbing, lighting,
ventilation, or construction; infection with contagious disease; or the
existence on the premises of an unsanitary condition likely to cause sickness
among occupants of the dwelling or adjoining properties.
(Ord. 575, passed 7-19-2016)
§ 91.05 COMMON LAW AND STATUTORY NUISANCES.
   In addition to what is declared in this chapter to be a public nuisance,
those offenses which are known to the common law and statutes of Kentucky as
public nuisances may be treated as such and be proceeded against as provided in
this chapter or in accordance with any other provision of law.
(Ord. 575, passed 7-19-2016)
§ 91.06 CERTAIN CONDITIONS DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person having control or
management of any land in unincorporated areas within the territorial
jurisdiction of Barren County to permit a public nuisance or health hazard to
develop thereon. The following conditions are declared to be public nuisances:
   (A)   Dwellings unfit for human habitation and dilapidated buildings. Any
accessory building, house or structure visible from a county, state, federal or
public roadway which is so out of repair and dilapidated that it constitutes a
fire hazard liable to catch on fire or communicate fire, or which due to
inadequate maintenance or neglect, endangers the public health, welfare, or
safety, or materially interferes with the peaceful enjoyment by owners or
occupants of adjacent property. Buildings currently being used for agricultural
purposes or located on ten acres or more are exempt.
   (B)   Accumulation of rubbish. An accumulation or dumping on any premises of
filth, refuse, trash, garbage, or other waste material which endangers the
public health, welfare, or safety, or materially interferes with the peaceful
enjoyment by owners or occupants of adjacent property because of the danger of
its catching or communicating fire, its attracting and propagating vermin,
rodents or insects, or its blowing of rubbish into any highway, road, street,
sidewalk or property of another.
   (C)   Accumulation of junked, wrecked or non-operative vehicles, vehicle
parts, machines or other scrap or salvage materials, excluding farm equipment,
unless such vehicles or parts are stored out of ordinary public view by
completely enclosed within a building or surrounded by a privacy fence
constructed of materials designed for the construction of permanent fencing.
   (D)   For any owners, lessee or occupant having control of any dwelling or
vacant lot to maintain or permit the maintenance of obnoxious growth.
   (E)   Any condition which endangers public health.
(Ord. 575, passed 7-19-2016)
§ 91.07 STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES.
   The County hereby establishes the standards and procedures for the
enforcement of this chapter as follows:
   (A)   The County Judge Executive or his designated agent, Solid Waste
Coordinator, Sheriff or his designated agent may take upon its own initiative
or upon the request of any person an investigation to determine whether a
violation of this chapter has occurred.
   (B)   If, based upon the investigation, there is probable cause to believe a
violation exists, abatement may be accomplished as follows:
      (1)   Notice of violation; demand to abate. It shall be the duty of the
County Judge Executive, Solid Waste Coordinator, or their designated agent, to
serve or cause to be served upon the alleged violator, notice which shall
describe the violation detailing the location of the property, the violation
and what should be done to remedy the nuisance and demand abatement within 30
days of the date of notice or longer if deemed necessary by the county
official.
      (2)   If, however, the violation constitutes a potential for immediate
danger to the health and well-being of the community, said notice shall demand
abatement within 72 hours. The notice shall inform the person or persons of the
possible civil and criminal penalties involved and give the person or persons
30 days from the date of notice to either remedy the nuisance pursuant to the
directions given or file an appeal with the County Nuisance Appeal Board.
   (C)   The County Nuisance Appeal Board shall consist of:
      (1)   Members of the County Nuisance Board shall be appointed by the
County Judge Executive with a majority approval of the Fiscal Court and serve
one year terms.
      (2)   The board shall consist of three members, all of which must be
property owners in Barren County.
   (D)   If non-compliance as set out in division (B)(1) above occurs, the
County Judge Executive is authorized to send county employees or persons hired
by the county upon said property to remedy the nuisance.
   (E)   The county shall have a lien against the property for the reasonable
value of labor and materials used in remedying the situation. The affidavit of
the responsible officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the amount of
the lien and the regularity of the proceedings pursuant to this statute, and
shall be recorded in the office of the county clerk. The lien shall be notice
to all persons from the time of its recording and shall bear interest
thereafter until paid. The lien created shall take precedence over all other
liens, except state, county, school board, and city taxes, except as provided
in division (F) of this section. The lien may be enforced by judicial
proceeding.
   (F)   The lien provided in division (E) of this section shall not take
precedence or priority over a previously recorded lien if:
      (1)   The county failed to provide the lien holder a copy of the
determination in accordance with division (G); or
      (2)   The lien holder received a copy of the determination as required by
division (G) and the lien holder corrected the violations or paid the fines,
penalty charges and costs incurred in remedying the violation.
   (G)   Unless imminent danger exists on the subject property that
necessitates immediate action, the county attorney shall send within 14 days of
a final determination after hearing or waiver of hearing by the property owner,
a copy of the determination to any lien holder of record of the subject
property by first class mail with proof of mailing. The lien holder of record
may, within 45 days from receipt of that notice, correct the violations cited
or elect to pay all fines, penalty charges, and costs incurred in remedying the
situation as permitted by division (E).
   (H)   In addition to the remedy prescribed in division (B) or any other
remedy authorized by law, the owner of a property upon which a lien has been
attached pursuant to this section shall be personally liable for the amount of
the lien, including all interest, civil penalties, and other charges and the
county may bring a civil action against the owner and shall have the same
remedies as provided for the recovery of debt owed. The failure of the county
to comply with division (G), and the failure of a lien to take precedence over
previously filed liens as provided in division (F), shall not limit or restrict
any remedies that the county has against the owner of the property.
   (I)   This chapter may also be enforced by criminal penalty. The County
Judge Executive or his/her designee may seek a criminal summons for violations
under this chapter. The criminal penalty for non-compliance of this chapter is
a $50.00 fine per day, for each day the property remains in violation of any
terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 575, passed 7-19-2016)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Minimum Standards for Fire Protection
   
92.01   Fire prevention regulations for subdivisions and mobile home parks
   
92.02   Fire prevention regulations for commercial buildings, industrial
buildings, and multi-family residential development
   
92.03   City-County Planning Commission responsibilities
   
92.04   Enforcement
Fire Hazard Periods
   
92.15   Proclamation of fire hazards
   
92.16   Prohibitions against open fires
   
92.17   Notice of fire hazard proclamation
 
   
92.99   Penalty
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR FIRE PROTECTION
§ 92.01 FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS FOR SUBDIVISIONS AND MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   (A)   These regulations shall apply to all new major residential
subdivisions, any series of minor residential subdivisions totaling five or
more lots, and mobile home parks.
   (B)   The following fire hydrant requirements shall apply to all major
residential subdivisions, any series of minor residential subdivision totaling
five or more lots, and mobile home parks, fronting on public or private roads
in the county.
      (1)   Fire hydrant; installation. Fire hydrants shall be spaced not
farther than 1,000 feet apart as measured over public and private roads. Fire
hydrants shall be connected to a new six-inch or larger main or an existing
four-inch or larger main.
      (2)   Fire hydrant; type.
         (a)   Fire hydrants shall meet with minimum specifications and be
installed in conformity with the requirements of the serving utility and ISO
standard.
         (b)   Fire hydrants shall be equipped with not less than two two and
one-half-inch outlets and a four and one-half-inch pumper outlet with national
standard threads.
         (c)   A gate valve shall be installed in the hydrant connection to the
road main.
         (d)   All water mains shall include fire hydrant branch connections.
(Ord. 148, passed 8-17-1994)
§ 92.02 FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS, INDUSTRIAL
BUILDINGS, AND MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.
   These regulations shall also apply to commercial buildings, industrial
buildings, and multi-family residential developments within the county.
   (A)   Water supply.
      (1)   Water mains shall be not less than six inches in diameter,
including fire hydrant branch connections, installed in conformity with the
minimum requirements of the local water authorities.
      (2)   Written approval of the Fire Chief of the responsible community
fire department shall be obtained prior to the approval of a plat or prior to
the issuance of a building permit.
      (3)   Water mains shall be so arranged that the distance between
intersecting mains does not exceed 1,500 feet. If intersecting mains are at a
distance in excess of 1,500 feet, eight-inch or larger mains must be used.
      (4)   Eight-inch mains shall be used where dead end and poor circulating
gridironing is likely to exist for a considerable period of time, or where the
layout of the streets and topographical characteristics are not well adapted to
a circulating system.
      (5)   The distribution system shall be equipped with a sufficient number
of valves so located that breakage or other interruption will not cause the
shut down of any portion of a main greater than 1,500 feet. Wherever meters are
installed in conjunction with fire hydrants, said meters shall be of the fire
protection type and at least six inches in size.
   (B)   Fire hydrant installation.
      (1)   Fire hydrant spacing shall not be less than that required for
residential areas referred to above, and in addition, each building shall have
hydrants within the following distances:
         (a)   Five-hundred feet distance: one hydrant;
         (b)   One thousand feet distance: two hydrants; and
         (c)   One thousand five hundred feet distance: three hydrants.
      (2)   No part of the exterior of the buildings, other than dwellings,
shall be further than 500 feet from a hydrant. Distances are to be measured
along the shortest feasible exterior route (never measured through buildings)
for laying hose.
      (3)   Fire hydrants must be located at least 25 feet from the exterior
wall of any masonry building, and at least 50 feet from any exterior wall,
frame, or equivalent construction, including brick and stone veneer.
   (C)   Fire hydrant type.
      (1)   Fire hydrants shall meet the minimum specifications and be
installed in conformity with the requirements of the local water authorities.
      (2)   Fire hydrants shall be equipped with not less than two two and one-
half-inch outlets and a four and one-half-inch pumper outlet.
      (3)   A gate valve must be installed in the hydrant connection to the
road main.
      (4)   The color of the hydrant shall be consistent with the National
Code.
(Ord. 148, passed 8-17-1994)
§ 92.03 CITY-COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The City-County Planning Commission shall require new major subdivisions,
any series of minor residential subdivisions totaling five or more lots, mobile
home parks, and commercial subdivisions and developments in the county to
comply with the fire hydrant and water supply requirements set out above.
(Ord. 148, passed 8-17-1994)
§ 92.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Before final approval of a plat or issuance of an occupancy permit,
the developer/builder must post a cash bond of $2,000 per fire hydrant to be
installed as specified in this subchapter. If hydrants are not installed within
60 days of final approval of plats, forfeiture of bonds will take place or
occupancy permit shall be denied in addition to forfeiture of bond.
   (B)   Fire hydrants shall not be blocked by vegetation. Fire hydrants shall
not be blocked at any time by vehicles, fences, buildings, or other
enhancements to property. In no case shall any of the aforementioned items be
closer than ten feet to a hydrant, excepting livestock holding fences which may
exist no closer than two feet to a hydrant. However, no fence shall be built
between a hydrant and the highway serving that hydrant.
(Ord. 148, passed 8-17-1994; Ord. 557, passed 3-17-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
FIRE HAZARD PERIODS
§ 92.15 PROCLAMATION OF FIRE HAZARDS.
   Whenever the Commonwealth Division of Forestry notifies the county that an
extraordinary fire hazard exists in the county as determined by the National
Fire Danger Rating System and Fire Occurrence, the County Judge/Executive may
proclaim such condition to exist in the county.
(Ord. 90, passed 12-17-1986)
§ 92.16 PROHIBITIONS AGAINST OPEN FIRES.
   No person shall, when a proclamation as provided for in §
92.15 has been issued, light or maintain an open fire at any location in the
county while such proclamation is in effect. Any person violating this section
shall be subject to the fines and penalties hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 90, passed 12-17-1986) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.17 NOTICE OF FIRE HAZARD PROCLAMATION.
   Notice of the proclamation provided for in §
92.15 shall be published in the newspaper of largest bona fide circulation in
the county and notice given using other available news media. Notice shall be
given by order/proclamation in the format attached to the ordinance codified
herein as Exhibit A.
(Ord. 90, passed 12-17-1986)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   The fine for noncompliance with §
92.04(B) shall be set at $100 for first occurrence; then $500 for each
subsequent occurrence, payable to the General Fund of the county.
   (C)   A person who violates §§
92.15 through
92.17 may be fined up to the sum of $500 for each offense of §§
92.15 through
92.17.
(Ord. 90, passed 12-17-1986; Ord. 148, passed 8-17-1994; Ord. 557, passed 3-17-
2015)
CHAPTER 93: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
93.01   Policy
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Unlawful practices
   
93.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
93.05   Discrimination in the financing of housing
   
93.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
   
93.07   Exemption
   
93.08   Administration
   
93.09   Education and conciliation
   
93.10   Enforcement
   
93.11   Investigations; subpoenas; giving of evidence
   
93.12   Enforcement by private persons
   
93.13   Interference, coercion, or intimidation
   
93.14   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the county to provide, within constitutional
limitations, for fair housing throughout the county.
(Ord. 175, passed 10-7-1992)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§ 93.04,
93.05, or 93.06.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families,
and any vacant land which is offered  for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries.
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for
a consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant.
(Ord. 175, passed 10-7-1992)
§ 93.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICES.
   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below and §
93.07, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
set forth in this section shall apply to:
   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) below;
   (B)   Nothing in §
93.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that
such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family
houses at any one time; provided further, that in the case of the sale of any
such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such
house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such
house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this division (B)(1) shall
apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided
further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest
in, nor is there owned or reserved on his or her behalf, under any express or
voluntary agreement, title to, or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds
from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one
time; provided further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family house
shall be excepted from the application of this chapter only if such house is
sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or
salesperson, or of such facilities or dwellings, or of any employee or agent of
any such broker, agent, salesperson, or person; and
         (b)   Without the publication, posting, or mailing after notice of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
93.04(C), but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purpose of division (B) above, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence in providing
sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or
      (3)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Ord. 175, passed 10-7-1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   As made applicable by §
93.03 and except as exempted by §§
93.03(B) and
93.07, it shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, familial status, or handicapped status;
   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, familial status, or handicapped status;
   (C)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published
any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of
a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based
on race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicapped
status or any intention to make any such preference, limitation, or
discrimination; or
   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, familial status, or handicapped status that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available.
(Ord. 175, passed 10-7-1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 DISCRIMINATION IN THE FINANCING OF HOUSING.
   It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company, or other corporation, association, firm, or enterprise whose business
consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to
deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying thereof for the
purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a
dwelling, or to discriminate against him or her in the fixing of the amount,
interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other
financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, national origin,
sex, familial status, or handicapped status of such person or of any person
associated with him or her in connection with such loan or other financial
assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or
occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other
financial assistance is to be made or given; provided, that nothing contained
in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception
contained in §
93.03(B).
(Ord. 175, passed 10-7-1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers
organization, or other service; organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings; or to discriminate against him or her
in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on
account of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or
handicapped status.
(Ord. 175, passed 10-7-1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 EXEMPTION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or
national origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not
in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or
purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to
its members or from giving preference to its members.
(Ord. 175, passed 10-7-1992)
§ 93.08 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for administering this chapter shall
be in the chief executive officer of the county.
   (B)   The chief executive officer may delegate any of these functions,
duties, and powers to employees of the county or to boards of such employees,
including functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating,
conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting, or
otherwise acting as to any work, business, or matter under this chapter. The
chief executive officer shall by rule prescribe such rights of appeal from the
decisions of his or her hearing examiners to other hearing examiners or to
other officers in the county, to boards, or officers or to himself or herself,
as shall be appropriate and in accordance with law.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies shall administer their programs
and activities relating to Housing and Urban Development in a manner
affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter and shall cooperate with
the chief executive officer to further such purposes.
(Ord. 175, passed 10-7-1992)
§ 93.09 EDUCATION AND CONCILIATION.
   Immediately after the enactment of this chapter, the chief executive officer
shall commence such educational and conciliatory activities as will further the
purposes of this chapter. He or she shall call conferences of persons in the
housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with the
provisions of this chapter and his or her suggested means of implementing it,
and shall endeavor with their advice to work out programs of voluntary
compliance and of enforcement.
(Ord. 175, passed 10-7-1992)
§ 93.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice or who believes that he or she will be irrevocably injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter “person
aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the chief executive officer. Complaints
shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as
the chief executive officer requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the
chief executive officer shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or
persons who allegedly committed or who is/are about to commit the alleged
discriminatory housing practice. Within 30 days after receiving a complaint, or
within 30 days after the expiration of any period of reference under division
(C) below, the chief executive officer shall investigate the complaint and give
notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he or she intends to resolve
it. If the chief executive officer decides to resolve the complaints, he or she
shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing
practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation, and persuasion.
Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made
public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this chapter
without the written consent of the persons concerned.
   (B)   A complaint under division (A) above shall be filed within 180 days
after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be
in writing and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a
discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and
fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint
against him or her and with the leave of the chief executive officer, which
shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, and may
amend his or her answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be
verified.
   (C)   If within 30 days after a complaint is filed with the chief executive
officer, the chief executive officer has been unable to obtain voluntary
compliance with this chapter, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days
thereafter, file a complaint with the Secretary of the Department of Housing
and Urban Development. The chief executive officer will assist in this filing.
   (D)   If the chief executive officer has been unable to obtain voluntary
compliance within 30 days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may, within 30
days hereafter commence a civil action in any appropriate court, against the
respondent named in the complaint, and to enforce the rights granted or
protected by this chapter, insofar as such rights relate to the subject of the
complaint. If the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has
occurred or is about to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent from
engaging in such practice or order such affirmative action as may be
appropriate.
   (E)   In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of
proof shall be on the complainant.
   (F)   Whenever an action filed by an individual shall come to trial, the
chief executive officer shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain
voluntary compliance.
(Ord. 175, passed 10-7-1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.11 INVESTIGATIONS; SUBPOENAS; GIVING OF EVIDENCE.
   (A)   In conducting an investigation, the chief executive officer shall have
access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals,
and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record, and
copy such materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such
persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation;
provided, however, that the chief executive officer first complies with the
provisions of the Fourth Amendment relating to unreasonable searches and
seizures. The chief executive officer may issue subpoenas to compel his or her
access to or the production of such materials, or the appearance of such
persons, and may issue interrogatories to a respondent, to the same extent and
subject to the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or
interrogatories were issued or served in aid of a civil action in the U.S.
District Court for the district in which the investigation is taking place. The
chief executive officer may administer oaths.
   (B)   Upon written application to the chief executive officer, a respondent
shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by, and
in the name of the chief executive officer to the same extent and subject to
the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the chief executive officer himself
or herself. Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their
face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were
issued at his or her request.
   (C)   Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the chief executive officer shall be
entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings
in U.S. District Courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena
issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by him or her.
   (D)   Within five days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such
person may petition the chief executive officer to revoke or modify the
subpoena. The chief executive officer shall grant the petition if he or she
finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable
time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to
any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient
particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly
onerous, or for other good reason.
   (E)   In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the chief
executive officer or other person at whose request it was issued may petition
for its enforcement in the municipal or state court for the district in which
the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or transacts
business.
   (F)   The County Attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the chief
executive officer participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to this
chapter.
(Ord. 175, passed 10-7-1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.12 ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS.
   (A)   (1)   The rights granted by sections §§
93.03,
93.04,
93.05, and
93.06 may be enforced by civil actions in state or local courts of general
jurisdiction.
      (2)   A civil action shall be commenced within 180 days after the alleged
discriminatory housing practice occurred; provided, however, that the court
shall continue such civil case brought pursuant to this section or §
93.10(D) from time to time before bringing it to trial if the court believes
that the conciliation efforts of the chief executive officers are likely to
result in satisfactory settlement of the discriminatory housing practice
complained of in the complaint made to the chief executive officer and which
practice forms the basis for the action in court; and provided, however, that
any sale, encumbrance, or rental consummated prior to the issuance of any court
order issued under the authority of this chapter, and involving a bona fide
purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant without actual notice of the existence of
the filing of a complaint or civil action under the provisions of this chapter
shall not be affected.
   (B)   The court may grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent
or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, and may
award to the plaintiff actual damages and not more than $1,000 punitive
damages, together with court costs and reasonable attorney fees in the case of
a prevailing plaintiff; provided, that the said plaintiff, in the opinion of
the court, is not financially able to assume said attorney’s fees.
(Ord. 175, passed 10-7-1992)
§ 93.13 INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§
93.03,
93.04,
93.05, and
93.06. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil action.
(Ord. 175, passed 10-7-1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.14 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates, or interferes with, or attempts to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, familial status, or handicapped status and because he or she is or
has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting, or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicapped status in any
of the activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in division
(A) above; or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
(Ord. 175, passed 10-7-1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)    Any employee of the chief executive officer who shall make public any
information in violation of §
93.10(A) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year.
   (C)   Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to
answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents, or other evidence,
if in his or her power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order
of the chief executive officer shall be fined not more than $1,000 or
imprisoned not more than one year, or both. Any person who, with intent thereby
to mislead the chief executive officer, shall make or cause to be made any
false entry or statement of fact in any report, account, record, or other
document submitted to the chief executive officer pursuant to his or her
subpoena or other order, or shall willfully neglect or fail to make or cause to
be made full, true, and correct entries in such reports, accounts, records, or
other documents, or shall willfully mutilate, alter, or by any other means
falsify any documentary evidence, shall be fined not more than $1,000 or
imprisoned not more than one year, or both.
   (D)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicapped
status in any of the activities, services, organizations, or facilities
described in § 93.14(A), or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful
assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity so to participate shall be
fined not more than $1,000, or imprisoned not more than one year, or both; and
if bodily injury results shall be fined not more than $10,000, or imprisoned
not more than ten years, or both; and if death results shall be subject to
imprisonment for any term of years or for life.
(Ord. 175, passed 10-7-1992)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
111.   CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
      
112.   ALCOHOL BEVERAGE CONTROL
      
113.   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM INSTALLATIONS
CHAPTER 110: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
110.01   Purpose and findings
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   General restrictions, requirements, and conditions for sexually-
oriented businesses
   
110.04   Exhibition of sexually-explicit films, videos, or live entertainment
in viewing rooms
   
110.05   Inspection
   
110.06   Live performances or other entertainment
   
110.07   Location restrictions
   
110.08   Entertainment permit
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-oriented
businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of the county, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations
relating to sexually-oriented businesses. The provisions of this chapter have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the
content of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials,
but to enact a content neutral ordinance which addresses the secondary effects
of sexually-oriented businesses. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect
of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented
materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented entertainment to their
intended market.
      (2)   However, neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material and the Fiscal Court
recognizes that state and federal law prohibits the distribution of obscene
materials and expects and encourages state law enforcement officials to enforce
state obscenity statutes against such illegal activities in the county.
   (B)   Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects
of adult uses on the community presented in reports made available to the
Fiscal Court, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v.
Play Time Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young vs. American Mini-
Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560
(1991), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to:
Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis,
Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California;
Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas; and also on findings from the
report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on the regulation of sexually-
oriented businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the Fiscal Court finds
the following.
      (1)   Sexually-oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful
and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of
the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners
of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their
premises.
      (2)   Certain employees of sexually-oriented businesses defined in this
chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidents of certain
types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments.
      (3)   Sexual acts occur at sexually-oriented businesses, especially those
which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films,
videos, or live sex shows. Offering and providing such space encourages such
activities which creates unhealthy conditions.
      (4)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other
sexually-oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the
premises of such sexually-oriented businesses.
      (5)   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually- oriented businesses, including but not limited to,
syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital
herpes, hepatitis B, non-A amebiasis, non-B amebiasis, salmonella infections,
and shigella infections.
      (6)   There has been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of
AIDS caused by the HIV virus in the United States. Through December 31, 1997,
there have been 619,690 reported cases of AIDS in the United States. As of
December 31, 1997, there have been 2,583 reported cases of AIDS in
commonwealth.
      (7)   The U.S. Surgeon General in his report of October 22, 1986, advised
the U.S. public that AIDS and HIV infections may be transmitted through sexual
contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood
components, and from an infected mother to her newborn.
      (8)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually-oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and,
in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of
the owners and operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities
and maintain those facilities.
      (9)   Children, the family environment, and residential neighborhoods
suffer injury from the deleterious effects and harmful consequences resulting
from the distribution of, and exposure to, certain sexually-explicit materials.
This is particularly so when such material is permitted to leave a business’
premises and enter the immediate family environment, neighborhood, and certain
areas where children are likely to be.
      (10)   The findings noted in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(9) above raise
substantial governmental concerns.
      (11)   Sexually-oriented businesses have operational characteristics
which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns.
      (12)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters.
      (13)   The general welfare, health, and safety of the citizens of the
county will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
(Ord. 404, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT AMUSEMENT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration,
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors, video or laser disk players, or other image
producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial
establishment which, as one of its regular features, offers for sale or rental
for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions,
slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or
      (2)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
   ADULT CABARET. A night club, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude;
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT MOTEL. Hotel, motel, or like commercial establishment which:
      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way
which advertises the availability of this adult-type photographic
reproductions;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than ten hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room
for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
   ADULT MOTION THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
dominant depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
   ADULT STAGE SHOW THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state
of nudity or are semi-nude, or live performances which are characterized by the
exposures of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually-
oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, whether or not
the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or
otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage, or other
compensation by the operator of said business. EMPLOYEE does not include a
person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or
equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods on the premises.
   ENTERTAINER. Any person who provides sexually-oriented entertainment in a
sexually-oriented business whether or not an employee of the business and
whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for such entertainment.
   ESCORT. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any sexually-oriented business, whether existing or opening
of such business; the conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually-oriented business to any sexually- oriented business; the additions of
any sexually-oriented businesses to any other sexually-oriented businesses; or
the relocation of any sexually-oriented business.
   MANAGER. Any person who manages, directs, administers, or is in charge of
the affairs and/or the conduct of a sexually-oriented business.
   MENTAL STATES. Required to prove violations. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary, for the purpose of this chapter, an act by an employee or any person
shall be imputed to the sexually- oriented business owner or manager for the
purpose of finding a violation if the owner or manager knowingly or negligently
allowed such act to occur on the premises of the establishment.
   NUDE, NUDITY, or a STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with less than a
frilly opaque covering; the showing of the female breasts with less than a
frilly opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or the showing of the covered
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   OWNER. Any individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity who has legal title to real estate, with or
without actual possession thereof, or has all or part of the beneficial
ownership of any real estate and a right to present use or enjoyment thereof,
including a mortgage in possession.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
   REGULARLY FEATURED or REGULARLY SHOWN. A substantial or significant use, but
not necessarily a majority of the business activity or stock in trade. The fact
that a business may have one or more other principal uses unrelated to
sexually-oriented business shall not relieve the business from the provisions
of this chapter if the business dedicates at least 25% of the utilized square
footage of its premises for sexually-oriented business, or at least 25% of the
gross receipts of a business, excluding food and beverage receipts, result from
sexually-oriented business.
   SEMI-NUDE or IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION. Showing of the female breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point of the
showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the
entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, or other wearing apparel
provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
   SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Depiction of human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation, acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, or
holding or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or
breasts.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, physical
contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite
sex; or activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult amusement arcade, adult bookstore,
adult motel, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult
motion picture theater, adult stage theater, escort agency, or sexual encounter
center.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. The fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast; or other sexual acts,
including but not limited to actual or stimulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or excretory functions as part of or in
connection with any of the foregoing activities.
(Ord. 404, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 110.03 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS, REQUIREMENTS, AND CONDITIONS FOR SEXUALLY-
ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   All sexually-oriented businesses defined under §
110.02 shall comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   An establishment shall not exhibit any lettering, wording, pictorial,
or representational matter which is distinguished or characterized by a
depiction of sexual activities on any sign subject to public view from outside
the establishment.
   (B)   An establishment shall not display its stock in trade, inventory, or
merchandise which depicts, describes, or relates to sexual activities in such a
manner as to be subject to public view from outside the establishment.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided by laws which may be more restrictive, no
owner or operator of an establishment shall knowingly permit a person under 18
years of age to be employed by or enter the establishment. Each establishment
shall maintain and retain for a period of two years beyond the last date of
employment, the full name, date of birth, last known address, date of
termination, and Social Security number of all persons employed by the
sexually-oriented business.
   (D)   An establishment must have an employee on duty at all times in which
the business is open and must be positioned at a station in the premises which
is located in such a manner that the entrance can be monitored at all times.
Any person who reasonably appears to be under the age of 18 shall be requested
to verify his or her age. All persons under the age of 18 discovered in the
establishment shall be immediately escorted out of the premises.
   (E)   No specified sexual activity, including but not limited to sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact shall be
permitted in or on the premises of any establishment, except for an adult
motel. No owner, operator, or employee of an establishment shall knowingly
permit these activities to occur on the licensed premises.
(Ord. 404, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.04 EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY-EXPLICIT FILMS, VIDEOS, OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT
IN VIEWING ROOMS.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated an establishment, other
than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less
than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, live entertainment,
or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   Any wall or partition which is situated so as to create a viewing
area which any amusement device or viewing screen is located shall be
constructed of not less than one hour fire restrictive material and shall
contain no hole or other perforation.
      (2)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there shall be an unobstructed view from a manager’s or cashier’s station
of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose excluding restrooms. The view required in this section must be by
direct line of sight from the manager’s or cashier’s station.
      (3)   No viewing room or booth shall be obstructed by any door, curtains,
partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials. No patron
shall be permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated
as an area to which patrons are not permitted.
      (4)   No viewing room or booth shall be occupied by more than one person
at any time. No owner, operator, or employee shall knowingly permit any viewing
room or booth to be occupied by more than one person at any time.
      (5)   No restroom shall contain any video reproduction devices or
equipment.
      (6)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than ten foot candles as measured at
floor level.
      (7)   It shall be the duty of the owner, manager, or employee to ensure
that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any
customer is present in the premises.
      (8)   No owner, manager, or employee shall allow openings of any kind to
exist between viewing rooms or booths.
      (9)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing booths or rooms.
      (10)   The owner, manager, or employees shall, during each business day,
cause the wall between the viewing booths to be regularly inspected to
determine if any openings or holes exist.
      (11)   All floor coverings in viewing rooms or booths shall be non-
porous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
      (12)   There must be at least one employee on duty and situated at the
manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
The manager’s or cashier’s station shall be a maximum of 32 square feet and if
multiple manager’s or cashier’s stations are needed, then an employee shall be
present at each such station when any patron is present in the area which is
monitored by that particular station.
   (B)   All establishments in operation in the county on the effective date of
this chapter shall comply with the terms and conditions hereof within 90 days
after the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 404, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 INSPECTION.
   All establishments shall permit representatives of the county, including
representatives of the Sheriff’s Department, Fire Department, or other county
departments or agencies to inspect the premises for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for business. Upon
observing any violation of this chapter by the owner, manager, or employee,
such duly-authorized representative shall make arrests without warrants for
violations committed within his or her presence.
(Ord. 404, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 110.06 LIVE PERFORMANCES OR OTHER ENTERTAINMENT.
   (A)   It shall be a violation for a patron, employee, or any other person to
knowingly or intentionally, in an establishment, appear in a state of nudity,
regardless of whether such public nudity is expressive in nature.
   (B)   It shall be a violation for any person to knowingly or intentionally,
in an establishment, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an
employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least six feet from any patron or
customer and on a stage at least 18 inches from the floor.
   (C)   It shall be a violation for any employee, while semi-nude in a
sexually-oriented business, to knowingly or intentionally receive any pay or
gratuity directly from any customer or for any customer to knowingly or
intentionally pay or give any gratuity directly to any employee, while said
employee is semi-nude in a sexually-oriented business.
   (D)   It shall be a violation for any employee, while semi-nude, to
knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer.
   (E)   No employee, while semi-nude, shall be visible from any public place
outside the premises during any performance.
(Ord. 404, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The public entrance to a sexually-oriented business shall not be
located within 1,000 feet of any building containing a public or private
elementary, middle, or secondary school; institution of higher education or
business college; or any park-like area of open space under the control of a
governmental agency, or any building used for a place of religious worship, or
any building used for a governmental function or public library. Such distance
shall be measured along a straight line from the nearest property line of the
property on which the building or park-like area is located to the entrance to
such establishment engaging in a sexually-oriented business.
   (B)   The public entrance to an establishment engaging in a sexually-
oriented business shall not be located within 1,000 feet of the public entrance
of another sexually-oriented business.
(Ord. 404, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.08 ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT.
   Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, nothing in this
chapter is intended to supersede or abrogate the requirement for any
establishment providing entertainment as defined in KRS 231.010 to obtain a
permit to operate a place of entertainment pursuant to KRS Ch. 231.
(Ord. 404, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than $500, or be imprisoned in
the County Jail for not more than 12 months, or  both, fine and imprisonment,
for each offense. Any person cited under this chapter may be cited again for
the same violation one or more days after a prior citation and each citation
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 404, passed 2-17-2004)
CHAPTER 111: CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Grant of franchise
   
111.03   Term
   
111.04   Ordinance of revocation
   
111.05   Consideration
   
111.06   Operation and maintenance
   
111.07   Removal on subscriber’s request
   
111.08   Emergency use
   
111.09   Notice
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CATV. A community antenna television system as hereinafter defined.
   COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM or SYSTEM. A system of antennas, coaxial
cables, wires, wave guides, or other conductors, equipment, or facility
designed, constructed, or used primarily for the interception and receipt of
television, radio, or satellite signals directly or indirectly off the air, and
the distribution or transmission of such signals by means of cables or other
similar devices to subscribers.
   FRANCHISE. The permission, license, franchise, or authority given hereunder
to conduct and operate a community antenna television system in the
unincorporated areas of the county.
   GRANTEES. A party to which a franchise under this chapter is granted by the
County Fiscal Court, its successors and assigns.
   GRANTOR. The unincorporated areas of the county, or its successors.
   GROSS ANNUAL RECEIPTS. Any and all compensation and other consideration in
any form whatsoever and any contributing grant or subsidy received directly or
indirectly by the grantees herein from subscriber or users in payment for
television, FM radio, satellite signals, or service received within the limits
of the grantor. Except, GROSS ANNUAL RECEIPTS shall not include any taxes on
services  furnished by the grantees herein imposed directly on any subscriber
or user by any state, city, or other governmental unit and collected by the
grantees on behalf of such governmental unit.
   PERSON. Any individual or association in individuals or any firm,
corporation, or other business entity.
   STREET. The surface of and the space above and below any public street,
road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, drive, or
other easement now or hereafter held by grantor for the purpose of public
travel and shall include such other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now
held or hereafter held by the grantor which shall within their proper use and
meaning entitle the grantor and its grantees to use thereof for the purpose of
installing or transmitting CATV transmissions over poles, wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, or
other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a CATV system.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service
of the grantees herein.
(Ord. 426, passed 6-21-2005)
§ 111.02 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   General grant. The grantor hereby grants to the grantees the
nonexclusive right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, and maintain a
CATV system within the limits of the grantor, and in so doing, to use the
streets of the grantor by erecting, installing, constructing, repairing,
replacing, reconstructing, maintaining, and retaining in, on, under, upon, or
across any such street, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be
necessary and pertinent to a CATV system, and in addition, so to use, operate,
and provide for all or a part of such facilities by service offerings obtained
from any public or private utility or any other franchise or operating
telephone or electric company within the limits of the grantor.
   (B)   Nonexclusivity. The authority hereby granted to conduct a CATV system
in the limits of the grantor and to use and to occupy the streets therefor is
not and shall not be deemed to be an exclusive right or permission. The grantor
expressly reserves the right to grant similar nonexclusive franchises to other
persons, firms, or corporations to conduct CATV and to use the streets of the
county therefor within the same or other areas of the county at any time or
period of time. No such additional franchise granted by the grantor shall in
any way affect the obligations of the grantees hereunder.
(Ord. 426, passed 6-21-2005)
§ 111.03 TERM.
   (A)   The franchise herein granted shall be for a term of ten years unless
the same shall sooner expire by reason of other provisions hereof.
   (B)   The term of this franchise for each grantee shall commence on the
first day of the first month following the date the grantees hereunder accepts
and agrees to abide with the terms and conditions of this franchise by filing a
written acceptance thereof with the grantor; which said acceptance shall be
filed, if it is to be valid, within a period of ten days from the effective
date of the ordinance granting this franchise. If such acceptance shall not be
filed within the time aforesaid, by any of the grantees, then the ordinance
granting this franchise as to the noncomplying grantee shall be deemed void and
of no further force and effect and the offer of franchise contained in said
ordinance shall stand revoked as to the non-accepting grantee.
(Ord. 426, passed 6-21-2005)
§ 111.04 ORDINANCE OF REVOCATION.
   No revocation provided in this section, except for reason of condemnation,
shall be effective unless or until the grantor shall have adopted an ordinance
setting forth the cause and reason for the revocation and the effective date
thereof, which ordinance shall not be adopted without 30 days prior notice
thereof to the grantees, and an opportunity for the grantees to be heard on the
proposed adoption of such proposed ordinance. If the revocation as proposed in
such ordinance depends on finding of fact, such finding of fact as made by the
grantor after the hearing provided for, if requested by the grantees; shall be
conclusive, for purpose of action by the legislative body.
(Ord. 426, passed 6-21-2005)
§ 111.05 CONSIDERATION.
   (A)   General payment. For the reason that the roads to be used by the
grantee in the operation of its system within the boundaries of the county are
valuable public properties, acquired and maintained by the grantor at great
expense to its taxpayers, and that the grant to the grantee to use said roads
is a valuable property right without which the company would be required to
invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, the grantee
shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee in an amount equal to 5% of the
grantee’s gross subscriber revenues from cable television operations in the
county. The franchise fee shall be payable monthly to the grantor and the
grantee shall file a complete and accurate report, signed by and certified as
accurate by an officer of the grantee, of all gross subscriber revenues
received within the territorial limits of the county during the period, and
said payment shall be made to the government no later than 25 days after the
expiration of the month when due.
   (B)   Early termination. If this franchise should be terminated or forfeited
prior to the end of the basic ten-year term, grantees shall immediately submit
to the grantor a financial statement prepared as required in this section,
showing the gross subscriber revenues per year from cable television operations
in the community, and the grantees shall pay to the grantor not later than 30
days following the termination of the franchise the like percentage of such
gross subscriber revenues per year from cable television operations in the
community.
   (C)   Inspection of records. The grantor shall have the right to inspect
grantees’ records showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payment
are computed and the right to audit and recomputation of any and all amounts
paid under this franchise shall be always accorded to the grantor.
(Ord. 426, passed 6-21-2005)
§ 111.06 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   Grantees shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.
Interruptions for maintenance insofar as possible shall be preceded by notice
and shall occur during the periods of minimum use of the system.
(Ord. 426, passed 6-21-2005; Ord. 431, passed 8-2-2005)
§ 111.07 REMOVAL ON SUBSCRIBER’S REQUEST.
   On termination of service to any subscriber, the grantees shall promptly
remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber
if the subscriber shall so request. In any event, the facilities of grantees
shall be so constructed and designed that by the use of ordinary household
tools and without special skills or knowledge and without unreasonable risk of
harm, the subscriber may be capable at any time of disconnecting the system of
grantees from the subscriber’s television set or receiver so that said set or
receiver may be used independently of the system for service of grantees.
(Ord. 426, passed 6-21-2005)
§ 111.08 EMERGENCY USE.
   In the event of any emergency or disaster, grantees shall, on request of the
grantor, make available its facilities to the grantor for emergency use during
the period of such emergency or disaster and shall provide such personnel as is
necessary to operate properly under the circumstances.
(Ord. 426, passed 6-21-2005)
§ 111.09 NOTICE.
   Whenever under the terms of this franchise either party shall be required or
permitted to give notice to the other, such notice shall be in writing and if
to be served upon the grantor, shall be delivered either by first class U.S.
mail or by handing such notices to any elected official then serving on
legislative body of grantor and that the grantees by delivering by first class
U.S. mail or by handing such notice to such officer at such address as grantees
shall be from time to time direct. The original name and address of the officer
on behalf of the grantees shall be included in grantees acceptance of this
franchise as provided herein.
(Ord. 426, passed 6-21-2005)
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOL BEVERAGE CONTROL
Section
   
112.01   General
   
112.02   License requirements
   
112.03   County Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator
   
112.04   Application and maintenance of license
   
112.05   Hours for sale and delivery
   
112.06   Conditions, prohibitions and restrictions
   
112.07   Minors
   
112.08   Consumption at premises prohibited
   
112.09   Malt beverage keg registration
   
112.10   Enforcement
   
112.11   Mandatory responsible beverage service training
   
112.12   Signs and advertising
   
112.13   Patio and outdoor sales
   
112.99   Penalties
§ 112.01 GENERAL.
   (A)   This chapter shall be known as the "Alcoholic Beverage Control
Ordinance" of the County of Barren, Kentucky (hereinafter referred to as the
"County").
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform regulations and
requirements for the licensing and regulation of alcoholic beverage manufacture
and sales pursuant to authorization under KRS Chs. 241 through 244.
   (C)   The definitions of the words used throughout this chapter, unless the
context requires otherwise, shall have the same meaning as those set out in the
alcoholic beverage control laws (KRS Chapters 241 through 244) of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky and all amendments and supplements thereto.
   (D)   This chapter shall be construed to apply to the manufacture and
traffic in both malt beverages and distilled spirits and wine where the context
permits such application. Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the
licensee, or the owner, proprietor, employee, agent or person in charge of any
licensed premises where alcoholic beverages are sold from the restrictions,
requirements and penalties of any other ordinance of the county, or of any
statues of the state relating to violations pertaining to alcoholic beverages.
   (E)   The provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky (KRS Chapters 241 through 244) and all amendments and
supplements thereto, are adopted so far as applicable to this chapter except as
otherwise lawfully provided herein.
(Ord. 584, passed 11-15-2016)
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   County licenses. For the privilege of causing, permitting and engaging
in the actions, business, and transactions Authorized thereby in regard to
traffic in alcoholic beverages in the county and pursuant to the authority of
KRS 243.060, there is hereby established a corresponding county license for
each of the state licenses described in KRS 243.060. The fee for each county
license shall be as set out in the schedule set forth below. In the event KRS
243.060 shall hereafter be amended to authorize additional county licenses, the
fee for each county license shall be the maximum fee provided in the statute as
amended.
      (1)   Quota Retail package license, per annum               $1,000
      (2)   Quota retail drink license, per annum                  $1,000
      (3)   Non-quota Type 2 retail drink license, per annum            $1,000
         (includes distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages)
      (4)   Non-quota Type 3 retail drink license, per annum            $300
         (includes distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages)
      (5)   Special temporary license, per event                  $166
      (6)   Special Sunday retail drink license, per annum            $300
      (7)   Non-quota retail malt beverage package license, per
annum         $400
      (8)   Non-quota Type 4 retail malt beverage drink license, per
annum      $400
      (9)   Limited restaurant license, per annum               $1,400
         (includes distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages)
      (10)   Limited golf course license, per annum               $1,400
         (includes distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages)
      (11)   Authorized public consumption license, per annum            $250
         (if want to allow)
      (12)   Qualified historical site license, per annum               $1,030
   (B)   The fee for each of the first five supplemental bar licenses shall be
the same as the fee for the primary drink license. There shall be no charge for
each supplemental license issued in excess of five to the same licensee at the
same premises.
   (C)   The holder of a nonquota retail malt beverage package license may
obtain a Nonquota type 4 malt beverage drink license for a fee of $50. The
holder of a Nonquota type 4 malt beverage drink license may obtain a nonquota
retail malt beverage package license for a fee of $50.
   (D)   Certain special licenses defined.
      (1)   Limited restaurant license. A limited restaurant license may be
issued pursuant to KRS Chapter 243, if said restaurant meets the definition of
a LIMITED RESTAURANT as set forth in KRS 241.010(39) it is a facility where the
usual and customary business is the serving of meals to consumers, which has a
bona fide kitchen facility, which receives at least 70% of its gross income
from the sale of food, and which maintains seating capacity of either 100 or 50
persons for dining If the limited restaurant only maintains seating capacity
for 50 persons, it shall not have open bar and all alcoholic beverages shall be
sold in conjunction with the sale of a meal. Distilled spirits, wine, and malt
beverages shall be deemed to be purchased in conjunction with a meal if the
distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages are served after the meal is
ordered and no more than one-half hour after the meal is completed.
      (2)   Limited golf course license. A limited golf course license may be
issued pursuant to KRS Chapter 243 if an establishment meets the following
conditions: a golf course with nine, or 18 holes that meets United States Golf
Association criteria as a regulation golf course. A limited golf course license
shall authorize the license to purchase, receive, possess, and sell distilled
spirits, wine, and malt beverages at retail by the drink for consumption on the
licensed premise.
      (3)   Non-quota Type 1 retail drink license. A non-quota retail drink
license may be issued to, and in the, following as defined by KRS to: a
convention center or a convention hotel complex; a horse racetrack; an
automobile racetrack; a railroad system; a commercial airlines system or
charter flight system, a qualified historic site, state park.
      (4)   Non-quota Type 2 retail drink license. A non-quota retail drink
license may be issued pursuant to and as defined by KRS to the following: (a) a
hotel that contains at least 50 sleeping units, contains minimum dining seating
for at least 50 persons, and which maintains 50% of its gross food and drinks
sales are from the sale of food; (b) a restaurant that contains minimum dining
seating for at least 50 persons, and which maintains 50% of its gross food and
drinks sales are from the sale of food; (c) an airport; or (d) a riverboat.
      (5)   Non-quota Type 3 retail drink license. A non-quota 3 retail drink
license may be issued pursuant to and defined by KRS to the following: (a) a
private club in existence for longer than one (1) year prior to the license
application and which excludes the general public; (b) a dining car, (c) a
distiller, and (4) a bed and breakfast.
      (6)   Non-quota Type 4 retail malt beverage drink license. A non-quota
Type 4 retail malt beverage drink license may be issued pursuant to and as
defined in KRS to the following: a holder of a quota retail drink license; a
holder of a microbrewery license; a holder of a small farm winery license; and
any other business wishing to sell malt beverages by the drink for consumption
on the premises only. A non-quota retail malt beverage drink license shall not
be issued to any premises from which gasoline and lubricating oil are sold, or
from which the servicing and repair of motor vehicles is conducted, unless
there is maintained in inventory for sale on the premises at retail not less
than $5,000 of food, groceries, and related products valued at cost.
      (7)   Special temporary license. A special temporary license may be
issued only as set forth in KRS 243.260 and 804 KAR 4:250. Such a license may
be issued to any regularly organized fair, exposition, racing Association,
organized civic or community-sponsored event, or charitable event as defined by
applicable law. This license shall authorize the licensee to exercise the
privileges of a quota retail drink licensee and a non-quota Type 4 malt
beverage drink licensee at designated premises for a specified and limited
time, which shall not exceed 30 days and which shall expire when the qualifying
event ends. All restrictions and prohibitions applying to a distilled spirits
and wine quota retail drink license or a non-quota retail malt beverage drink
license shall apply also to a special temporary licensee as described in this
section.
      (8)   Authorized public consumption license (optional). A specific county
ordinance is required to authorize these license types to be issued to a
commercial quadricycle business. KRS 243.089(d) provides that required
ordinance must address: (1) Hours of operation; (2) Local licensing
requirements; (3) Any additional insurance requirements; (4) Standards for the
approval of authorized travel routes; (5) Safety and equipment standards; (6)
Local inspection requirements; (7) Standards for vehicle operation; and (8)
Standards for loading and unloading passengers.
      (9)   Qualified historic site license. Shall authorize the licensee to:
         (a)   Sell alcoholic beverages by the drink at one or more permanent
or nonpermanent locations on the premises over which the licensee, by lease or
ownership, has exclusive control without obtaining additional supplemental bar
licenses prescribed by KRS 243.037;
         (b)   Sell alcoholic beverages by the drink to patrons at public or
private functions held on premises; and
         (c)   Purchase and store alcoholic beverages in the manner prescribed
in KRS 243.088, 243.250, and 244.260.
   (E)   Expiration of license; proration of fees. All county licenses, except
temporary licenses, shall begin on May 1 of any year and shall expire on April
30 of the following year as set forth in KRS 243.090 and 804 KAR 4:390. Any
licenses issued after November 1 of any year shall be assessed a fee which is
based on the pro rata portion of the remainder of the license period; however,
the cost of any license shall not be less than one-half the amount of the full
fee for an annual license of that type.
   (F)   Payment of license fees; delinquency. No licensee shall enter into or
begin operating any business for which a license is required by this chapter
until the license fee has been paid in full. The fee for renewal of any license
shall be paid with the renewal application. Failure to pay any license fee
within ten days after it becomes due shall result in a penalty equal to 10% of
the license fee. Any licensee failing to pay the fees, including penalties,
within ten days after such fees are due may be subject to revocation of the
license and to other penalties as provided in this chapter.
   (G)   Refund of fees.
      (1)   Should any licensee under this chapter be prohibited from
conducting the licensed business for the full period covered by the license
because of any changes that may hereafter be made in the laws of the
Commonwealth with reference to alcoholic beverages or other cause outside
licensee's control, then the county shall refund to licensee the proportionate
part of the license fee for the period during which licensee is prevented from
carrying on said business if the licensee provides sufficient proof to the
County ABC Administrator that such period of inactivity was not the fault of
the licensee or the result of a revocation, suspension or other wrongdoing by
licensee, or an agent or employee of the licensee.
      (2)   In the event a violation of this chapter occurs that results in the
suspension or revocation of the license, the county shall not be required to
refund any portion of the license fee.
   (H)   Pursuant to KRS 243.075, there is hereby imposed a regulatory license
fee on the gross receipts of sale of alcoholic beverages of each licensee who
has a local license issued by the County ABC Administrator. The County's
regulatory license fee shall be 5% of gross sales of all alcoholic beverages
sold by the drink. In the case of retail sales of package distilled spirits and
wine, the regulatory license fee shall be 5% of gross sales. The regulatory
license fee shall be 5% on gross retail sales of package malt beverages.
      (1)   (Please note: the County Fiscal Court may adopt with the budget for
each subsequent fiscal year, such annual rate for the regulatory license fee as
shall be reasonably estimated to ensure full reimbursement to the county for
the cost of any additional policing, regulatory, or administrative expense
related to the sale of alcoholic beverages in the county. Should the county
fail to address the regulatory license fee in any budget, men the regulatory
license fee shall remain at the level at which it was last fixed in this ABC
Ordinance until such time as the County Fiscal court shall adjust the fee.)
      (2)   Payment of said regulatory fee shall be remitted to the County ABC
Administrator, who shall transmit all fees to the County Clerk, or his
designee, for deposit into the appropriate designated account. The County may
use said fees as permitted by law, including but not limited to, any cost of
additional policing, regulatory or administrative expenses related to the sale
of alcoholic beverages in the County. The regulatory license fee shall be in
addition to any other fees or licenses permitted by law, except that a credit
against a regulatory license fee in the County shall be allowed in an amount
equal to any license fee shall be based on paperwork required by the local and/
or state ABC Administrator, which may include but is not limited to tax returns
and financial statements. Said paperwork and payment will be due according to
the schedule set forth by the County ABC Administrator, or his designee, which
may be set at but is not limited to, time periods consisting of a monthly or
quarterly billing by the local ABC office and/or the County.
      (3)   Failure to pay such remittance within ten days of the due date
constitutes a violation and shall subject a licensee to suspension or
revocation.
      (4)   Penalty for failure to file a return and pay remittance by the due
date is 5% of the regulatory fee for each 90 days or fraction thereof. The
total late filing penalty shall not exceed 25% of the regulatory fee; provided,
however, that in no case shall the penalty be less than $10.
      (5)   Interest at the rate of 8% per annum will apply to any late
payments.
   (I)   Disposition of fees and any other type of payment to the County. The
County ABC Administrator shall transmit all fees and any other types of payment
made to the County, upon collection, to the County Clerk, or his/her designee,
for deposit into the appropriate designated account.
(Ord. 584, passed 11-15-2016; Ord. 605, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 112.03 COUNTY ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator. Pursuant to KRS 241.110,
there is hereby created the duties of the County of Barren Alcoholic Beverage
Control Administrator.
      (1)   The County Judge Executive shall serve as the County Alcoholic
Beverage Control Administrator (hereinafter referred to as County ABC
Administrator), unless the Barren County Judge Executive shall appoint someone
else to fill the position pursuant to KRS 241.110.
      (2)   The County Alcohol Beverage Administrator may from time to time
appoint such additional personnel, such as Alcohol Beverage Control
investigators), as is necessary to assist him or her in the administration of
this chapter.
      (3)   The functions of the County ABC Administrator shall be the same
with respect to the county licenses and regulations as the functions of the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Board of the Commonwealth of Kentucky (hereinafter
referred to as ABC Board) with respect to state licenses and regulations.
      (4)   To prevent potential conflicts of interests, no person shall be a
County ABC Administrator, an investigator, or an employee of the county, under
the supervision of the County ABC Administrator, who would be disqualified to
be a member of the ABC Board under state law set forth in KRS 241.100.
      (5)   The County ABC Administrator shall have authority delegated by the
Fiscal Court, and as authorized under KRS Chs. 241 through 244. The County ABC
Administrator, along with any designated investigators), shall have full police
powers of law enforcement, and their jurisdiction shall be, the county
administrator in that county shall have jurisdiction over only that portion of
the county which lies outside the corporate limits of any city that has
appointed' its own city, ABC administrator. The County ABC Administrator and
his investigators may inspect any premises where alcoholic beverages are
manufactured, sold, stored or otherwise trafficked in, without first obtaining
a search warrant.
      (6)   The County ABC administrator and his investigators shall have
available at all reasonable times for their inspection all books and records
required to be maintained by licenses under KRS 244.150 and the County ABC
Administrator shall receive copies of all reports submitted by licensee to the
State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board.
      (7)   The County ABC Administrator, before entering upon his or her
duties, shall take the oath as prescribed in Section 228 of the Constitution
and shall execute a bond with a good corporate surety in the penal sum of not
less than $1,000. Any employee delegated or assigned to the ABC Administration
may also be asked to execute a similar bond in such penal sum as the County
deems necessary unless said person is already covered under the County's active
bonds as required under KRS in regards to officials and employees of the
County.
   (B)   Appeals.
      (1)   Appeals from the orders of the County ABC Administrator may be
taken to the state ABC Board by filing with the Board within 30 days a
certified copy of the orders of the County ABC Administrator. The Board shall
hear matters at issue as upon an original proceeding. Appeals from orders of
the County ABC Administrator shall he governed by KRS Chapter 13B.
      (2)   When any decision of the County ABC Administrator shall have been
appealed, or when a protest has been lodged against an application for any
license within the county, and the ABC Board shall have made a decision
regarding such appeal or protested application, the County ABC Administrator,
upon receipt of notice of finality of the decision, shall enter such orders and
take such action as required by the final order of the ABC Board. As provided
by law, and as used herein, no order of the ABC Board is final until all
appeals or appeal times shall have been exhausted. A "final order” of the ABC
Board is the order entered by said Board, unless a court appeal is taken from
the Board's order, in which case the "final order" is the order entered by the
Board upon direction from the reviewing court of last resort in the final order
of said reviewing court.
(Ord. 584, passed 11-15-2016)
§ 112.04 APPLICATION AND MAINTENANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Advertisement. Before an application for a license shall be
considered, the applicant must publish a notice of its intent to apply for an
alcoholic beverage license in a newspaper meeting the requirements of KRS
Chapter 424, including the following:
      (1)   The advertisement shall comply with KRS 243.360 ad state the name
and address of the applicant. It shall state the members of the partnership if
the applicant is a partnership, and membership of the LLC if the applicant is
an LLC, as well as the name of the business and its address. If the applicant
is a corporation, the advertisement shall state the names and addresses of the
principal officers and directors of the corporation, as well as the name and
address of the corporation itself. All advertisements shall state the location
of the premises for which the licenses sought, and the type of license for
which application is made.
      (2)   The applicant shall attach to the application a newspaper clipping
of the advertisement and proof of the publication is provided in KRS 424.170.
   (B)   Application fee. A nonrefundable application fee of $50 shall be paid
with the filing of the application for a county license. If the license is
granted, the application fee shall be credited against the initial license fee.
   (C)   Form of application.
      (1)   AU licenses granted under this chapter shall be approved by the
County ABC Administrator. Applications for the issuance of new licenses and for
renewals of existing licenses shall be in writing and upon the forms provided
by the Kentucky ABC Board and/or the County, both of which may be amended and
supplemented from time to time by each respective agency.
      (2)   The application shall be verified and shall set forth in detail
such information concerning the applicant and the premises for which the
license is sought, as required by the Kentucky Revised Statutes, the state ABC
Board, and the County, including as follows:
         (a)   Name and address;
         (b)   Nature of interest;
         (c)   Whether or not a citizen of the United States;
         (d)   Date of birth;
         (e)   Date of residence was established in Kentucky, if a resident of
Kentucky.
         (f)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any other license
or LLC, corporation, partnership or other business organization holding a
license under this chapter;
         (g)   Extent of stock or company ownership;
         (h)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any license or LLC,
corporation, partnership or other business organization holding a license in
any other state or province.
      (3)   Each application shall be accompanied by a certified check, cashier
check, or money order for the amount of the license fee, less the $50
application fee.
      (4)   In addition to the above specified information, the applicant shall
file, with the application, responses to any additional questions as may be
posed or prescribed by the County ABC Administrator. The County Fiscal court
has adopted a statement of guidelines and priorities for the issuance of
licenses within this chapter to determine the extent to which applications may
further, or impede, the objectives of those guidelines. Therefore, in addition
to the information contained in the application, the County ABC Administrator
may require such other information as the Administrator may, in his or her
discretion, deem desirable, reasonable, or appropriate to the consideration of
the application.
   (D)   Other conditions. In addition to any other inquiries, conditions or
considerations required or permitted by law:
      (1)   The County ABC Administrator shall not grant any alcoholic beverage
license or approve a renewal of a license until the applicant and his or her
place of business shall have been approved by a licensed building inspector,
and any and all other inspections required by the Kentucky Building Code or
other applicable law;
      (2)   All applicants shall voluntarily submit to a criminal background
check and shall sign a waiver allowing the release of this information to the
County ABC Administrator; and
      (3)   No license to sell alcoholic or malt beverages may be granted or
renewed to any person who is delinquent in the payment of any property taxes,
both real and personal, any other taxes due to the County, fees of any type, or
charges due to any department of the county at the time of issuing the license,
nor may any license be granted or renewed to sell upon any premises or
property, owed and occupied by the licensee upon which there are any of the
above delinquent payments due and owing to the County. Further, if a licensee
becomes delinquent in the payment of any of the above at any time during the
license period, the license to sell alcoholic or malt beverages may be subject
to revocation or suspension.
      (4)   No person, whether applicant for license, or a licensee, shall in
any manner attempt to bribe, threaten, unduly influence or intimidate the
County ABC Administrator, or any member of the County's staff, or any state ABC
Administrator or staff, in any matter in which an application or proposed
application for license, or procedure for revocation or suspension is pending
before such officer. This division is not intended to stifle expressions of
opinion; however, it is intended to make clear that the ABC Administrators are
public officials charged with the administration and enforcement of the law,
both local and state. Any person applying for a license, or contesting the
revocation or suspension of a license, who engages in attempted bribes,
threats, attempted undue influence or intimidation of a county or state ABC
Administrator or staff shall be disqualified from receiving or retaining a
license, in addition to other penalties as provided by law. The procedures for
appeals shall apply to disqualifications, revocations or suspensions under this
chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit monetary
settlements in lieu of revocation or suspension of license after a final order
or revocation or suspension, where this chapter and applicable statutes allow
for such payments in settlement.
   (E)   Form of license. All county licenses shall be in such form as may be
provided by the ABC Administrator, but at the least shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the licensee;
      (2)   The number of the license;
      (3)   The type of license;
      (4)   A description by street and number, or otherwise, of the licensed
premises;
      (5)   The name and address of the owner of the building in which the
licensed premises are located;
      (6)   The expiration date of the license; and
      (7)   A statement in substance that the license shall not be a property
or vested right and that it may be revoked at any time pursuant to law.
   (F)   Change of information.
      (1)   If after a license to individuals or to a sole proprietor has been
issued, there is a change in any fact required to be set forth in the
application, a verified amendment in writing giving notice of the change shall
be filed with the County ABC Administrator with ten days of the change.
      (2)   Since a number of licenses issued by the county are in the name of
corporations or other business organizations, it is necessary that ownership
changes in such organizations be reported to the County ABC Administrator. The
County ABC Administrator can, therefore, investigate the person to whom the
ownership or management is transferred in order to ascertain whether that
person is precluded by statute from holding an interest in an alcoholic
beverage license.
      (3)   As used with regard to a partnership, corporation, LLC or other
business organization herein, the word "change" is construed to include any
change in managers, partners or LLC members, directors or officers of the
corporation, or change in ownership or stock whereby any person secures 10% of
the outstanding ownership or stock. Transfer of more than 10% of the total
ownership or stock shall require a new license.
      (4)   The following information shall be required concerning any new
manager, partner or LLC member, new director, officer, or person securing any
interest in alcoholic beverage license:
         (a)   Name and address;
         (b)   Nature of interest;
         (c)   Whether or not a citizen of the United States;
         (d)   Date of birth;
         (e)   Date residence was established in Kentucky, if a resident of
Kentucky. If a Barren County resident, indicate when residence was established;
         (f)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any other license
or in any LLC, corporation, partnership or other business organization holding
a license under this act;
         (g)   Extent of stock or company ownership;
         (h)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any license or in
any LLC, corporation, partnership or other business organization holding a
license in any other state or province.
      (5)   This information shall be filed with the County ABC Administrator
as a verified amendment of the application pursuant to which the license was
granted. Filing shall be made within ten days of any change of required
information.
   (G)   Renewal of license.
      (1)   Every year, except in the case of the temporary licenses, each
licensee shall renew its license. All renewal licenses must be on file with the
County ABC Administrator no less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the
license for the preceding license period or the same shall be canceled, except
where the licensee is unable to continue in business at the same premises
licensed during the preceding license period as a result of construction, act
of God, casualty, death, the acquisition or threatened acquisition of the
premises by any federal, state, county or other governmental agency or private
organization possessing power of eminent domain, whether such acquisition is
voluntary or involuntary, or loss of lease through failure of landlord to renew
exiting lease; provided that said licensee shall file a written verified
statement no less man 20 days from the expiration date of the license, setting
forth these facts, and the County ABC Administrator is hereby authorized to
extend the time for filing of a renewal of such license for a reasonable length
of time within the sound discretion of the County ABC Administrator; provided,
however, such licensee shall pay a license fee from the expiration date of the
former license or licenses. Said license fee shall not by payable until
application is made for the transfer of said license to a new location.
      (2)   The renewal by the County ABC Administrator of the license shall
not be construed to be a waiver or acceptance of any violation which occurred
prior to such renewal and shall not prevent subsequent proceedings against the
licensee.
   (H)   Lost or destroyed license. When a license shall be lost or destroyed
without fault on the part of the licensee or his or her agent or employee, a
duplicate in lieu of the original license shall be issued by the County ABC
Administrator after the Administrator shall have been satisfied as to the
facts; provided, however, that the applicant for said duplicate license shall
pay a fee of $10 for the duplicate license.
   (I)   Revocation or suspension.
      (1)   Any license may be revoked or suspended by the County ABC
Administrator if the licensee shall have violated any of other provisions of
KRS Chs. 241 through 244, or any rule or regulation of the ABC Board, or of the
Kentucky Department of Revenue, relating to the regulation of the manufacture,
sale, and transportation, or taxation, of alcoholic beverages or if such
licensee shall have violated or shall violate any act of Congress or any rule
or regulation of any federal board, agency or commission, or this chapter now,
heretofore, or hereafter in effect relating to the regulation of the
manufacture, sale, and transportation, or taxation, of intoxicating liquors, or
any rules or regulations of the county heretofore in existence or authorized by
the terms of KRS Chs. 241 through 244 to be created, irrespective of whether
the licensee knew of or permitted the violation or whether the violation was
committed is disobedience of his or her instructions, or any such license may
be revoked or suspended for any cause which the County ABC Administrator in the
exercise of his or her sound discretion deems sufficient.
      (2)   A license may be revoked for any of the reasons for which the
County ABC Administrator would have been required to refuse a-license if the
facts had been known.
      (3)   In addition to the foregoing stated causes, any license may be
revoked or suspended for the following causes:
         (a)   Conviction of the licensee or his or her agent or employee for
selling any illegal beverages on the premises licensed.
         (b)   Making any false, material statements in an application for a
license.
         (c)   If within a period of two consecutive years, any licensee or any
clerk, servant, agent or employee of the licensee shall have been convicted of
two violations of the terras and provisions of KRS Chs. 241 through 244 or any
act heretofore or hereafter in effect relating to the regulation of the
manufacture, sale and transportation of alcoholic beverages or if within such
period, any licensee or any clerk, servant, agent or employee of the license
shall have twice been convicted of any felony or of any misdemeanor directly or
indirectly attributable to the use of alcoholic beverages, or of one such
felony and one such misdemeanor.
   (d)   Willful and deliberate failure or default of a licensee to pay an
excise tax or any part thereof, or any penalties imposed by or under the
provisions of any statutes, this chapter, or acts of Congress relative to
taxation or for a violation of any rules or regulations of the Kentucky
Department of Revenue made in pursuance thereof.
   (e)   Setting up, conducting, operating or keeping, on the licensed
premises, any gambling game, device, machine or contrivance, or lottery or gift
enterprise, or handbook or facility for betting or transmitting bets on horse
races; or permitting to be set up, conducted, operated, kept, or engaged in, on
the licensed premises, any such game, device, machine, contrivance, lottery,
gift enterprise, handbook or facility.
   (J)   Proceedings for revocation or suspension of license.
      (1)   Upon the verified complaint of any person, or on the initiative of
any law enforcement officer, or of the County ABC Administrator, the County ABC
Administrator may institute proceedings to revoke or suspend any license
granted under this chapter. A license may be revoked or suspended only after
the licensee shall have been given written notice, by certified or registered
mail, of the proposed revocation, including notice of the reasons for such
proposed action. The licensee shall be given opportunity to be heard in
opposition to the proposed revocation or suspension. The notice of proposed
action shall advise the licensee of the date, time and place of the hearing.
Notice shall be sufficient if mailed to the licensee at the address shown in
the last application for a license or in the last statement supplemental to or
in amendment of the application, whether or not the mailing is receipted for or
claimed.
      (2)   A decision of the County ABC Administrator revoking or suspending a
license may be appealed as provided in KRS 241.140 and §
112.03.
      (3)   Within three days after any order of revocation or suspension of a
license becomes final, notice of revocation shall be given to the licensee and
to the owner of the licensed premises. A notice mailed to the licensee and to
the owner of the licensed premises at the address shown in the last application
for a license or in the last statement supplemental to the application shall be
deemed sufficient compliance with this section. The licensee shall at once
surrender his or her license to the County ABC Administrator. If the revoked or
suspended license is not forthwith surrendered by the licensee, the Chief of
Police, at the request of the County ABC Administrator, shall immediately cause
one of his or her officers to take physical possession of the license and
return it to the County ABC Administrator.
      (4)   When a license has been revoked or suspended, the former licensee
may, with prior approval of the County ABC Administrator, dispose of and
transfer his or her stock of alcoholic beverages to an appropriate entity.
      (5)   Appeal from the decision of the County ABC Administrator revoking
or suspending a license shall be to the ABC Board. The timely filing of an
appeal shall stay any penalty imposed by the order until conclusion of the
Board appeal and any subsequent court appeals.
      (6)   If a license is revoked or suspended by an order of the County ABC
Administrator, and the decision is not appealed, the licensee shall suspend all
operations authorized under his or her license upon effective date of the
order. Upon the entry of a final order of the ABC Board sustaining or ordering
revocation or suspension on appeal, the licensee shall at suspend all
operations authorized under this license upon effective date of the order.
   (K)   Transfer or assignment. No license issued under this chapter shall be
transferred or assigned either as to licensee or location except with prior
approval of the County ABC Administrator.
   (L)   Refusal of license; guidelines for approval of quota licenses.
      (1)   The County ABC Administrator may refuse to issue a license for any
of the following reasons:
         (a)   Causes for refusal to issue or renew a license and for
suspension or revocation of a county license shall be the same as provided for
state licenses according to KRS 243.450, 243.490 and 243.500, as well as
violation of any county ordinance regarding alcohol beverage licensing, sales
or the administration thereof.
         (b)   If the applicant has done any act for which a revocation of
license would be authorized under local, state, or federal law; or
         (c)   If the applicant has made any false material statement in his or
her application.
      (2)   An applicant who has been refused a license by the County ABC
Administrator may appeal the refusal to the ABC Board pursuant to KRS 241.140
and §
112.03.
   (M)   Review of license; books, records and reports.
      (1)   Applicants to whom a license is issued pursuant to this chapter
shall provide periodic information demonstrating compliance with the conditions
of any license, such as, but not limited to, the continuing requirement that a
minimum percentage of the applicant's business income is earned from the sale
of food. This documentation shall be provided on a schedule to be coordinated
with the applicant's quarterly regulatory fee filings. The county shall provide
the form schedule to the licensee. The licensee's acceptance of a license to
manufacture or traffic in alcoholic beverages shall constitute consent to the
filing of the quarterly report. In the case of caterer filing, the quarterly
report shall identity each catered event by type of event, date and address of
the event, and shall provide a per event breakdown of sales and the ratio of
food sales to alcohol sales during the reporting period. This requirement for
filing of reports notwithstanding, the county may at any time come upon the
premises of any licensee and examine the books and records to determine whether
the licensee is in compliance with all parts of this chapter. In the event the
conditions of any license requirement are not met during any particular
quarter, the County ABC Administrator shall have discretion in determining
whether revocation is appropriate or whether the licensee may be allowed a
reasonable period of time to reach compliance. If a good faith effort is
demonstrated by the licensee, the County ABC Administrator may apply an
accounting period of at least one year in determining whether or not the food
sale percentage requirement has been met.
      (2)   Every licensee under this chapter shall keep and maintain, upon the
licensed premises, adequate books and records of all transactions involved in
the sale of alcoholic beverages in the same manner required by the rules and
regulations of the ABC Board. Such books and records shall be available at all
reasonable times for inspection by the County ABC Administrator and such county
employees who may assist the County ABC Administrator in his or her review.
      (3)   For the purpose of assisting the County ABC Administrator in
enforcement of this chapter, every licensee required to report to the ABC Board
under KRS 243.850 shall provide a copy of such report to the County ABC
Administrator. Copies of any and all reports and correspondences to the ABC
Board required by statute shall be furnished to the County ABC Administrator.
   (N)   Dormancy.
      (1)   It is necessary that a licensee actually conduct the business
authorized by such a license or else the license will be declared dormant and
become null and void after 90 days. Such is the intent of this section.
Realizing that a licensee, like other business, may have his or her business
interrupted by situations not under his or her control, various exceptions to
the dormancy rule have been included in this section.
      (2)   Any license under which no business is transacted during a period
of 90 days shall be deemed inactive and, unless the conditions set forth in
division (N)(3) are proved to the satisfaction of the County ABC Administrator,
the license shall be surrendered to the County ABC Administrator. If the
license is not voluntarily surrendered, it shall be revoked by the County ABC
Administrator.
      (3)   The provisions of division (N)(2) shall not apply to any licensee
who is unable to continue in business at the premises for which a license is
issued due to construction, an act of God, casualty, death, the acquisition of
the premises by any federal, state, city or other governmental agency under
power of eminent domain, whether acquisition is voluntary or involuntary, or
loss of lease through failure of landlord to renew existing lease. Prior to the
expiration of 90 days of inactivity, such licensee shall furnish to the County
ABC Administrator a verified statement setting forth the fact that the licensee
is unable to continue in business, for any of the specific reasons set forth
herein, and the County ABC Administrator may grant an extension of the dormancy
with the license continuing to remain in effect during the license period or
until same is transferred to another premises, notwithstanding the fact that no
business is transacted during said period; provided, however, no such license
shall be considered valid unless business is conducted there under within 12
months from the date of notice to the County ABC Administrator. Such extension
may not extend beyond the renewal date but may be for such times as the County
ABC Administrator deems appropriate in exercise of his or her sound discretion.
(Ord. 584, passed 11-15-2016)
§ 112.05 HOURS FOR SALE AND DELIVERY.
   (A)   Hours for sale and delivery. A licensee for distilled spirits, wine
and/or malt beverages shall be permitted to sell or dispense distilled spirits,
wine and/or malt beverages between the hours of 6:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m.
(midnight) Monday - Saturday.
   (B)   A licensee for distilled spirits, wine and/or malt beverages shall be
permitted to sell or dispense distilled spirits, wine and/or malt beverages on
Sunday after the hours of 12:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m. Licensees must obtain a
Sunday retail drink license in order to sell distilled spirits or wine by the
drink on Sunday.
   (C)   A licensee may sell and dispense distilled spirits, wine, and/or malt
beverages on New Year's Eve until 2:00 a.m. on January 1, regardless of the day
of the week on which New Year's Eve occurs; provided that, the appropriate
licenses have been obtained from both the County and the State ABC Board.
   (D)   Licensees which operate as golf courses, private clubs, and
distilleries shall be allowed to sell distilled spirits, wine, or malt
beverages by the drink on Sunday between the hours of 12:00 p.m. until 12:00
a.m.
(Ord. 584, passed 11-15-2016)
§ 112.06 CONDITIONS, PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Gambling. No gambling or game of chance unless otherwise authorized by
the Commonwealth of Kentucky shall be permitted in any form on such licensed
premises unless permitted by state law. Dice, slot machines, prize redemption
machines with programmable payouts, or any device of chance is prohibited and
shall not be kept on such premises.
   (B)   Radio receiving apparatus. It shall be unlawful for any licensee
licensed under this chapter to have, or maintain, any radio receiving apparatus
on such premises which is intentionally adjusted so as to receive police
messages broadcast from any law enforcement agency in Barren County as it is
now, or may hereafter be operated. In addition to other penalties provided for
the violation of this section, the Chief of Police or the County ABC
Administrator, or his or her designated investigator, shall have the authority
to confiscate any and all such radio receiving apparatus.
   (C)   Security. The licensee shall be responsible for maintaining security
on his or her premises including providing adequate outside lighting to permit
customers to utilize the parking area and to promote the safety, health and
welfare of the general public utilizing the licensed premise. Security
standards are further necessary to discourage unlawful activity in and around
the licensed premises.
   (D)   Prizes and premiums prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to
give away, or offer to give away, anything tangible of value as a premium or
prize, or for any other purpose in direct connection with the sale of malt
beverages unless permitted by KRS 244.500.
   (E)   Treating prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the licensee under this
chapter to give away any alcoholic beverage in any quantity for free or for
less than a full monetary consideration unless the licensee holds a sampling
license, the licensee's license type permits limited free samples (i.e., small
farm winery, microbrewery, brewer's) or products are sampled at educational
event authorized by 804 KAR 1:110 and 804 KAR 11:030.
   (F)   Drunkenness. No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall
permit any person to become drunk or intoxicated on the premises, nor shall any
licensee sell alcoholic beverages to any person who is actually or apparently
under the influence of alcoholic beverages, or known to the seller or server to
be an habitual drunkard or any person known to the seller or server to have
been convicted of drunkenness as many as three times within the most recent 12-
month period. No licensee shall permit any person who is actually or apparently
under the influence of alcoholic beverages to remain on the licensed premises.
As used herein, whether a person is actually or apparently under the influence
of alcoholic beverages shall be determined by the licensee or server with
specific reference to the principles and guidelines established in mandatory
alcohol server training as to the signs of alcohol intoxication.
   (G)   Underage sales. The licensee shall not sell or dispense alcoholic
beverages to any person who is under 21 years of age.
   (H)   (1)   Sign requirements; notice to persons under the age of 21. The
licensee shall display at all times in a prominent place a sign at least 8" x
11" in 30-point or larger type font which states as follows:
      (2)   Persons under the age of 21 are subject to a fine of up to $100 if
they:
         (a)   Enter licensed premises to buy, or have served to them,
alcoholic beverages.
         (b)   Possess, purchase or attempt to purchase, or get another to
purchase alcoholic beverages.
         (c)   Misrepresent their age for the purpose of purchasing or
obtaining alcoholic beverages.
   (I)   License to be displayed.
      (1)   Pursuant to the requirements set forth in KRS 243.895, the
licensee, before commencing any business for which a license has been issued,
shall post and display at all times in a conspicuous place in the room or
principal room where the business is carried on so that all persons visiting
the place may readily see the license. The licensee shall not at any time post
the license on premises other than the licensed premises or upon premises where
traffic in alcoholic beverages is being carried on by any person other than the
license, or knowingly deface, destroy or alter the license in any respect.
      (2)   The licensee shall post in a prominent place easily seen by patrons
a printed sign at least 11" x 14" in size, with letters at least one inch high,
supplied by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, and with gender-
neutral language supplied by the Kentucky Cabinet for Health and Family
Services, which shall warn that drinking alcoholic beverages prior to
conception or during pregnancy can cause birth defects. A person who violates
this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10, nor more than
$50.
   (J)   Legal transactions for wholesalers, distributors and retail. No
wholesaler or distributor shall sell any alcoholic beverages to any person in
the county for any consideration except under cash terms of the wholesaler or
distributor at or before the time of delivery. A wholesaler is also permitted
to extend credit for 30 days to a retailer for the purchase of distilled
spirits and wine. No retail licensee shall sell to a consumer for any
consideration except for cash or case equivalent at time of purchase.
   (K)   Employment restrictions. No licensee shall knowingly employ in
connection with his or her business any person who:
      (1)   Has been convicted of any felony within the last two years unless
permitted by KRS 244.090(2);
      (2)   Has been twice convicted of any misdemeanor or offense directly or
indirectly attributable to the use of intoxicating liquors within the last two
years unless permitted by KRS 244.090(2);
      (3)   Is under the age of 20 years who will be serving alcoholic
beverages or who will be having any contact whatsoever with the sale of alcohol
as defined under state statute, unless said person is exempt or permitted by
KRS 244.090 or state law ;
      (4)   Within two years prior to the date of his or her employment, has
had any county license under this chapter revoked for cause.
   (L)   Lavatory facilities required. All retail beer and retail drink
licenses shall be required to provide indoor or outdoor lavatory facilities for
their customers where such beverages are consumed on the premises.
   (M)   Nudity and adult entertainment activities prohibited. No licensee
shall offer or permit nudity, adult entertainment activities, including nude or
nearly nude dancing, adult motion picture, television, slide or stage shows,
cabarets or sexual entertainment centers on any licensed premise. No licensee
shall permit explicit sexual activity, whether actual or simulated, upon any
licensed premises. No licensee shall sponsor or permit wet t-shirt or wet
clothing contests, lingerie fashion shows, mud wrestling, Jell-O wrestling or
similar activities, nor shall a licensee allow dancing with touching for
compensation (including but not limited to wages, tips or gratuities), or any
other service, display or contest requiring physical contact between patrons
and/or patrons and employees on any licensed premises. No licensee shall
sponsor, offer or permit drinking contests, all-you-can-drink specials or free
drinks on any licensed premise in the county.
   (N)   Cause for revocation. Violation of this and any other section shall
subject the licensee to penalties provided in this chapter and shall be cause
for revocation or suspension of County licenses.
(Ord. 584, passed 11-15-2016)
§ 112.07 MINORS.
   (A)   No person under the age of 21 may possess alcoholic beverages or enter
onto any licensed premises for the purpose of acquiring alcoholic beverages.
   (B)   As provided in KRS 244.085, no person under the age of 21, except in
the company of a parent or guardian, may enter any premises licensed for the
package sale of alcoholic beverages. No person under the age of 21, may enter
any premises licensed for drink sales of alcoholic beverages unless permitted
by KRS 244.085(6). For purposes of this prohibition, "premises" specifically
encompasses the entire lot upon which a licensed establishment is situated,
including any drive-up window. The prohibitions contained in this Subsection
shall not apply to premises where the usual and customary business of the
establishment is a gas station, convenience store, grocery store, drugstore, or
similar establishment.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly permit, aid, assist, induce, cause or
otherwise encourage any minor to be in possession of, use or consume alcoholic
beverages. All licenses, as set out in this chapter, shall require proof of age
of all persons attempting to purchase or consume alcoholic beverages on the
licensee's premises.
   (D)   No person being the owner or occupant or otherwise in possession or
control of any property located within the county shall knowingly allow any
minor to remain on such property while in possession of, using or consuming
alcoholic beverages.
   (E)   It shall be a defense to any prosecution under this section if the
person charged, upon discovery of said minor individuals, manifests a proper
effort to enlist the aid of and cooperate with law enforcement personnel in
stopping the minor individuals' possession, consumption or use of alcoholic
beverages, or that the minor individuals' possession of alcoholic beverages was
exempted by state law .
(Ord. 584, passed 11-15-2016)
§ 112.08 CONSUMPTION AT PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Consumption at package store prohibited.
      (1)   No licensee of a package store, whether trafficking in distilled
spirits, -wane or malt beverages, shall permit consumption of alcoholic
beverages on the premises unless it also holds the appropriate drink license.
The licensee shall post a prominent notice on the premises stating that
consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises is prohibited.
      (2)   This restriction regarding on premises consumption shall not
prohibit sampling as allowed for microbreweries, breweries, and small farm
wineries as permitted by provisions in KRS Ch. 243, or where sampling is
permitted for a retail distilled spirits and wine licensee under the provisions
of KRS 244.050, or beer tastings as permitted in 804 KAR 1:110 and 804 KAR 11:
030.
   (B)   Habitual congregating.
      (1)   Definitions. In addition to the definitions contained in KRS Chs.
241 through 244, as used in this section, the following terms are defined as
follows:
      HABITUAL. Consistent, that is, by frequent practice or use, but not
necessarily constant or exclusive;
      PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE. A retail establishment selling distilled spirits,
wine and malt beverages in package containers pursuant to licenses issued for
those purposes;
      PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any activity that endangers or interferes with the
general use and enjoyment of neighboring property, passers-by or the health,
safety and welfare of the public; and
      VACANT PROPERTY. A vacant lot on which no building or other structure
exists or property on which any structure is unoccupied or unused, or which
otherwise reflects abandonment by the owner or person with the right of
occupancy.
      (2)   Licensed premises. No person or entity operating a package liquor
store, whether trafficking in distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages,
including retail package beer licensees, shall knowingly allow or permit
habitual congregating of persons on the unenclosed portion of the licensed
premises so as to constitute a public nuisance.
      (3)   Vacant property. No person or entity being the owner or otherwise
in possession or control of any vacant property shall knowingly allow or permit
habitual congregating of persons on the unenclosed portion of such property so
as to constitute a public nuisance.
      (4)   It shall be a defense to any prosecution under this section, if a
licensed vendor or property owner shall permit the County of post and maintain
a legible, painted or printed sign in at least two separate prominent places in
such area, in letters of not less than three inches in height, stating that
congregating of persons in prohibited and that violators shall be prosecuted
for trespass pursuant to KRS 511.080.
(Ord. 584, passed 11-15-2016)
§ 112.09 MALT BEVERAGE KEG REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section, KEG is defined as a container
designed and capable of holding six or more gallons of malt beverage.
   (B)   Malt beverage keg identification tag. All retail licensees (herein
after referred to as "licensee") operating within the County who sell malt
beverages in kegs for consumption off the premises of the licensee shall attach
a numbered identification tag or other device as provided by the county to each
keg at the time of sale and shall require the purchaser to complete and sign a
keg registration form for the keg stating the following:
      (1)   The purchaser is of legal age to purchase, possess and use the malt
beverage:
      (2)   The purchaser is not purchasing the keg for resale and will not
allow any person under the age of 21 to consume the malt beverage;
      (3)   The purchaser will not remove, obliterate or allow to be removed or
obliterated the Identification tag;
      (4)   The purchaser will state the property address where the keg will be
consumed and physically located; and
      (5)   The purchaser is aware of his/her duty to maintain a copy of the
keg registration form visible and readily accessible from the location of the
keg.
   (C)   Keg registration.
      (1)   The licensee shall obtain the name, address and telephone number of
the purchaser and shall require the purchaser to produce a valid driver's
license number and, if that is not available, to produce at least one other
valid form of identification.
      (2)   The licensee shall retain copies of the keg registration forms for
a period of one year and shall make the keg registration form available for
inspection by state and local alcoholic beverage control officers and other
enforcement officers.
      (3)   The keg registration form shall be forwarded to the county within
five working days in all situations when the keg is not returned or is returned
with the identification tag removed or obliterated.
      (4)   The county is authorized to develop appropriate rules and
regulations and to develop and make available forms for the identification tags
and keg registration forms.
      (5)   All licensees that sell or offer for sale kegs shall post on the
licensed premises a notice provided by the county concerning the provisions of
this section.
   (D)   Unlawful sales. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer
for sale kegs without the identification tags attached and the keg registration
form completed. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove or to
obliterate the identification tag or to fail to have the declaration form
visible and readily accessible from the location of the keg. The penalties for
violation of this section shall be the penalties as set out in this chapter. In
addition, licensees violating this section shall be subject to appropriate
alcoholic beverage control administrative remedies.
(Ord. 584, passed 11-15-2016)
§ 112.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   Enforcement. County Sheriff Department officers and the County ABC
Administrator and his/her investigator(s) are hereby authorized to enforce this
chapter in full.
(Ord. 584, passed 11-15-2016)
§ 112.11 MANDATORY RESPONSIBLE BEVERAGE SERVICE TRAINING.
   (A)   Mandatory responsible beverage service training. All persons employed
in the selling and/or serving of alcoholic beverages shall participate in and
complete the Kentucky S.T.A.R. program or other state approved program.
   (B)   All persons required to complete training under division (A) above
shall complete that training within 30 days of the date on which the person
first becomes subject to the training requirement. When a new business is
licensed to serve alcoholic beverages all employees must be trained prior to
the opening of the business.
   (C)   Each licensee shall be responsible for compliance with the training
requirements and shall maintain for inspection by the County ABC Administrator
a record or file on each employee that shall contain the pertinent training
information. Each premise licensed hereunder must at all times when alcoholic
beverages are being served have at least one person currently certified in
responsible beverage service training on duty as described herein.
   (D)   All persons completing the training required by this section shall be
re-certified not less than once every three years thereafter.
(Ord. 584, passed 11-15-2016; Ord. 605, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 112.12 SIGNS AND ADVERTISING.
   (A)   All signage shall be in compliance with any and all other existing
rules, regulations, and Ordinances of the County of Barren, including but not
limited to, the Planning and Zoning Ordinance as currently enacted, and/or as
may be amended in the future.
   (B)   No flashing lights shall be used to illuminate the exterior of any
premises licensed under this chapter.
   (C)   Any advertising by any licensee under this chapter shall be in
compliance with KRS 244.130 and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (D)   No licensee shall publish or display advertising that is false or
misleading, nor shall any licensee publish or display advertising that implies
that consumption of alcoholic beverages is fashionable or the accepted course
of behavior, or advertising that contains any statement, picture or
illustration implying that the consumption of alcoholic beverages enhances
athletic prowess, whether or not any known athlete is depicted or referred to,
nor shall any licensee publish or display advertising that encourages
intoxication by referring to the intoxicating effects of alcohol (or the use of
terms such as 'high test', "high proof or "extra strong") or depicting
activities that tend to encourage excessive consumption.
   (E)   No licensee shall erect or allow to be erected any banner that
displays any particular brand of alcoholic beverage on the outside of the
building or on the property.
   (F)   Any off premises signage advertising the sale of alcoholic beverages
is prohibited. It shall be unlawful to attach signage advertising alcoholic
beverages to the exterior of the building or the exterior premises of the
business. This prohibition shall include the use of outdoor umbrellas or other
outdoor or patio fixtures that feature the name or logo of an alcoholic
beverage or manufacturer of alcoholic beverages.
   (G)   Signage which refers directly or indirectly to alcoholic beverages
will be limited to one sign not over two square feet that must be displayed
from the inside of the window or interior of the business. No additional signs,
banners, posters or other type of displaying advertising which refers either
directly or indirectly to alcoholic beverages shall be displayed on, nor shall
it be visible from the exterior of any premises licensed for the sale of
alcoholic beverages, except that reference to such may be included in the name
of the business. This restriction shall not prevent any licensee from placing
in the windows of the licensed premises business cards not larger than two and
one-half inches in size, setting forth the price at which the licensee offers
alcoholic beverages for sale.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to distribute
or cause to be distributed any handbills, circulars, or cards as a medium of
advertising alcoholic beverages.
   (I)   No licensee shall advertise alcoholic beverages on any municipally
owned property or at any municipally Sponsored event.
(Ord. 584, passed 11-15-2016)
§ 112.13 PATIO AND OUTDOOR SALES.
   (A)   Patio and outdoor sales regulations.
      (1)   Patio and outdoor sales of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted
only on premises licensed for sales of alcoholic beverages by the drink.
      (2)   No licensee shall offer alcoholic beverages for sale in a patio or
outdoor area of the licensee's premises except in a clearly defined patio or
outdoor area that is enclosed by a fence or other screening, not less than four
feet in height. All outdoor areas and screening shall be subject to the
.approval of the County ABC Administrator. An exception to this restriction may
be granted for seasonal sidewalk cafes, upon application to and authorization
from the ABC County Administrator. The permission to operate a sidewalk café
shall be governed by the provisions of this article and shall be subject to the
regulation of local zoning authorities as well as codes enforcement and public
safety officers.
      (3)   No licensee shall offer patio or outdoor sales of alcoholic
beverages unless the patio or outdoor area and fencing or screening area shall
have been approved in advance by the ABC administrator.
      (4)   Unless exempted by the following provisions of this chapter, and by
permission of the County ABC Administrator, patio areas must comply with the
screening requirements of this chapter. Sidewalk café seating areas must comply
with this chapter and with local zoning laws and other public safety
requirements noted in this chapter, or in other local ordinances, statutes or
regulations.
   (B)   Exception(s) to screening requirements for outdoor sales and service
of alcoholic beverages, specifically, permitted sidewalk cafes in the downtown
business area.
      (1)   Licensees in the downtown business district/area of a city with an
ABC Administrator may request an exception from the outdoor screening of patio
provision in order to permit seasonal sidewalk cafes that serve food and
alcoholic beverages as an adjunct to the primary and adjacent licensed
premises. In the case of permitted sidewalk cafes, they shall be deemed part of
the licensed premises.
      (2)   Any food establishment which operates a restaurant and is licensed
under this chapter and the provisions of the state ABC code, may, upon
application to the local ABC Administrator, ask permission to expand the
operation of that restaurant onto a part, and only that part, of the public
sidewalk which immediately adjoins the licensed premises (hereinafter referred
to as "sidewalk café"). Licensees who do not serve food shall not be eligible
to apply for a sidewalk café permit.
   (C)   Conditions for sidewalk café permit. The issuance of a permit shall be
subject to the following conditions and restrictions; provided, however, that
the ABC Administrator may without adverse hearing procedures impose additional
reasonable restrictions or withdraw approval upon the operation of any sidewalk
café where necessary in the judgment of the said Administrator to protect the
public health, safety or welfare or to prevent a nuisance from developing or
continuing:
      (1)   No sidewalk café shall be permitted in any portion of the public
sidewalk where normal pedestrian traffic flow is obstructed. A minimum
clearance width of 36 inches must be maintained on the public sidewalk at all
times. The sidewalk café shall not be permitted in any manner to obstruct the
entrance/exit to the restaurant.
      (2)   No tables, chairs or any other furnishings, except plant tubs,
shall be placed in the area used for the sidewalk café during any period when
the sidewalk café is not open and being operated. They shall be removed at the
end of each business day at the hour specified in the permit. Umbrellas,
tables, chairs, and other portable appurtenances shall be confined to the area
shown on the approved Permit. While such café is in operation, all tables and
chairs shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition.
      (3)   The use of a portion of the public sidewalk as a sidewalk café
shall not be an exclusive use. All public improvements, including but not
limited to, trees, light poles, traffic signals, pull boxes or manholes, or any
public-initiated maintenance procedures, shall take precedence over said use of
the public sidewalk at all times.
      (4)   The licensee shall, in addition to all other requirements of law,
take reasonable steps to ensure that alcoholic beverages are consumed only by
patrons of the establishment who are of age, and not by passersby or persons
who are not of age or who are obviously or apparently intoxicated.
      (5)   No disposable cups or drinking vessels may be used and the licensee
shall not permit any alcoholic beverages to be taken off premises by patrons,
customers or guests.
      (6)   No amplified sound shall be used within a sidewalk café. At no time
shall any music originating from any part of the premises create a nuisance.
      (7)   Dancing shall not be permitted or allowed in the sidewalk café;
      (8)   The licensee must at all times comply with all federal, state and
local laws regarding the sale, service and consumption of alcohol and the
operation of the premises;
      (9)   The permit for sidewalk café may not be assigned or transferred.
   (D)   Other requirements applicable to sidewalk cafes. No sidewalk café
permit shall be effective unless the licensee has filed with the County
Administrator evidence of insurance, insuring the licensee against liability
imposed by law arising out of the ownership, maintenance or operation of such
sidewalk café, in an amount to be established by the County Attorney and the
County's Safety Coordinator. The county shall be named an additional insured in
the policy required. Such insurance policy shall further provide expressly that
it may not be canceled except upon ten day's written notice (or more) filed
with the ABC Administrator and the County Attorney.
(Ord. 584, passed 11-15-2016)
§ 112.99 PENALTIES.
   (A)   In addition to any criminal prosecution instituted in Barren District
Court against an alleged violator, the County ABC Administrator may assess
civil fines in lie of suspension as authorized in KRS 243.480, including the
per diem assessments for ongoing violations. Payment of all fines shall be
remitted to the County ABC Administrator, who shall then transmit the fines to
the County Clerk for deposit in the appropriate designated account.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter, for which no other penalty is hereby provided, shall be guilty of
a Misdemeanor, and subject to prosecution in the Barren County Court System, as
follows: for the first offense, be fined not less than $100 nor more than $200
nor more than five hundred dollars $500, or imprisoned for not more than six
months, or both. The penalties provided for in this subsection shall be in
addition to the revocation or suspension of the offender's license. If the
offender is a corporation, LLC, joint stock company, association or other
business organization, or a fiduciary, the principal officer or officers
responsible for the violation may be imprisoned.
(Ord. 584, passed 11-15-2016)
CHAPTER 113: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM INSTALLATIONS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Applicability
   
113.03   License required; license renewal
   
113.04   Specific requirements
   
113.05   Decommissioning required
   
113.06   License revocation
   
113.07   License transfer; notification; required exhibits
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and
intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal,
process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature.
   DECOMMISSIONING PLAN FOR GROUND MOUNTED SES. A plan prepared by a licensed
engineer that establishes the party responsible for the decommissioning, the
anticipated life of the project, the estimated cost for removal of the SES
facility, the costs for restoring the land to its original condition, and all
other plan information required by this chapter.
   ENLARGEMENT. To increase the size of an SES footprint or to relocate an SES
footprint to an area of land not included as part of an original license’s
approval, or any change that would exceed the scope (increased height or
decreased setback or buffer) of the original license’s approval. SES
ENLARGEMENT does not include the repair, modification, retrofitting, or
enhancement of a licensed facility, provided the repair, modification,
retrofitting, or enhancement does not violate the terms of this chapter or a
condition of the license's approval.
   EXEMPT SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (EXEMPT SES). An SES that is a facility of a
municipally owned electric system or public utility regulated by the Kentucky
Public Service Commission or Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, which is
exempt from planning and zoning requirements under KRS 100.324.
   MERCHANT ELECTRIC GENERATING FACILITY. Except for a qualifying facility as
defined in KRS 278.700(7), an electricity generating facility or facilities
that, together with all associated structures and facilities:
      (1)   Are capable of operating at an aggregate capacity of ten megawatts
or more; and
      (2)   Sell the electricity they produce in the wholesale market, at rates
and charges not regulated by the Public Service Commission.
   NON-PARTICIPATING PROPERTY. Any property that is not a participating
property.
   PARTICIPATING PROPERTY. A property on which a solar energy system (SES), as
regulated by the terms of this chapter, is to be constructed in whole or part.
This includes any property for which the owner(s) has provided their signature
(s) on a written and recorded agreement, explicitly consenting to be a party to
the licensure application for the construction of an SES. Such signature(s)
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the owner(s)’ consent and/or agreement
to any terms set forth in the licensure application, including the waiver of
any setback requirements from non-participating properties as defined herein.
   PHYSICAL CONSTRUCTION (SES FACILITY). The excavation or movement of earth,
erection of forms or structures, or similar activities undertaken in the
construction of an SES facility. This term does not include any activity or
construction undertaken prior to the issuance of all required certificates,
approvals and permits, if any, as required under KRS Chapter 278 and other
applicable state statutes.
   RESPONSIBLE ENTITY. The owner of the solar energy system and related
improvements irrespective of land ownership by fee simple title, lease
agreement, or other instrument. The RESPONSIBLE ENTITY is the applicant under
the terms of this chapter.
   SES FOOTPRINT. An area calculated by drawing a perimeter around the
outermost SES panels and any equipment necessary for the equipment to function,
such as transformers and inverters. The FOOTPRINT does not include perimeter
fencing or visual buffers, nor transmission lines or portions thereof that are
required to connect the SES to a utility or customer outside the SES perimeter.
   SETBACK. The minimum distance established by this chapter, measured from the
property line of a non-participating property or boundary of a public roadway
or rail-line to the nearest portion of an SES footprint or other regulated SES
feature. The setback distance required by this chapter is to be contained
within the boundary of a participating property and is the minimum distance
from a non-participating property or public roadway or rail-line boundary that
an SES footprint or other regulated SES feature is allowed to be constructed.
   SITING BOARD REGULATED SES. An SES that constitutes a “merchant electric
generating facility” under KRS 278.700(2), the construction and siting of which
is subject to review and approval of the Kentucky State Board on Electric
Generation and Transmission Siting. A MERCHANT ELECTRIC SITING FACILITY is an
electricity generating facility or facilities that, together with all
associated structures and facilities, are capable of operating at an aggregate
capacity of ten megawatts or more, and to sell the electricity produced in the
wholesale market at rates and charges not regulated by the Kentucky Public
Service Commission.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES). A device, including its components and
subsystems, that collects solar energy for electricity generation, consumption,
or transmission, or for thermal applications. SESs are in turn divided into
three types, depending on how the system is incorporated into the existing land
use:
      (1)   GROUND MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM.(GROUND MOUNTED SES). An SES
that is structurally mounted to the ground and does not qualify as an
integrated SES. Ground mounted SESs are subcategorized as follows:
         (a)   SMALL SCALE GROUND MOUNTED ENERGY SYSTEM (SMALL SCALE SES). A
ground mounted SES with a footprint of less than 2,500 square feet.
         (b)   INTERMEDIATE SCALE GROUND MOUNTED ENERGY SYSTEM (INTERMEDIATE
SCALE SES). A ground mounted SES with a footprint of between 2,501 square feet
and 40 acres and which does not constitute a merchant electric generating
facility as provided in KRS 278.700(2).
         (c)   LARGE SCALE GROUND MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (LARGE SCALE
SES). A ground mounted SES with a footprint of more than 40 acres. This term
also includes any non-exempt SES that, irrespective of footprint size or
configuration, constitutes a merchant electric generating facility as defined
by the terms of KRS 278.700(2) and is otherwise subject to review and approval
by the Kentucky State Board on Electric Generation and Transmission Siting.
      (2)   INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (INTEGRATED SES). An SES where the
solar materials are incorporated into the building materials, such that the
building and solar system are reasonably indistinguishable, or where the solar
materials are used in place of traditional building components, such that the
SES is structurally an integral part of the house, building, or other
structure. An integrated SES may be incorporated into, among other things, a
building facade, skylight shingles, canopy, light, or parking meter.
      (3)   ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (ROOFTOP SES). An SES that is
structurally mounted to the roof of a house, building, or other structure and
does not qualify as an integrated SES.
(Ord. 25-695, passed 5-20-2025)
§ 113.02 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter and its requirements for licensure shall apply to the siting,
construction, installation, enlargement, operation, maintenance, and
decommissioning of large-scale SES facilities in all unincorporated areas of
Barren County, Kentucky. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to
the following:
   (A)   Integrated SES;
   (B)   Rooftop SES;
   (C)   Small-scale SES;
   (D)   Intermediate-scale SES; and
   (E)   Large-scale SES, where physical construction began prior to the
effective date of this chapter, provided:
      (1)   Physical construction is completed within two years of the
effective date of this chapter; and
      (2)   The SES footprint is not thereafter cumulatively enlarged by more
than 5%.
(Ord. 25-695, passed 5-20-2025)
§ 113.03 LICENSE REQUIRED; LICENSE RENEWAL.
   (A)   Prior to the commencement of physical construction or enlargement of a
large-scale solar energy system (SES), the responsible entity (applicant) must
obtain a county solar energy system license. Additionally, a renewal license
shall be required concomitant with the updating of the decommissioning plan, as
stipulated in §
113.04(D) hereafter. All applications and supporting documents for licensure
shall be submitted by the applicant to the Joint City-County Planning
Commission of Barren County (Planning Commission) for a determination of
conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   A request for licensure shall contain the following:
      (1)   An application for licensure that includes:
         (a)   The name of the applicant and owner(s) of participating property
(if different);
         (b)   The street address and tax map parcel number of the property for
which a license is sought to include all participating property;
         (c)   The current mailing address and phone number of the applicant
and the owner(s) of participating property;
         (d)   A copy of deeds and lease agreements for participating property;
         (e)   A listing of the names, mailing addresses, and property
addresses (including tax map parcel numbers) of all adjoining non-participating
property owners, to include all owners within 2,500 feet of the proposed SES
footprint;
         (f)   A written description of the proposed facility that includes a
statement of conformance with the requirements of this chapter; and
         (g)   The signed statement of the applicant and all participating
property owners attesting to the truthfulness and exactness of information
supplied in the application.
      (2)   Supplemental documents and exhibits that include:
         (a)   Twenty-four copies of a site plan, drawn to a scale of no
greater than 1" to 100', which illustrates:
            1.   A vicinity map denoting the location of the proposed facility;
            2.   Property lines of participating properties and adjacent non-
participating properties, public rights-of-way, and rail-lines within 2,500
feet of the SES footprint (due to scale, this information may be provided on a
separate sheet at a scale of no greater than 1' to 300');
            3.   Required setbacks with plan notes detailing the minimum
distance to be provided from the SES footprint to the boundary of non-
participating properties and public streets and rail-lines;
            4.   Adjoining roads and points of proposed access to the facility;
            5.   The proposed location of all buildings, panels, inverters,
transformers, and other onsite supporting facilities, with plan notes detailing
the height of such features;
            6.   The proposed location of perimeter fencing, with plan notes
detailing type, height, and setback;
            7.   The proposed location of the vegetative buffer, with plan
notes detailing plant type, planting height and anticipated mature height, and
opacity; and
            8.   Any additional site plan depictions or accompanying
descriptions that may be required to determine compliance with this chapter.
         (b)   A decommissioning plan and surety instrument.
      (3)   A statement of the proposed large-scale SES’s conformance (or
pending conformance) with the requirements of KRS 278.700 et seq. where the
State Board of Electric Generation and Transmission Siting’s approval is
required.
      (4)   Fee entitlement for review and application. 
         (a)   The Planning Commission is hereby authorized to impose a fee for
the review and processing of licensure applications. The amount of this fee
shall be deemed reasonable and commensurate with the services provided. The
specific fee schedule shall be determined and established by the Planning
Commission at its discretion and formalized through a duly adopted resolution.
This fee shall be payable upon submission of a licensure application and is
non-refundable. Additionally, the County Fiscal Court may establish a separate
fee for the issuance of a license, which is in addition to any review fee
specified herein.
         (b)   Within 60 days of its receipt of a complete licensure
application, supplemental documents and exhibits, and fee, the Planning
Commission shall review and recommend that the application for licensure be: 1.
approved; 2. approved with conditions or required modifications; or 3. denied,
with cause stated. Any recommendation shall be recorded in the minutes of the
Planning Commission. Notification of the Planning Commission’s recommendation
shall be provided to the applicant and the County Judge Executive.
         (c)   Within 30 days of receiving a recommendation from the Planning
Commission regarding a licensure application, the County Judge Executive's
Office shall:
            1.   Issue the requested license with or without conditions or
modifications as deemed appropriate;
            2.   Deny the license request, providing the cause for denial in
writing; or
            3.   Remand the matter back to the Planning Commission for
additional review and findings. In such cases, the County Judge Executive shall
specify the reasons necessitating further review with particularity.
         (d)   Should the matter be remanded, the Planning Commission is
required to re-examine the application and submit a report to the County Judge
Executive within 45 days of the remand receipt. This report should address the
specified reasons for remand and provide additional findings as requested.
         (e)   When a license is issued, it shall remain in effect unchanged,
provided the applicant maintains compliance with the terms of this chapter and
the conditions of the original approval.
         (f)   Upon the issuance of a solar energy system license by the County
Judge Executive's Office, it shall be recorded with the County Clerk’s Office
to place notice upon all bona-fide purchasers for value of the existence of the
license.
         (g)   In the event of a denial, the County Judge Executive will
provide the decision in writing, which shall be sent via certified mail, with
return receipt requested, to the applicant, all participating properties, and
any non-participating properties included within the application. Furthermore,
the denial will be published In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 424
of the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
         (h)   Any party aggrieved by either the issuance or denial of a
license shall have a period of 30 days from the date of the recording of the
license or the publication of the denial of the license to file an action with
the Circuit Court seeking judicial review.
(Ord. 25-695, passed 5-20-2025)
§ 113.04 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.
   The following standards shall apply to the siting, construction,
installation, enlargement, operation, maintenance, and decommissioning of
large-scale SES.
   (A)   Setbacks. The SES footprint shall be setback no less than 1,000 feet
from any non-participating property line and any right-of-way for a publicly
maintained roadway or rail-line.
      (1)   Any request by an applicant for a variance of the setback
requirements from any non-participating properly line must be presented to the
Planning and Zoning Commission with a signed and notarized statement by the
non-participating property owner. The statement will include the full name and
address of the non-participating property owner, along with a statement from
the non-participating property owner affirming the waiver of any setback
requirements.
      (2)   If a variance request concerns the setback from any right-of-way of
any public road or rail-line, the request to the Planning and Zoning Commission
must be accompanied by a signed and notarized statement by all non-
participating property owners that adjoin the public road or rail-line. The
statement will include the full names and addresses of the non-participating
owners, along with statements from the non-participating property owners
affirming the waiver of any setback requirements.
   (B)   Perimeter access and screening. Access to the site must be controlled
by a fence of at least eight feet in height, with a vegetative landscape buffer
provided between the fencing and the property line. The fence shall be equipped
with screening to help shield the facilities and equipment from view. Screening
shall consist of:
      (1)   An eight-foot-tall fence and a double row of staggered evergreen
trees (minimum five feet in height at planting and maturing to a minimum of 15
feet in height);
      (2)   Evergreen trees shall be planted exterior to the fence and shall be
setback no less than 15 feet from any property line;
      (3)   Screening shall achieve an opacity of 90% to a height of no less
than eight feet within three years of planting;
      (4)   Screening shall be installed within 180 days of the start of
physical construction and shall be maintained until the decommissioning of the
SES is completed; and
      (5)   All unhealthy, dead, or noncompliant plantings shall be repaired or
replaced within 90 days of such occurrence.
   (C)   Lighting. Lighting of a ground mounted SES shall be limited to the
minimum necessary for safe operation, and shall be directed downward,
incorporate full cutoff features, and incorporate motion sensors where
feasible. Lighting shall be designed to avoid light trespass. Nothing in this
section is intended to preclude the installation of lighting required by the
Federal Aviation Administration.
   (D)   Decommissioning plan required. The applicant shall be responsible for
a decommissioning plan in strict compliance with KRS 278.706(2)(m).
   (E)   Surety instrument required. As provided under KRS 278.706(2)(m)(5)
(ii), and as a part of the decommissioning plan, the applicant shall provide a
surety instrument in an amount and form acceptable to the County Judge
Executive, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, sufficient to cover
the costs of decommissioning the SES in accordance with the approved plan in
the event the applicant defaults in its decommissioning obligations. The surety
instrument shall be updated and revised in conjunction with a resubmitted
decommissioning plan not less than once every five years. A surety instrument
shall be continuously maintained by applicant, its successors in interest and/
or assigns, until such time as the large-scale SES is decommissioned and all
disturbed areas are reclaimed, revegetated, and restored. The form and content
of surety shall be in accordance with the requirements of KRS 278.706(2)(m)5
and shall name Barren County government as secondary beneficiary.
   (F)   For projects with an SES footprint located within an airport’s
approach zones or airport imaginary surfaces, as defined by the United States
Code of Federal Regulations, or within 1,000 feet of an accident potential zone
(APZ 1 or APZ 2), the applicant must complete and provide the results of a
glare analysis through a qualitative analysis of potential impact, field test
demonstration, or geometric analysis of ocular impact in consultation with the
Federal Aviation Administration Office of Airports, the Kentucky Airport Zoning
Commission, and the United States Army, Fort Campbell Directorate of Public
Works.
(Ord. 25-695, passed 5-20-2025) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.05 DECOMMISSIONING REQUIRED.
   (A)   The applicant shall begin decommissioning no later than 12 months
after a large-scale SES has ceased to generate electricity or thermal energy.
All structures and facilities associated with the SES shall be removed within
six months of the beginning of decommissioning. All materials shall be recycled
or otherwise reused to the extent reasonably practicable, and the disturbed
areas shall be reclaimed, revegetated, and restored.
   (B)   Failure of the applicant to decommission a large-scale solar energy
system (SES) in accordance with this chapter and the approved decommissioning
plan shall be grounds for the county to invoke the surety instrument. The
county shall be entitled to recover from the surety instrument proceeds that
are necessary to complete the decommissioning of the facility. Furthermore,
should the costs of decommissioning exceed the value of the surety instrument,
the county shall be entitled to recover the excess amount necessary to complete
the decommissioning process.
   (C)   In the event of a failure to perform, default, or failure to extend a
surety instrument, the county reserves the right to take all available legal
and administrative actions necessary to compel the completion of the
decommissioning by the applicant. This includes securing all necessary
easements and rights of entry, and/or recouping any public funds expended by
the county in the fulfillment of the applicant’s obligation.
   (D)   A failure to decommission a large SES facility as required herein is a
violation of this chapter and is subject to the enforcement and penalties as
provided herein.
(Ord. 25-695, passed 5-20-2025) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.06 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   (A)   The County Judge Executive may revoke a license, subject to a 90-day
written notice to the applicant, upon the occurrence of one or more of the
following:
      (1)   The applicant has:
         (a)   Provided false or inaccurate information as part of the
application for licensure;
         (b)   The false or inaccurate information would result in the siting,
construction, or operation of a large SES facility in violation of this
chapter; and
         (c)   The applicant has failed to correct the violation through the
resubmittal of an amended and approvable application and to perform any
necessary site modifications within the 90-day notification period;
      (2)   The applicant has:
         (a)   Failed to construct or maintain the large-scale SES in
accordance with this chapter and the approved plan; and
         (b)   The applicant has failed to correct the violation within the 90-
day notification period;
      (3)   The applicant has:
         (a)   Failed to decommission the large SES facility in accordance with
this chapter; and
         (b)   The applicant has failed to correct the violation within the 90-
day notification period;
      (4)   The applicant has:
         (a)   Failed to submit an updated decommissioning plan and
accompanying revised surety instrument within the five-year period as required
by §
113.04(D); and
         (b)   The applicant has failed to correct the violation within the 90-
day notification period; or
      (5)   The applicant has failed to transfer the license upon change of
responsible entity in accordance with §
113.07 of this chapter.
   (B)   Any license revocation issued under this section shall be recorded at
the County Clerk’s Office. Within 90 days of the recording of a revocation of a
license, the large-scale SES shall cease operation and, within 12 months
thereafter, be decommissioned in accordance with §
113.05 of this chapter.
(Ord. 25-695, passed 5-20-2025) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.07 LICENSE TRANSFER; NOTIFICATION; REQUIRED EXHIBITS.
   (A)   A change in or transfer of the responsible entity’s ownership, as
contained on a large-scale SES application and accompanying license, shall
require the issuance of an amended license that shall be so recorded at the
County Clerk's Office.
   (B)   No later than 30 days following the sale or transfer of a large SES
facility, the responsible entity that has or is assuming ownership shall
provide written notification to the County Judge Executive and shall submit the
following information:
      (1)   The name, mailing address, and license number of the current,
licensed responsible entity;
      (2)   The name, mailing address, and proof of ownership of the
responsible entity assuming ownership;
      (3)   A statement that lease agreements for participating property, if
any, are transferable with accompanying documentation;
      (4)   A statement of conformance with this chapter. If SES enlargement or
change to the conditions of the original application (other than ownership) is
to occur, a new application as provided in §
113.03 is required; and
      (5)   A revised surety instrument bearing the name of the new responsible
entity.
   (C)   Within 60 days of receipt of notification, the County Judge Executive
shall: (1) approve the issuance of the amended license; or (2) deny the
issuance of the amended license with cause stated. In the review of the license
transfer, the Judge Executive may refer the requested transfer to the Planning
Commission for recommendation.
(Ord. 25-695, passed 5-20-2025)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $100 and not more than Five $500.
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 25-695, passed 5-20-2025)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      [Reserved]
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
151.   BUILDING CODE
      
152.   MOBILE HOMES
      
153.   CENTRAL ADDRESSING SYSTEM
      
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
155.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
CHAPTER 150: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose, and Objectives
   
150.01   Statutory authorization
   
150.02   Findings of fact
   
150.03   Statement of purpose
   
150.04   Objectives
General Provisions
   
150.15   Definitions
   
150.16   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
150.17   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas
   
150.18   Establishment of development permit
   
150.19   Compliance
   
150.20   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
150.21   Interpretation
   
150.22   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
150.23   Enforcement, violation, and notice
   
150.24   Appeals and variance procedure
   
150.25   County as member of Federal Flood Insurance Program
Administration
   
150.40   Designation of local Administrator
   
150.41   Establishment of development permit
   
150.42   Duties and responsibilities of the local Administrator
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
150.55   General construction standards
   
150.56   Specific standards
   
150.57   Standards for streams without established base flood elevation
(unnumbered 'A' Zones) and/or floodways
   
150.58   Standards for shallow flooding zones
   
150.59   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
150.60   Standards for accessory structures in all zones beginning with the
letter 'A'
   
150.61   Critical facilities
 
   
150.99   Penalty
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND OBJECTIVES
§ 150.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   The Legislature of the commonwealth has in KRS 67.084 delegated to
local government units the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
   (B)   Therefore, the County Fiscal Court, hereby adopts this chapter.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic
inundation which result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increased flood height and velocity, and by the location
in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands
which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private loss due to flooding by
provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood height or velocity;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which accommodate or channel floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
areas.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines; and streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard or other flood-prone areas in such
a manner as to minimize future flood blighted areas caused by flooding;
   (G)   Ensure that potential homebuyers are on notice that property is in a
special flood hazard area; and
   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy a special flood hazard area assume
responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A1-30 and AE ZONES. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 1% annual
chance flood 100-year flood. Base flood elevations (BFEs) are determined.
   A99 ZONE. Part of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) inundated by the 100-
year flood which is to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood
protection system under construction. No base flood elevations are determined.
   A ZONE. Portions of the SFHA in which the principle source of flooding is
runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A ZONES,
floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant
threat to structures. Areas of a 100-year flood, base flood elevations, and
flood hazard factors are not determined.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principle structure, the use of which is incidental
to the use of the principle structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should constitute a
minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and should be
designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay
sheds.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is
connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls, is new construction.
   AH ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between one
and three feet (usually shallow ponding). Base flood elevations are shown.
   AO ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where water depth is between
one and three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain). Flood depths are
shown.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or from the Floodplain
Administrator’s ruling on a request for a variance.
   AR/A1-A30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, and AR/A ZONES. Special flood hazard areas
(SFHAs) that result from the decertification of a previously accredited flood
protection system that is in the process  of being restored to provide a 100-
year or greater level of flood protection. After restoration is complete, these
areas will still experience residual flooding from other flooding sources.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) where the base flood depths range from one to three
feet, there is no clearly defined channel, the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   B AND X ZONES (SHADED). Areas of the 0.2% annual chance (500-year) flood,
areas subject to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot
or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile, and areas
protected by levees from the base flood.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year (also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD). BASE FLOOD is the term used
throughout this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, and AR/
AO that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a
1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all four sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure that is principally above ground;
including a manufactured home, gas or liquid storage tank, or other human-made
facility or infrastructure. See definition for STRUCTURE.
   C AND X (UNSHADED) ZONES. Areas determined to be outside the 500-year
floodplain.
   COMMUNITY. A political entity having the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
   COMMUNITY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (CFHA).
      (1)   An area that has been determined by the Floodplain Administrator
(or other delegated, designated, or qualified community official) from
available technical studies, historical information, and other available and
reliable sources, which may be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters
that can adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
      (2)   Included are areas downstream from dams.
   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance
Administration to provide incentives to those communities in the regular
program to go beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop
extra measures for protection from flooding.
   CRITICAL FACILITY.
      (1)   Any property that, if flooded, would result in severe consequences
to public health and safety or a facility which, if unusable or unreachable
because of flooding, would seriously and adversely affect the health and safety
of the public.
      (2)   CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited to: housing likely
to contain occupants not sufficiently mobile to avoid injury or death unaided
during a flood; schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency
response installations, vehicle and equipment storage facilities, emergency
operations centers likely to be called upon before, during, and after a flood,
public and private utility facilities important to maintaining or restoring
normal services before, during, and after a flood, and those facilities or
installations which produce, use, or store volatile, flammable, explosive,
toxic and/or water-reactive materials, hazardous materials, or hazardous waste.
   D ZONE. An area in which the flood hazard is undetermined.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor
elevated above ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls,
piling, columns (post and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. (See
freeboard requirements for residential and nonresidential structures.)
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor on the FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of
certification that verifies a structure’s elevation and other related
information to verify compliance with this chapter.
   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The initial phase under which a community participates in
the NFIP, intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized
rates on all insurable structures in that community before the effective date
of the initial FIRM.
   ENCLOSURE. The portion of a structure below the base flood elevation (BFE)
used solely for parking of vehicles, limited storage, or access to the
structure.
   ENCROACHMENT. The physical advance or infringement of uses, plant growth,
fill, excavation, structures, permanent structures, or development into a
floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for
FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to
as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured  homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the county based on
specific technical base flood elevation data which established the area of
special flood hazards.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD. The flood that has a 0.2% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any year. Areas subject to the 500-YEAR FLOOD have a moderate to
low risk of flooding.
   FLOOD, FLOODING, or FLOODWATER.
      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source,
and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows). See MUDSLIDES.
      (2)   The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. See FLOOD-
RELATED EROSION.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). A map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has
delineated the areas of flood hazards and the regulatory floodway.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). A map on which the boundaries of the
flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow), and flood-related erosion areas having special
hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has
delineated special flood hazard areas and risk premium zones.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) containing
flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), and/or the flood boundary
floodway map (FBFM), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by floodwaters from any source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed by a NFIP participating
community to administer and enforce the floodplain management ordinances.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing
natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management ordinances, and
open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as grading and erosion control), and other applications of
police power, which control development in flood-prone areas. This term
describes federal, state, and/or local regulations, in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures, and their contents.
   FLOOD-PROOFING CERTIFICATE. A certification by a registered professional
engineer or architect on a FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of
certification stating that a nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities, is watertight to a specified design
elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water
and all structural components are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy and anticipated
debris impact forces.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also
referred to as the REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. The area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory
floodway where encroachment may be permitted without additional hydraulic and/
or hydrologic analysis.
   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION. As related in § 150.24, means that the variance
granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining
this requirement, the Fiscal Court will consider the fact that every newly
constructed structure adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of
the community for 50 to 100 years. Structures that are permitted to be
constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years
to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property
and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience,
danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages may incur. In
addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject
to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance
rates.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than those calculated for the base flood. FREEBOARD must be applied not
just to the elevation of the lowest floor or flood-proofing level, but also to
the level of protection provided to all components of the structure, such as
building utilities, HVAC components, and the like.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE FACILITY. A facility, structure, or other
development, which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located
or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only a docking or
port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers,
shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit, (i.e., county or municipality)
that is empowered to adopt and implement ordinances to provide for the public
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
   HAZARD POTENTIAL. The possibly adverse incremental consequences that result
from the release of water or stored contents due to failure of a dam or
misoperation of a dam or appurtenances. The HAZARD POTENTIAL classification of
a dam does not reflect in any way the current condition of a dam and its
appurtenant structures (e.g., safety, structural integrity, or flood routing
capacity).
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).
      (1)   Increased cost of compliance coverage provides for the payment of a
claim for the cost to comply with state or community floodplain management laws
or ordinances after a direct physical loss by flood. When a building covered by
a standard flood insurance policy under the NFIP sustains a loss and the state
or community declares the building to be substantially or repetitively damaged,
ICC will help pay up to $30,000 for the cost to elevate, flood-proof, demolish,
or remove the building.
      (2)   ICC coverage is available on residential and nonresidential
buildings (this category includes public or government buildings, such as
schools, libraries, and municipal buildings) insured under the NFIP.
   KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTE (KRS) 151.250. Plans for dams, levees, and the like
to be approved and permit issued by Cabinet - (Environmental and Public
Protection Cabinet).
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person and no city,
county, or other political subdivision of the commonwealth, including levee
districts, drainage districts, flood control districts, or systems, or similar
bodies, shall commence the construction, reconstruction, relocation, or
improvement of any dam, embankment, levee, dike, bridge, fill, or other
obstruction (except those constructed by the Department of Highways) across or
along any stream, or in the floodway of any stream, unless the plans and
specifications for such work have been submitted by the person or political
subdivision responsible for the construction, reconstruction, or improvement
and such plans and specifications have been approved in writing by the Cabinet
and a permit issued. However, the Cabinet by regulation may exempt those dams,
embankments, or other obstructions, which are not of such size or type as to
require approval by the Cabinet in the interest of safety or retention of water
supply.
      (2)   No person, city, county, or other political subdivision of the
commonwealth shall commence the filing of any area with earth, debris, or any
other material, or raise the level of any area in any manner, or place a
building, barrier, or obstruction of any sort on any area located adjacent to a
river or stream or in the floodway of the stream so that such filling, raising,
or obstruction will in any way affect the flow of water in the channel or in
the floodway of the stream unless plans and specifications for such work have
been submitted to and approved by the Cabinet and a permit issued as required
in division (1) above.
      (3)   Nothing in this section is intended to give the Cabinet any
jurisdiction or control over the construction, reconstruction, improvement,
enlargement, maintenance, or operation of any drainage district, ditch, or
system established for agricultural purposes, or to require approval of the
same except where such obstruction of the stream or floodway is determined by
the Cabinet to be a detriment or hindrance to the beneficial use of water
resources in the area, and the person or political subdivision in control
thereof so notified. The Department for Natural Resources, KRS Ch. 350, shall
have exclusive jurisdiction over KRS Ch. 151 concerning the regulation of dams,
levees, embankments, dikes, bridges, fills, or other obstructions across or
along any stream or in the floodway of any stream which structures are
permitted under KRS Ch. 350 for surface coal mining operations.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC).
      (1)   Is an official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise
effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, and
flood insurance studies.
      (2)   LOMCs include the following categories.
         (a)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on technical
data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated SFHA. A
LOMA amends the current effective FIRM and establishes that a specific property
is not located in a SFHA.
         (b)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical
data that, usually due to human-made changes, shows changes to flood zones,
flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric
features.
         (c)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION - FILL (LOMR-F). A determination that a
structure or parcel has been elevated by properly placed engineered fill above
the BFE and is, therefor, excluded from the SHFA.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM.
      (1)   A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
      (2)   For a LEVEE SYSTEM to be recognized, the following criteria must be
met.
         (a)   All closure devices or mechanical systems for internal drainage,
whether manual or automatic, must be operated in accordance with an officially
adopted operation manual (a copy of which must be provided to FEMA by the
operator when levee or drainage system recognition is being sought or revised).
         (b)   All operations must be under the jurisdiction of a federal or
state agency, an agency created by federal or state law, or an agency of a
community participating in the NFIP.
   LIMITED STORAGE. An area used for storage and intended to be limited to
incidental items which can withstand exposure to the elements and have low
flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood resistant material, void
of utilities except for essential lighting, and cannot be temperature
controlled.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The elevation of the sidewalk, patio, deck support,
or basement entryway immediately next to the structure and after the completion
of construction. It does not include earth that is emplaced for aesthetic or
landscape reasons around a foundation wall. It does include natural ground or
properly compacted fill that comprises a component of a structure’s foundation
system.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including a
basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking
of vehicles, structure access, or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a structure’s LOWEST FLOOR, provided that  such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected or attached to the required utilities. The
term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable
structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to
be improved property. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a
“recreational vehicle”. (See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.)
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MAP. The flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or the flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
   MAP PANEL NUMBER. The four-digit number on a flood map, followed by a letter
suffix, assigned by FEMA. The first four digits represent the map panel. The
letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been revised.
(The letter “A” is not used by FEMA, the letter “B” is the first revision.)
   MARKET VALUE. The structure value, excluding the land (as agreed between a
willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market
will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent certified appraisal,
replacement cost depreciated by age of structure (actual cash value), or
adjusted assessed values.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL). The average height of the sea for all stages of the
tide. For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the MSL is used
as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain as
shown on a community’s FIRM. For purposes of this chapter, the term is
synonymous with either NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) 1929 or NORTH
AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD) 1988.
   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to
people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of MITIGATION
is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the costs of
disaster response and recovery.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW). Describes a condition where there is a river,
flow, or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a
dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water
on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A
MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide
is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Floodplain Administrator
only if the MUDFLOW, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage
that occurs.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT. The operation of and overall
program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) damage, including but  not limited to emergency preparedness plans,
mudslide control works, and floodplain management regulations.
   MUDSLIDE- (i.e., MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA. An area with land surfaces and slopes
of unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a
potential for mudflow.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal Program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, a vertical
control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain. (Generally used as the vertical datum on the older FIRMs. Refer to
FIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the county’s floodplain management
regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the county’s adopted floodplain management ordinances.
   NONRESIDENTIAL. Structures that are not designed for human habitation,
including but is not limited to: small business concerns, churches, schools,
farm structures (including grain bins and silos), pool houses, clubhouses,
recreational structures, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial
structures, warehouses, and hotels or motels with normal room rentals for less
than a six-month duration.
   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD). As corrected in 1988, a vertical
control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain. (Generally used on the newer FIRMs and Digitally Referenced FIRMs
(DFIRMs).) (Refer to FIRM or DFTRM legend panel for correct datum.)
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes but is not limited to any dam, wall, embankment,
levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge,
conduit, culvert, structure, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across, or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard, or change the direction and/or
velocity of the flow of water, due to its location, its propensity to snare or
collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried
downstream.
   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). (See BASE FLOOD.) The flood that
has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any
flood zone that begins with the letter ‘A’ is subject to the 100-year flood.
Over the life of a 30-year loan, there is a 26% chance of experiencing such a
flood with the SFHA.
   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. A community that voluntarily elects to participate
in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that
are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.
   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement that started
on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later.
   PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement, which
started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the
initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.
   PROBATION. A means of formally notifying participating NFIP communities of
violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local
floodplain management regulations. During periods of PROBATION, each insurance
policy is subject to a $50 surcharge.
   PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a community’s floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation
of those floodplain management standards or of the standards of 44 C.F.R. parts
60.3, 60.4, 60.5, and/or 60.6.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything that is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable to a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of a community’s participation in the NFIP where
more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher
amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations
determined in a FIS.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
See BASE FLOOD.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. The process by which a community brings a structure or
other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management
regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impact of
noncompliance. Reduced impact may include protecting the structure  or other
affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement
provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations,
or reducing state or federal financing exposure with regard to the structure or
other development.
   REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two or
more separate occasions during a ten-year period where the value of damages
equals or exceeds an average of 50% of the current value of the structure,
beginning on the date when the damage first occurred, or, four or more flood
losses of $1,000 or more over the life of the structure, or, three or more
flood losses over the life of the structure that are equal to or greater than
the current value of the structure.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.
   SECTION 1316. The section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as
amended, which states that no new or renewal flood insurance coverage shall be
provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a
duly-constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that
are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy
in flood-prone areas.
   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The portion of the floodplain subject to
inundation by the base flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards as shown on a
FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AO, or AR.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT and OTHER PROPOSED
NEW DEVELOPMENT. The date a building permit is issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual START means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
(including manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or
footings, the installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; or the installation
on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground;
including manufactured homes, gas or liquid storage tanks, or other human-made
facilities or infrastructures. See BUILDING.
   SUBDIVISION. Any division, for the purposes of sale, lease, or development,
either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms, and
conditions, of any tract or parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels.
   SUBROGATION. An action brought by FEMA to recover insurance money paid out
where all or part of the damage can be attributed to acts or omissions by a
community or other third party.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.
      (1)   Any damage to a building for which the cost of repairs equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the building prior to the damage occurring.
This term includes structures that are categorized as repetitive loss.
      (2)   For the purposes of this definition, “repair” is considered to
occur when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences.
      (3)   The term does not apply to:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to comply
with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a “historic structure” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any combination of reconstruction, alteration, or improvement to a
building, taking place during a one-year period in which the cumulative
percentage of improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the current market value of
the building. For the purposes of this definition, an IMPROVEMENT occurs when
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of
the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
      (2)   The term does not apply to:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to comply
with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions;
         (b)   Any alteration of a “historic structure” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”; or
         (c)   Any building that has been damaged from any source or is
categorized as repetitive loss.
   SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS OR SUBDIVISIONS.
Repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvement of the streets,
utilities, and pads equaling or exceeding 50% of the value of the streets,
utilities, and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement
commenced.
   SUSPENSION. Removal of a participating community from the NFIP for failure
to enact and/or enforce floodplain management regulations required for
participation in the NFIP. New or renewal flood insurance policies are no
longer available in suspended communities.
   UTILITIES. Includes electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment.
   VARIANCE. Relief from some or all of the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. Failure of a structure or other development to fully comply with
this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other
topographic feature on or over which water flows at least periodically.
   WATERSHED. All the area within a geographic boundary from which water,
sediments, dissolved materials, and other transportable materials drain or are
carried by water to a common outlet, such as a point on a larger stream, lake,
or underlying aquifer.
   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
Shaded X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B Zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% probability of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood) in any year. Unshaded X ZONES (C Zones on older
FIRMs) designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is
less than 0.2%.
   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or a flood
insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.16 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas (SFHA), areas
applicable to KRS 151.250 and, as determined by the Floodplain Administrator or
other delegated, designated, or qualified community official as determined by
the County Fiscal Court from available technical studies, historical
information, and other available and reliable sources, and areas within the
jurisdiction of the County Fiscal Court which may be subject to periodic
inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the citizens of the county.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.17 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in the flood insurance study (FIS) for the county,
dated May 3, 2011, with the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs),
other supporting data, and any subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. This FIS
and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and
may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of
this chapter and which are recommended to the Fiscal Court by the Floodplain
Administrator and are enacted by the Fiscal Court pursuant to statutes
governing land use management regulations. The FIS and/or FIRM are permanent
records of the county and are on file and available for review by the public
during regular business hours at the County Government Center.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.18 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   A development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provision of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in the special flood hazard areas (SFHA). See §
150.41 for instructions and explanation.
   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.19 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable state regulations.
   (B)   Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Fiscal Court from taking
such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.20 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.21 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.22 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the County Fiscal Court, any officer
or employee, the commonwealth, the Federal Insurance Administration, or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, thereof for any flood damage that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.23 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION, AND NOTICE.
   (A)   Civil offense. If, at any time, development occurs which is not in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, including obtaining or
complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain construction permit and
any approved modifications, such development shall constitute a civil offense.
   (B)   Notice of violation. If, at any time, a duly-authorized employee or
agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a
person has caused development to occur which is not in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, including obtaining or complying with the terms and
conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any approved modifications
thereof, a duly- authorized employee of the Floodplain Administrator shall
issue a notice to the person responsible for the violation and/or the property
owner, stating the facts of the offense or violation, the section of this
chapter and/or of the permit violated, when it occurred, how the violation is
to be remedied to bring the development into conformity with this chapter or
with the approved permit, and within what period of time the remedy is to
occur, which period of time shall be reasonable and shall be determined by the
nature of the violation, and whether or not it creates a nuisance or hazard.
The remedy may include an order to stop-work on the development. The notice
shall also state that a citation may be forthcoming in the event that the
requested remedies and collective actions are not taken, which citation will
request a civil monetary fine, and shall state the maximum fine which could be
imposed. See §
150.99.
   (C)   Notice of citation. If, at any time, a duly-authorized employee or
agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a
person has caused development to occur which is not in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, including obtaining or complying with the terms and
conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any approved modifications
thereof, a duly- authorized employee of the Floodplain Administrator may issue
a citation to the offender stating the violation, prior notices of violation
issued, how the violation is to be remedied to bring the development into
conformity with this chapter or with the approved permit, within what period of
time the remedy is to occur, and what penalty or penalties are recommended.
When a citation is issued, the person to whom the citation is issued shall
respond to the citation within seven days of the date the citation is issued by
either carrying out the remedies and collections set forth in the citation,
paying the civil fine set forth in the citation, or requesting a hearing before
the governing body. If the person to whom the citation is issued does not
respond to the citation within seven days, that person shall be deemed to have
waived the right to a hearing and the determination that a violation occurred
shall be considered final.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.24 APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Nature of variance.
      (1)   The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the
general principles of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property
and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of
property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the
requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the
applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants, or the property owners.
      (2)   It is the duty of the Fiscal Court to help protect its citizens
from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that variances from
the flood elevation or from other requirements in this chapter are quite rare.
The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be
met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines
provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that
must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are
designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a
variance are more appropriate.
   (B)   Designation of Variance and Appeal Board. The County Fiscal Court
shall establish an Appeal Board consisting of members of the Fiscal Court.
   (C)   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board.
      (1)   The Appeal Board shall hear and decide requests for variances from
the requirements of this chapter and appeals of decisions or determinations
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
      (2)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the local Circuit Court, as provided in
Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   (D)   Appeals/variance procedures. In passing upon such applications, the
Appeal Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
all standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:
      (1)   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
      (2)   Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and
future owners of the property;
      (4)   Importance to the community of the services provided by the
proposed facility;
      (5)   Necessity that the facility be located on a waterfront, in the case
of functionally dependent facility;
      (6)   Availability of alternative locations which are not subject to
flooding or erosion damage;
      (7)   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
      (10)   Expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
      (11)   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, streets, and bridges.
   (E)   Conditions for variances. Upon consideration of the factors listed
above and the purposes of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the “minimum necessary” to afford relief considering the flood
hazard. MINIMUM NECESSARY means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation
from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to
an elevation requirement, this means the Fiscal Court need not grant permission
for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the
applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the Fiscal Court believes
will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief considering the flood
hazard. In the instance of an historical structure, a determination shall be
made that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief and not
destroy the historic character and design of the structure.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant (as defined in this chapter); and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood height, additional threats to public safety, cause
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance (as defined in §
150.15, under “public safety and nuisance”), cause fraud or victimization of
the public (as defined in §
150.15), or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (5)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
      (6)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) and the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) upon request.
      (7)   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of divisions (D)(1)
through (D)(11) above are satisfied and that the structure or other development
is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a
public nuisance.
   (F)   Variance notification. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted
shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain
Administrator in the office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a
manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land;
and
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in the community’s biennial report submission to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
   (G)   Historic structures. Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of “historic structures” (see §
150.15 ) upon determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the
variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
   (H)   No impact certification within the floodway. Variances shall not be
issued within any mapped or designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.25 COUNTY AS MEMBER OF FEDERAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM.
   (A)   The county assures the Federal Insurance Administration that it will
enact as necessary, and maintain in force in those areas having flood, mudslide
(i.e., mudflow), or flood-related erosion hazards, adequate land use, and
control measures with effective enforcement provisions consistent with the
criteria set forth in § 1910 of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations.
   (B)   The county vests the Judge/Executive with the responsibility,
authority, and means to:
      (1)   Assist the Administrator, at his or her or her request, in his or
her delineation of the limits of the area having special flood, mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow), or flood-related erosion hazards;
      (2)   Provide such information as the Administrator may request
concerning present uses and occupancy of the floodplain, mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow), or flood-related erosion areas;
      (3)   Cooperate with federal, state, and local agencies and private firms
which undertake to study, survey, map, and identify floodplain, mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow), or flood-related erosion areas, and cooperate with neighboring
communities with respect to management of adjoining floodplain, mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow), and/or flood-related erosion areas in order to prevent aggravation of
existing hazards;
      (4)   Submit on the anniversary date of the community’s initial
eligibility an annual report to the Administrator on the progress made during
the past year within the community in the development and implementation of
floodplain management measures; and
      (5)   (a)   Upon occurrence, notify the Administrator in writing whenever
the boundaries of the community have been modified by annexation or the
community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations for a particular area.
         (b)   In order that all flood hazard boundary maps and flood insurance
rate maps accurately represent the community’s boundaries, include within such
notification a copy of a map of the community suitable for reproduction,
clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for which the
community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory
authority.
   (C)   The county appoints the County Building Inspector to maintain for
public inspection and to furnish upon request, for the determination of
applicable flood insurance risk premium rates within all areas having special
flood hazards identified on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate
map, any certificates of flood-proofing, and information on the elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) of the level of the lowest habitable floor
(including basement if habitable) of all new or substantially improved
structures, and he or she shall include whether or not such structures contain
a basement, if the structure has been flood-proofed, and the elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was flood-proofed.
   (D)   The county agrees to take such other official action as may be
reasonably necessary to carry out the objectives of the program.
(Res. passed 12-14-1994)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 150.40 DESIGNATION OF LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.
   The County Fiscal Court hereby appoints the Judge/Executive or designee to
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter by granting
or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions, and is
referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.41 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   A development permit shall be obtained before any construction
or other development begins within any special flood hazard area established in
§
150.17.
      (2)   Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development activities,
and may include, but not be limited to, the following:
         (a)   Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
         (b)   Existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials,
drainage facilities; and
         (c)   The location of the foregoing.
      (3)   Endorsement of a local administrator is required before a state
floodplain construction permit can be processed.
   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required.
      (1)   Application stage.
         (a)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level (MSL) of the
proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures in Zone A and
elevation of highest adjacent grade;
         (b)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be flood-proofed;
         (c)   All appropriate certifications from a registered professional
engineer or architect that the nonresidential flood-proofed structure will meet
the flood-proofing criteria in §
150.56(B) and §
150.58(B);
         (d)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         (e)   Where a building permit is requested within a designated flood
zone according to the adopted FIRM maps, a plot plan with a certificate of
elevation of one foot above the base flood elevation line shall be required
prior to construction.
      (2)   Construction stage.
         (a)   Upon placement of the lowest floor, and before construction
continues, or flood- proofing by whatever construction means, it shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator and to the
commonwealth a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or flood-
proofed elevation, as built, in relation to mean sea level. In AE, A1-30, AH,
and A Zones where the community has adopted a regulatory base flood elevation,
said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same.
         (b)   When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, said
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
certified professional engineer or architect. Any continued work undertaken
prior to the submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder’s
risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor and flood-
proofing elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review
shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further
progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or
failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a
stop-work order for the project.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.42 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or his or her staff is hereby
appointed, authorized, and directed to administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator is further authorized
to render interpretations of this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit
and purpose by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its
provisions.
   (B)   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   Permit review. Review all development permits to ensure that:
         (a)   Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
         (b)   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
federal or state law, including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334;
         (c)   Flood damages will be reduced in the best possible manner; and
         (d)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of affected watercourses. For purposes of this chapter, ADVERSELY
AFFECTS means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
      (2)   Review and use of any other base flood data. When base flood
elevation data has not been provided in accordance with §
150.17, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or
state agency, or other source, in order to administer §§
150.55 through
150.61. Any such information shall be submitted to the Fiscal Court for
adoption.
      (3)   Notification of other agencies.
         (a)   Notify adjacent communities, the Commonwealth Division of Water,
and any other federal and/or state agencies with statutory or regulatory
authority prior to any alteration or relocation of the watercourse;
         (b)   Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA), and Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); and
         (c)   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
      (4)   Documentation of floodplain development. The Administrator shall
obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the
following:
         (a)   Certification required by §
150.56(A) (lowest floor elevations) as shown on a completed and certified
elevation certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, in accordance with §
150.41(B);
         (b)   Certification required by §
150.56(B) (elevation or flood-proofing of nonresidential structures) as shown
on a completed and certified flood-prooofing certificate. Verify and record the
actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or
substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with §
150.41(B);
         (c)   Certification required by §
150.56(C) (elevated structures);
         (d)   Certification of elevation required by §
150.59(A) (subdivision standards);
         (e)   Certification required by §
150.56(E) (floodway encroachments);
         (f)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished;
         (g)   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance; and
         (h)   Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in
§
150.23.
      (5)   Map determinations. The Administrator shall make interpretations
where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood
hazard areas, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions.
         (a)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §
150.24(C)(2).
         (b)   When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been
provided in accordance with §
150.17, then the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal,
state, or other sources, in order to administer the provisions of §§
150.55 through
150.61.
         (c)   When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the
Floodplain Administrator shall obtain certification from a registered
professional engineer or architect, in accordance with §
150.56(B) a flood-proofing certificate.
         (d)   All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall
be maintained in the office of the Floodplain Administrator and shall be open
for public inspection.
      (6)   Right of entry.
         (a)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this chapter, or whenever the Administrator has reasonable cause
to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises any
condition or ordinance violation which makes such building, structure, or
premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the Administrator may enter such
building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or
perform any duty imposed upon the administration by this chapter.
         (b)   If such structure or premises are occupied, he or she shall
first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building,
structure, or premises are unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable
effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such
request entry.
         (c)   If entry is refused, the Administrator shall have recourse to
every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
         (d)   When the Administrator shall have first obtained a proper
inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or
occupant or any other persons having charge, care, or control of any building,
structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as
provided by this section, to promptly permit entry therein by the Administrator
for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter.
      (7)   Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the Administrator, work on any
building, structure, or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and
shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the
person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be
resumed.
      (8)   Revocation of permits.
         (a)   The Administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under
the provisions of this chapter, in case there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which
the permit or approval was based.
         (b)   The Administrator may revoke a permit upon determination by the
Administrator that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving,
demolition, installation, or replacement of the structure for which the permit
was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of
this chapter.
      (9)   Liability. Any officer, employee, or member of the Floodplain
Administrator’s staff, charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for
the applicable governing authority in the discharge of her or her duties, shall
not thereby render himself or herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved
from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
or her duties. Any suit brought against any officer, employee, or member
because of such act performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provision
of this chapter shall be defended by the department of law until the final
termination of the proceedings.
      (10)   Expiration of floodplain construction permit. A floodplain
construction permit, and all provisions contained therein, shall expire if the
holder of a floodplain construction permit has not commenced construction
within 180 calendar days from the date of its issuance by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 150.55 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces;
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air condition equipment,
and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   (F)   Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures;
   (G)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
   (H)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters;
   (I)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
   (J)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall
meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter; and
   (K)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
shall be undertaken only if said nonconformity is not furthered, extended, or
replaced.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.56 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data have been
provided, as set forth in §
150.17, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement
of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, mechanical equipment, and ductwork elevated no lower
than two feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter
walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with
standards of division (C) below:
      (1)   In an AO Zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a
height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or
elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number
is specified;
      (2)   In an A Zone, where no technical data has been produced by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, elevated two feet above the base flood
elevation, as determined by this community. The Floodplain Administrator will
determine the method by which base flood elevations are determined. Methods
include, but are not limited to, detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses,
use of existing data available from other sources, use of historical data, and
best supportable and reasonable judgment in the event no data can be produced.
Title 401 KAR Ch. 4, Regulation 060, states as a part of the technical
requirements for a state floodplain permit: The applicant shall provide cross
sections for determining floodway boundaries (and thereby base flood
elevations) at any proposed construction site where FEMA maps are not
available. All cross sections shall be referenced to mean sea level and shall
have vertical error tolerances of no more than + five-tenths (0.5) foot. Cross
sections elevations shall be taken at those points which represent significant
breaks in slope and at points where hydraulic characteristics of the base
floodplain change. Each cross section shall extend across the entire base
floodplain and shall be in the number and at the locations specified by the
Cabinet. If necessary to ensure that significant flood damage will not occur,
the Cabinet may require additional cross sections or specific site elevations
which extend beyond those needed for making routine regulatory floodway
boundary calculations;
      (3)   In all other zones, elevated two feet above the base flood
elevation; and
      (4)   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspection
department to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall
be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential structure
(including manufactured homes used for nonresidential purposes) shall be
elevated to conform with division (A) above or together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities:
      (1)   Be flood-proofed below an elevation two feet above the level of the
base flood elevation so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
      (3)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, mechanical equipment,
and ductwork, elevated no lower than two feet above the level of the base flood
elevation;
      (4)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the standards of this division (B)(4) are satisfied. Such certification shall
be provided to the official as set forth in §
150.41(B)(1)(c);
      (5)   Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in division (D) below;
and
      (6)   All new construction and substantial improvement with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, and which are
subject to flooding, shall be constructed of flood resistant materials below an
elevation two feet above the base flood elevation, and, shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwater. Opening sizes (FEMA Technical Bulletin 1-
93) for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
         (a)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect;
or
         (b)   Have a minimum of two openings with a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwater.
   (C)   Elevated structures. New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated structures on columns, posts, or pilings that include fully enclosed
areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood
elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to
allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
      (1)   Opening sizes for complying with this requirement must either be
certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum
criteria:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation or higher
than the exterior foundation grade); and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions.
      (2)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow
for parking of vehicles (garage door), limited storage of maintenance equipment
used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door), or entry to the
living area (stairway or elevator).
      (3)   The interior portion of such enclosed areas shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
   (D)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
      (1)   All new or substantially improved manufactured homes placed on
sites located within A, A1-30, AO, AH, and AE on the community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) must meet all the requirements for new construction,
including elevation and anchoring. Locations include:
         (a)   On individual lots or parcels;
         (b)   In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or
subdivisions;
         (c)   In new manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
         (d)   In substantially improved manufactured home parks or
subdivisions;
         (e)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; and
         (f)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site
upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result
of a flood.
      (2)   All manufactured homes must be:
         (a)   Elevated on a permanent foundation;
         (b)   Have its lowest floor elevated no lower than two feet above the
level of the base flood elevation; and
         (c)   Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      (3)   Except manufactured homes that have incurred substantial damage as
a result of a flood, all manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in
an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that the
manufactured home is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, so that either the:
         (a)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower
than two feet above the level of the base flood elevation; or
         (b)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less
than 36 inches in height above the highest adjacent grade.
      (4)   (a)   All recreational vehicles placed on sites located within A,
A1-30, AO, AH, and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must
either:
            1.   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
            2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
            3   Meet the permit requirements for new construction of this
chapter, including anchoring and elevation requirements for “manufactured
homes”.
         (b)   A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
licensed and insured in accordance with the commonwealth’s motor vehicle
regulations, is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only
by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.
   (E)   Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§
150.17 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential
projectiles, and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other developments unless certification (with
supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base
flood elevation levels during occurrence of base flood discharge; and
      (2)   If this division (E) is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements and other proposed new development shall comply with
all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of §§
150.55 through
150.61.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010; Ord. 499, passed 8-19-2014)
§ 150.57 STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
(UNNUMBERED ‘A’ ZONES) AND/OR FLOODWAYS.
   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
150.17, where streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided or
where base flood data has been provided without floodways, the following
provisions apply.
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be
located within special flood hazard areas, unless certification by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering
certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard
hydraulic engineering principles.
   (B)   New construction or substantial improvements of structures shall be
elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with §
150.17 .
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.58 STANDARDS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING ZONES.
   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
150.17 are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet, where a clearly
defined channel does not exist and the water path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate; therefor, the following provisions apply.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall:
      (1)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO, the flood depth specified on the
flood insurance rate map above the highest adjacent grade; and
      (2)   In Zone AO, if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor,
including basement, shall be elevated no less than two feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures shall:
      (1)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO, the flood depth specified on the
flood insurance rate map, above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO, if no
flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including the basement, shall be
elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade; and
      (2)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely flood-proofed either to the base flood elevation or above or, in
Zone AO, to or above the specified flood depth plus a minimum of one foot so
that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in §
150.56(B).
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.59 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard
area and the elevation of the base flood and be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (D)   In areas where base flood elevation and floodway data is not available
(Zone A or unmapped streams), base flood elevation and floodway data for
subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured
home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is
the lesser, shall be provided.
   (E)   All subdivision plans will include the elevation of proposed structure
(s) and lowest adjacent grade. If the site is filled above the base flood
elevation, the lowest floor and lowest adjacent grade elevations shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.60 STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN ALL ZONES BEGINNING WITH THE
LETTER ‘A’.
   For all accessory structures in special flood hazard areas designated ‘A’,
the following provisions shall apply:
   (A)   Structure must be non-habitable;
   (B)   Must be anchored to resist floatation forces;
   (C)   Will require flood openings/vents no more than one foot above grade,
total openings are to be one square inch per one square foot of floor area, at
least two openings required on opposite walls;
   (D)   Built of flood resistant materials below a level two feet above the
base flood elevation;
   (E)   Must elevate utilities above the base flood elevation;
   (F)   Can only be used for storage or parking; and
   (G)   Cannot be modified for a different use after permitting.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010; Ord. 499, passed 8-19-2014)
§ 150.61 CRITICAL FACILITIES.
   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible,
located outside the limits of the SFHA (100-year floodplain). Construction of
new critical facilities shall not be permissible within the floodway; however,
they may be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated one foot or more above the level of the base flood
elevation at the site. Flood-proofing and sealing measures must  be taken to
ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into
floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood
elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with granting of a variance or special exceptions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor civil offense. Any person who violates this chapter or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined no less than $50 or imprisoned for not more than ten days, or both, and
in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day
such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing
contained in this section shall prevent the Floodplain Administrator from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(Ord. 499, passed 12-7-2010)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING CODE
Section
   
151.01   Kentucky Building Code and Kentucky Residential Code adopted by
reference
   
151.02   Designated enforcement officer
   
151.03   Building inspection program
   
151.04   Permits and fees
   
151.05   Effective date
§ 151.01 KENTUCKY BUILDING CODE AND KENTUCKY RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED BY
REFERENCE.
    (A)   (1)   The Kentucky Building Code, promulgated in 815 KAR 7:120, and
the Kentucky Residential Code, promulgated in 815 KAR 7:125 by the Department
of Housing, Buildings, and Construction, Commonwealth of Kentucky, are hereby
adopted by reference and shall be enforced by the county as if set out at
length in this section.
      (2)   Copies of the Kentucky Building Code and the Kentucky Residential
Code are on file in the office of the County Clerk, and the Clerk shall at all
times keep copies of the Building Code and the Residential Code for reference.
      (3)   An attested copy of Ordinance 687 shall be transmitted to the
Commonwealth Department of Housing, Buildings, and Construction.
   (B)   (1)   The application of the Kentucky Building Code, promulgated in
815 KAR 7:120, and the Kentucky Residential Code, promulated in 815 KAR 7:125
by the Department of Housing, Buildings, and Construction, are hereby extended
to all single-family dwellings, prefabricated, and/or mobile homes, regardless
of whether they are located on farms, and agricultural exemptions shall not
apply to such dwellings.
      (2)   This division (B) does not interfere with agricultural exemptions
provided by statute for other nonresidential buildings located on
agriculturally exempt real estate.
      (3)   An attested copy of this division (B) shall be transmitted to the
Department of Housing, Buildings, and Construction of the commonwealth.
      (4)   This division (B) shall take effect and be in full force when
passed, published, and recorded according to law.
(Ord. 352, passed 10-17-2000; Ord. 473, passed 7-15-2008; Ord. 687, passed 10-
20-2023)
§ 151.02 DESIGNATED ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
    The County Building Inspector’s Office shall be designated as the local
enforcement agent/agency for the Kentucky Building Code. All building code
inspections shall be performed by persons certified by the Kentucky Department
of Housing, Buildings and Construction. All electrical inspections shall be
performed by persons certified by the Kentucky Department of Housing, Buildings
and Construction as electrical inspectors.
(Ord. 352, passed 10-17-2000; Ord. 687, passed 10-20-2023)
§ 151.03 BUILDING INSPECTION PROGRAM.
    (A)   Pursuant to KRS 198B.060(B), a building inspection program is hereby
established in the county for application to all buildings subject to 815 KAR
7:120, the Kentucky Building Code.
   (B)   The county building inspection program shall include plan review and
inspections of structures subject to 815 KAR 7:125, the Kentucky Residential
Code.
(Ord. 215, passed 2-1-1995; Ord. 352, passed 10-17-2000; Ord. 687, passed 10-
20-2023)
§ 151.04 PERMITS AND FEES.
   The fees for permits and inspections shall be as provided for in the
schedule attached to Ordinance 687.
(Ord. 352, passed 10-17-2000; Ord. 683, passed 6-29-2023; Ord. 687, passed 10-
20-2023)
§ 151.05 EFFECTIVE DATE.
    This chapter shall take effect and be in full force when passed, published,
and recorded according to law.
(Ord. 352, passed 10-17-2000; Ord. 687, passed 10-20-2023)
CHAPTER 152: MOBILE HOMES
Section
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Prohibitions
   
152.03   Underpinned or skirted units
   
152.04   Certification
   
152.05   Permits
   
152.06   Relocated units
   
152.07   Storage of mobile homes
   
152.08   Units subject to zoning ordinances and subdivision regulations
   
152.09   Permitted zones
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A single-family residential dwelling unit fabricated as
defined in KRS 227.550 on or after June 15, 1976, in an off-site manufacturing
facility for installation or assembly at the building site as a permanent
structure with transport features removed, bearing a seal certifying that it is
built in compliance with the federal manufacturing housing construction and
safety standards, as defined in § 152.03.
   MANUFACTURED HOME or MOBILE HOME. As defined in KRS 227.550, which does not
bear a seal certifying that it was manufactured in accordance with the Federal
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act and not bearing either
a Class A or Class B seal issued by the Commonwealth Department of Housing,
Building, and Construction, Office of the Commonwealth Fire Marshal is not
acceptable for residential occupation.
   MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTIONS AND SAFETY STANDARDS. The standards for the
construction, design, and performance of a manufactured home as set forth in 24
C.F.R. parts 3280, 3282, and 3283, and 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq., and as
mandated in the United States and as administered by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development, commonly referred to as the HUD CODE.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure manufactured prior to June 15, 1976 which was not
required to be constructed in accordance with the federal act, which is
transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight
body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected
on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. These homes bear a
numbered Class A or Class B seal issued by the Commonwealth Department of
Housing, Building, and Construction, Office of the State Fire Marshal.
(Ord. 360, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 152.02 PROHIBITIONS.
   No mobile home or manufactured home may be erected, set up, or brought onto
property in the county without first applying for and obtaining a permit for
erection and habitation in the county for the unit. In addition to the
requirements listed below, no unit shall be approved unless the electric and
septic or sewer system permit has been applied for, and a plot plan showing
home is inside all setback and right-of-way lines have been provided to the
Building Inspector’s office.
(Ord. 360, passed 5-15-2001; Ord. 489, passed 2-2-2010) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.03 UNDERPINNED OR SKIRTED UNITS.
   All units must be underpinned or skirted along the entire perimeter of the
home that is comprised of masonry, treated wood, plastic, or other material
that harmonizes with the architectural style of the home within 60 days of
receipt of their permit for habitation. Failure to have the unit underpinned on
skirted within this time limit shall subject the owner of the unit to sanctions
under §
152.09(B).
(Ord. 360, passed 5-15-2001) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.04 CERTIFICATION.
   In order to be issued a permit for erection and habitation, all manufactured
homes or mobile homes must be certified as meeting the Federal Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code as set forth in the 24 C.F.R
parts 3280 and 3282, and 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq., and commonly referred to as
the HUD Code, or be certified by the State Fire Marshal’s Office or certified
inspector as safe and habitable and bearing a B-1 seal. Mobile homes or
manufactured homes to be used for storage and not human habitation may be
erected and used if that unit has a B-2 seal, provided it meets all other
applicable conditions in this section, except that it need not pass electrical
inspection if there is no electricity in the unit and it need not meet
plumbing, sewer, or septic tank inspections if it has no running water.
(Ord. 360, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 152.05 PERMITS.
   Permits under this chapter shall be issued by the County Judge/Executive,
and units subject to this chapter shall be subject to inspection by the Judge/
Executive or his or her designee. The Judge/Executive or his or her designee
shall impose reasonable charges for permits and inspections. Existing units
which would not meet these standards may not be relocated regardless of whether
or not ownership of the unit changes, unless a valid permit is first obtained.
(Ord. 360, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 152.06 RELOCATED UNITS.
   Existing units which would not meet these standards may not be relocated
regardless of whether or not ownership of the unit changes, unless a valid
permit is first obtained.
(Ord. 360, passed 5-15-2001) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.07 STORAGE OF MOBILE HOMES.
   Storage of mobile homes or manufactured homes in the county is prohibited,
except for manufactured home dealers holding a valid commonwealth dealer’s
permit and except for units permitted under this chapter.
(Ord. 360, passed 5-15-2001) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.08 UNITS SUBJECT TO ZONING ORDINANCES AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
   Units located within the City of Glasgow are subject to the zoning ordinance
of the City of Glasgow. All units located anywhere in the county are subject to
the subdivision regulations of the Joint City and County Planning Commission of
the county.
(Ord. 360, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 152.09 PERMITTED ZONES.
   (A)   Class A and Class B mobile homes may be placed in a manufactured home
community or a mobile home park with their placement governed by those
regulations set forth in the adopted zoning code and subdivision regulations.
They may be permitted in zones as a conditional temporary use subject to the
requirements for such use as set forth in the zoning ordinance or subdivision
regulations.
   (B)   Manufactured homes with no HUD Code seal and mobile homes with no
Class A or Class B seal are not permitted in any zoning district or in mobile
home parks. Those which are, at the time of the adoption of this chapter,
located within the jurisdiction are nonconforming uses, subject to the same
requirements and regulations as any other nonconforming use.
(Ord. 360, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Any landowner upon whose land an unpermitted unit is located, or title owner
of an unpermitted unit located in the county without having obtained a permit
and complying with this chapter, shall be deemed to have violated this chapter
and shall be subject to the following:
   (A)   A civil sanction or forfeiture of the unpermitted mobile home or
manufactured home, which shall be removed at once from this county by the owner
or landowner, and if not, may be removed by the county with the costs charged
to the owner or landowner and disposed of at the expenses of the owner or
landowner;
   (B)   Criminal penalties equivalent to a Class A misdemeanor under the
commonwealth’s Penal Code, that being a fine of up to $500 and up to 12 months,
in jail, or both;
   (C)   Jurisdiction for enforcement of the civil and criminal penalties shall
be in the County District Court, or the County Circuit Court as appropriate;
and/or
   (D)   Each day of nonconformance shall be considered a new violation.
(Ord. 360, passed 5-15-2001; Ord. 489, passed 2-2-2010)
CHAPTER 153: CENTRAL ADDRESSING SYSTEM
Section
   
153.01   Authority of Barren Information Technology Systems, Inc.
   
153.02   Address numbers displayed
   
153.03   Display requirements
   
153.04   Address numbers free of obstruction or hindering visibility
   
153.05   Warnings of noncompliance
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 AUTHORITY OF BARREN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS, INC.
    Beginning immediately, Barren Information Technology Systems, Inc.,
(hereinafter referred to as B.I.T.S.), shall be the only agency within the
county authorized to assign or cause to be assigned, and to delete or change
property addresses, site addresses, and building addresses where appropriate so
as to ensure no duplication of addresses. B.I.T.S. shall maintain a street
index file containing the official list of valid road names.
(Ord. 353, passed 11-21-2000)
§ 153.02 ADDRESS NUMBERS DISPLAYED.
   No owner, resident, or occupant of residential, commercial, or industrial
property located in the county shall display incorrect address numbers or
incorrect street or road names on his, her, or their house, commercial or
industrial structure, or upon any mailbox.
(Ord. 353, passed 11-21-2000) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.03 DISPLAY REQUIREMENTS.
   Every owner, resident, and/or occupant of residential, commercial, and
industrial property located in the county shall conspicuously display the
appropriate road address approved or assigned by B.I.T.S. in accordance with
this chapter. All such road address numbers shall be in a contrasting color
distinguishable from its background or mounting surface.
(Ord. 353, passed 11-21-2000)
§ 153.04 ADDRESS NUMBERS FREE OF OBSTRUCTION OR HINDERING VISIBILITY.
   Every owner, resident, and/or occupant of residential, commercial, and
industrial property located in the county shall keep his, her, or their road
addresses numbers free and clear of any obstructions hindering clear visibility
to vehicles traveling in either direction on the nearest fronting road.
(Ord. 353, passed 11-21-2000)
§ 153.05 WARNINGS OF NONCOMPLIANCE.
   Prior to the issuance of any criminal summons for violation of this chapter,
the addressing official of B.I.T.S. shall deliver a written warning either in
person or by first class mail which shall inform the property owner or resident
of the address assignment or address correction, or describe the violation and
direct the correction of such violation or posting of the address assignment or
correction within ten business days of the written notice. Thereafter, if
subsequent inspection reveals the violation has not been corrected, the
addressing official shall take the necessary action to cause the issuance of a
criminal complaint for the violation through the County Attorney’s Office.
(Ord. 353, passed 11-21-2000) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $10 nor more than $25. Each day during which the violation
exists shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 353, passed 11-21-2000)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
154.01   Regulations adopted by reference
   
154.02   Minimums standards for streets and roads within a subdivision
   
154.03   Minimum lot size for new residential lot subdivisions with no sewer
hook-up
§ 154.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The subdivision regulations of the county, approved by the Joint City
and County Planning Commission of the county, on April 16, 2001, are hereby
adopted and approved.
   (B)   Upon taking effect, this section and the subdivision regulations of
the county, shall be recorded and indexed in the office of the County Clerk in
the miscellaneous records maintained therein.
   (C)   This section shall take effect upon its passage and publication,
according to law.
(Ord. 363, passed 7-3-2001; Res. passed 3-4-2008; Ord. 468, passed 4-1-2008)
§ 154.02 MINIMUMS STANDARDS FOR STREETS AND ROADS WITHIN A SUBDIVISION.
   Before considering acceptance of a street or road within a subdivision
subject to the subdivision regulations of the Joint City and County Planning
Commission the county onto the county road system, the following minimum
requirements shall have been met.
   (A)   The minimum requirements pertaining to rights-of-way and construction
of the subdivision regulations of the Joint City and County Planning Commission
of the county must be complied with and so certified to the County Fiscal Court
in writing, by the Chairperson of the Joint City and County Planning Commission
of the county.
   (B)   The right-of-way must be completely cleared of stumps, logs, brush,
and other matters which might deteriorate.
   (C)   All top soil shall be removed from the area of street construction.
All fills shall be constructed of clay and packed so that the density of the
surrounding sub-soil is achieved.
   (D)   Construction of the grade and drain shall have been completed and
settled in a complete condition for two complete winters before construction of
the street surface. (A complete winter shall be considered to be all of the
months of December, January, and February in succession.)
   (E)   Street surfaces shall be constructed as follows:
      (1)   Minor streets. Minor streets are streets that are designed for or
will be used primarily for access to abutting properties or which will carry
limited volumes of traffic. Minor streets shall be constructed with a minimum
of two inches of dense grade aggregate (measured after rolling), a minimum of
two inches of binder, and one inch of rolled blacktop surface.
      (2)   Through streets. Through streets are streets, which due to their
proximity to other streets or roads, are designed for or will be used to
provide access from other streets or roads, and which will carry a large volume
of traffic. Through streets shall be constructed with a minimum of four inches
or dense grade aggregate (measured after rolling), a minimum of two inches of
binder, and one inch of rolled blacktop surface.
   (F)   All drainage structures shall be of sufficient diameter to carry water
reasonably expected to occur within the drainage area. Drainage structures from
15 inches to 24 inches in diameter shall be at least 16 guage, structures 24
inches to 36 inches shall be at least 14 guage, and structures 36 inches to 72
inches shall be at least 12 guage.
   (G)   The subdivider shall furnish a certification by a licensed engineer in
a form prepared by the County Attorney and approved by the County Fiscal Court
certifying that the above minimum requirements have been met.
   (H)   The Supervisor of the County Road Department shall be given prior
notice of construction and an opportunity to inspect the work while it is in
progress.
(Ord. 25, passed 2-4-1981)
§ 154.03 MINIMUM LOT SIZE FOR NEW RESIDENTIAL LOT SUBDIVISIONS WITH NO SEWER
HOOK-UP.
   (A)   Beginning January 1, 2000, all newly established residential
subdivision lots which are not connected to a sewer system must have a lot size
of no less than 25,000 square feet and must be at least 125 feet by 200 feet
with a minimum of 125 feet width at the building set back line.
   (B)   Beginning January 1, 2000, the Joint City-County Planning Commission
shall not approve a new residential subdivision plat that does not comply with
division (A) above.
(Ord. 325, passed 9-8-1999)
CHAPTER 155: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Section
   
155.01   Comprehensive Plan adopted by reference
§ 155.01 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The county’s comprehensive plan statement regulations are hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
   (B)   The comprehensive plan and statement of goals and objectives shall be
and hereby are amended and adopted for utilization by the Joint City and County
Planning Commission of the county.
(Ord. 412, passed 6-22-2004; Ord. passed 485, passed 10-20-2009)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
      
II.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
      
III.   ROAD MAINTENANCE
      
IV.   ACCEPTANCES AND DEDICATIONS
TABLE I: CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
     4-21-  Approving an inducement contract between the county and Doctor’s Park to
43   1982   finance the acquisition, construction, and equipping of an industrial
            building project
237  9-6-   Interlocal agreement for countywide animal control and establishing the
     1995   Glasgow-Barren County Animal Shelter Board
347  8-15-  Amending Ord. 237 pertaining to the Glasgow-Barren County Animal Shelter
     2000   Board
536  6-18-  Interlocal agreement between the County Fiscal Court and the City of
     2013   Glasgow for the creation of a Joint Electrical Examining Board
           
 
TABLE II: REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
302      6-2-1998    Authorizing the execution of deeds to the Barren County
                     Public Properties Corporation
306      6-21-1998   Authorizing the execution of deeds and a lease agreement
                     with the Barren County Public Properties Corporation
498      10-19-2010  Approving a lease for the financing of a project
688      10-20-2023  Approving a lease for the financing of a project
                    
 
TABLE III: ROAD MAINTENANCE
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
219      4-19-1995   Maintaining the roads leading into, around, and through
                     Union No. 2 Cemetery
220      4-19-1995   Maintaining the roads leading into, around, and through
                     Bowels Cemetery
222      5-17-1995   Maintaining the roads leading into, around, and through
                     Peden Cemetery
229      6-7-1995    Maintaining the roads leading into, around, and through
                     Campground Cemetery
233      8-16-1995   Maintaining the roads leading into, around, and through
                     Bailey Cemetery
236      8-16-1995   Maintaining the roads leading into, around, and through
                     Huffman Bellamy Cemetery
249      11-15-1995  Maintaining the roads leading into, around, and through
                     Barbour Cemetery
259      3-20-1996   Maintaining the roads leading into, around, and through
                     Mt. Olivet Cemetery
359      4-17-2001   Maintaining the roads leading into, around, and through
                     Beech Grove Cemetery
400      12-16-2003  Maintaining the roads leading into, around, and through
                     Buckley Cemetery
464      12-4-2007   Maintaining the roads leading into, around, and through
                     Settles Family Cemetery and Houchens Family Cemetery
                    
 
TABLE IV: ACCEPTANCES AND DEDICATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
2    9-6-   Accepting a portion of D.B. Smith Road as a county road in Magisterial District
     1978   Number Three
6    12-20- Accepting Rogers Hill Road, South Fork Road, and South Fork Terrace Manor as
     1978   county roads in Magisterial District Number Seven
10   1-2-   Amending Ord. 6 pertaining to Rogers Hill Road, South Fork Road, and South Fork
     1980   Terrace Manor as county roads
11   1-2-   Accepting Cheyenne Valley Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number
     1980   Two
12   1-16-  Accepting the streets within the Jackson Trail Subdivision, Golfcourse Estate,
     1980   and Greenlawn Drive as county roads in Magisterial District Number Seven
16   6-18-  Accepting Maryette Circle as a county road in Magisterial District Number Seven
     1980
17   6-18-  Accepting a portion of W. Settle Road as a county road in Magisterial District
     1980   Number Five
19   7-2-   Accepting a portion of Gillock Public Way as a county road in Magisterial
     1980   District Number Five
21   10-15- Accepting Sugartree Lane and Western Hills Drive as county roads in Magisterial
     1980   District Number Seven
22   11-5-  Accepting Twin Creeks Drive as a county road in Magisterial District Number
     1980   Seven
23   11-5-  Accepting Dana Court Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Seven
     1980
24   12-17- Accepting Tracts 1, 2, and 3 of Coon Creek Road as a county road in Magisterial
     1980   District Number Seven
27   2-18-  Accepting Woods Drive and Gravens Drive Road in Needmore Acres as county roads
     1981   in Magisterial District Number Seven
35   12-16- Accepting Beaverwood Trail as a county road in Magisterial District Number
     1981   Seven
37   2-17-  Accepting Blair Road and Grinstead Mill Road as county roads in Magisterial
     1982   District Number Six
     4-7-   Accepting a portion of Dana Court of Haywood Acres Subdivision and Phillip
39   1982   Drive of Haywood Acres Subdivision as county roads in Magisterial District
            Number Seven
40   4-7-   Accepting Mossway of Rolling Fields Subdivision as a county road in Magisterial
     1982   District Number Seven
41   4-7-   Accepting Amos Street of Maplewood Village Subdivision as a county road in
     1982   Magisterial District Number Seven
50   11-17- Accepting a portion of a road leading from Old Highway 68-80 as a county road
     1982   in Magisterial District Number One
71   12-5-  Accepting Jimtown Trail in Jimtown Terrace as a county road in Magisterial
     1984   District Number One
75   4-17-  Accepting the road from KY 252 to Beaver Point Subdivision as a county road in
     1985   Magisterial District Number Seven
79   9-4-   Accepting Navajo Trail as a county road in Magisterial District Number Two
     1985
81   9-18-  Accepting Wilderness Trail Road and Poynter Lane as county roads in Magisterial
     1985   District Number Six
95   4-15-  Accepting Richland Drive of Rolling Fields Subdivision as a county road in
     1987   Magisterial District Number Two
96   5-20-  Accepting Wilson Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Three
     1987
98   6-17-  Accepting a portion Old Salem Road and H. Miller Road as county roads in
     1987   Magisterial District Number Three
106  6-1-   Accepting a portion of Beaver Trail as a county road in Magisterial District
     1988   Number Five
112  8-3-   Accepting Dana Court Drive as a county road in Magisterial District Number Two
     1988
118  11-16- Accepting Shady Acres Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Two
     1988
119  11-16- Accepting a portion of a right-of-way connecting 31-E North to Lohden Road as a
     1988   county road in Magisterial District Number Four
123  4-10-  Accepting a portion of a right-of-way of Coomer Road to the county as a county
     1989   road in Magisterial District Number Three
124  4-10-  Accepting a portion of a right-of-way of Nan’s Lane to the county as a county
     1989   road in Magisterial District Number Six
125  4-19-  Reconstructing Chenoweth Road in Magisterial District Number Three
     1989
132  7-19-  Accepting Steeplechase Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number
     1989   Four
133  8-16-  Accepting Little Work Acres as a county road in Magisterial District Number Two
     1989
134  9-6-   Reconstructing Dearing Road in Magisterial District Number Five
     1989
137  12-6-  Accepting Matthews Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Three
     1989
143  6-20-  Accepting Jackson Lane as a county road in Magisterial District Number Two
     1990
146  7-18-  Accepting Beaver Mound in Beaver Bay Subdivision as a county road in
     1990   Magisterial District Number Two
150  10-17- Accepting Bristletown Hills Road as a county road in Magisterial District
     1990   Number Three
152  5-15-  Accepting Squire Edwards Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number
     1991   Four
157  7-3-   Accepting Bale Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Six
     1991
159  9-3-   Accepting Hillview Drive as a county road in Magisterial District Number Six
     1991
164  12-18- Accepting D.B. Smith Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Three
     1991
167  4-1-   Accepting Bob Lewis Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Five
     1992
174  8-5-   Accepting C T Talley Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Three
     1992
178  12-16- Accepting Scenic View Drive as a county road in Magisterial District Number Six
     1992
182  3-3-   Accepting Circle Road, formerly Wells Road, as a county road in Magisterial
     1993   District Number Five
188  8-18-  Accepting Tom Thomas Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Three
     1993
192  12-30- Accepting Joe Marshall Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Two
     1993
194  1-19-  Accepting Shamrock Place as a county road in Magisterial District Number Four
     1994
195  1-19-  Accepting Patton Terrace as a county road in Magisterial District Number Three
     1994
196  4-20-  Accepting Garrets Hideaway as a county road in Magisterial District Number Five
     1994
197  5-4-   Accepting Hidden Cove Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Two
     1994
202  10-19- Accepting Goodnight Terrace Road as a county road in Magisterial District
     1994   Number Four
203  10-19- Accepting Jackson Trail Unit 2 as a county road in Magisterial District Number
     1994   Two
204  11-2-  Accepting Rolling Hills Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number
     1994   Three
206  1-4-   Accepting a portion of An Extension of Wilderness Trail and Pine Valley Road as
     1995   county roads in Magisterial District Number Six
209  1-18-  Accepting Beechwood Drive, Beechwood Trail, and Beech Court as county roads in
     1995   Magisterial District Number Two
210  1-18-  Accepting Wyndemere Way and Wynd Start Court as county roads in Magisterial
     1995   District Number One
221  5-3-   Accepting Fields Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Three
     1995
223  5-17-  Accepting Reneau Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Three
     1995
224  5-17-  Accepting Coomer Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Two
     1995
228  6-27-  Accepting Beechtree Lane as a county road in Magisterial District Number Two
     1995
240  10-4-  Accepting Yoder Hills Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number
     1995   Three
245  10-18- Accepting J.R. Drive as a county road in Magisterial District Number Five
     1995
243  11-1-  Accepting Peden- Matthews Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number
     1995   Three
246  11-1-  Accepting Wyatt Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Two
     1995
247  11-1-  Accepting Eastern Sportsman Club Road as a county road in Magisterial District
     1995   Number Three
250  11-15- Accepting Buck Creek Sportsman Club Road as a county road in Magisterial
     1995   District Number Five
251  12-6-  Accepting Wilderson Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Two
     1995
253  12-6-  Accepting Misty Moor Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Two
     1995
252  12-20- Accepting Holly Hill Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Three
     1995
254  12-20- Accepting Ginger Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Two
     1995
256  2-7-   Accepting Yellow Buckey Lane as a county road in Magisterial District Number
     1996   Five
262  4-24-  Accepting Skaggs Creek Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number
     1996   Five
263  4-24-  Accepting Quarter Lane as a county road in Magisterial District Number Three
     1996
264  6-5-   Accepting Gibbons Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Six
     1996
265  6-5-   Accepting Hall Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Two
     1996
272  7-16-  Accepting Rooster Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Six
     1996
273  7-16-  Accepting Geralds Road as a county road in Magisterial District Number Three
     1996
682  8-15-  Accepting Annette Lane, Christopher Avenue, and Jessica Avenue as a county road
     2023   in Magisterial District Number Seven
689  12-19- Accepting Madison Lane as a county road in Magisterial District Number Six
     2023
           
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES
KRS Cites Code Section
KRS Cites                     Code Section
Ch. 13B                       112.03
23A.220                       35.08
24A.185                       35.08
Ch. 31                        36.26
39A to 39F                    31.24
39B                           31.24
39F                           31.24
41.240(4)                     34.11
Ch. 45A                       36.26
Ch. 56                        36.26
61.168                        36.26
61.169                        36.26
61.805 through 61.850         31.28
61.810                        31.03
61.870                        31.03
61.870 et seq.                10.18
61.870 - 61.884               36.27
61.870(1)                     36.01
61.870(2)                     36.01
61.870(4)                     36.01
61.870(5)                     36.01
61.870(6)                     36.01
61.870(7)                     36.01
61.870(8)                     36.01
61.872(1) - (3)               36.15
61.872(4)                     36.16
61.872(5)                     36.17
61.872(6)                     36.18
61.874(1), (2)                36.22
61.874(3), (4)                36.23
61.874(5)                     36.24
61.874(6)                     36.25
61.878                        32.05,
                              36.01
61.878(1), (2), (3), (4), (5) 36.26
61.880(1)                     36.19,
                              36.26
61.884                        31.03,
                              36.21
61.931(b)                     33.20
61.931(c)                     33.20
61.932                        33.20
64.017(1)                     34.07
64.091                        35.08
64.527                        31.02,
                              31.03
64.530(6)                     34.07
65.007                        31.21
66.480                        34.11
67.045(6)                     31.05
67.075 through 76.077         31.05
67.080                        31.03,
                              31.22
67.083                        31.03
67.083(g)                     70.06
67.084                        150.01
67.090                        31.03
67.680(2)                     31.22
67.682                        31.22
67.700                        31.02
67.710                        31.02
67.711                        31.02
67.715                        31.02,
                              31.04
68.005(2)                     31.03
68.020                        34.08
68.100                        34.08
68.120                        34.40
75.450(7)                     35.04
83A.065                       10.99
83A.090                       10.18
89.1(1)                       70.07
91A.350                       31.21
91A.350 to 91A.390            31.21
91A.350(2)                    31.21
100.324                       113.01
118.105                       32.01
118.115                       32.01
118.325                       32.01
118.760                       32.01
122.180                       34.01
131.190                       36.26
134.420                       52.01
Ch. 136                       35.02
137.115(2)                    35.01
150.010(25)                   90.25
150.010(41)                   90.25
Ch. 151                       150.15,
                              150.16
151.250                       150.16
Ch. 154                       36.26
154.50-20 et seq.             31.25
164.605 to 164.675            31.20
164.635                       31.20
179.020                       31.26
179.060                       31.26
179.470                       70.03
189.390                       Ch. 71, Schd. II
189.394                       Ch. 71, Schd. I
189.940                       Ch. 71, Schd. II
189.990(1)                    Ch. 72, Schd. I
198B.060(B)                   151.03
217.900(1)                    33.18
218A.010(6)                   33.18
227.550                       152.01
Ch. 231                       110.08
231.010                       110.08
                              112.01,
Ch. 241                       112.03,
                              112.04,
                              112.08
241.010(39)                   112.02
241.100                       112.03
241.110                       112.03
241.140                       112.04
                              112.01,
Ch. 242                       112.03,
                              112.04,
                              112.08
                              112.01 -
Ch. 243                       112.04,
                              112.08
243.037                       112.02
243.060                       112.02
243.075                       112.02
243.088                       112.02
243.089(d)                    112.02
243.090                       112.02
243.250                       112.02
243.260                       112.02
243.360                       112.04
243.450                       112.04
243.480                       112.99
243.490                       112.04
243.500                       112.04
243.505                       112.06
243.850                       112.04
243.895                       112.06
                              112.01,
Ch. 244                       112.03,
                              112.04,
                              112.08
244.050                       112.08
244.085                       112.07
244.085(6)                    112.07
244.087                       112.06,
                              112.07
244.090                       112.06
244.090(2)                    112.06
244.130                       112.12
244.150                       112.03
244.500                       112.06
258.015                       90.02
258.035                       90.02
258.055                       90.02
258.065                       90.02
258.085                       90.02
258.990                       90.02
Ch, 278                       113.01
278.700 et seq.               113.03
278.700(2)                    113.01
278.700(7)                    113.01
278.706(2)(m)                 113.04
278.706(2)(m)(5)              113.04
278.706(2)(m)(5)(ii)          113.04
287.135                       35.02
304.39-110(2)                 70.01
Ch. 350                       150.15
351.010(m)                    33.18
367.952                       31.22
                              31.03,
Ch. 424                       34.01,
                              112.04,
                              113.03
424.170                       112.04
Ch. 446                       10.02
447.010(55)                   10.05
511.080                       112.08
523.010 et seq.               Ch. 32, App. B, § 2
525.010                       90.02
525.130(2)                    90.01
524.130(3)                    90.01
534.040(2)(c)                 10.99
                              
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        12-14-1994  150.25
-        3-4-2008    154.01
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
73 1     7-3-1973    Ch. 71, Schd. II
74-1     3-5-1974    Ch. 71, Schd. II
75-      7-1-1975    90.11
2        9-6-1978    TSO Table IV
6        12-20-1978  TSO Table IV
8        7-18-1979   Ch. 71, Schd. II
10       1-2-1980    TSO Table IV
11       1-2-1980    TSO Table IV
12       1-16-1980   TSO Table IV
16       6-18-1980   TSO Table IV
17       6-18-1980   TSO Table IV
19       7-2-1980    TSO Table IV
21       10-15-1980  TSO Table IV
22       11-5-1980   TSO Table IV
23       11-5-1980   TSO Table IV
24       12-17-1980  TSO Table IV
25       2-4-1981    154.02
27       2-18-1981   TSO Table IV
35       12-16-1981  TSO Table IV
37       2-17-1982   TSO Table IV
39       4-7-1982    TSO Table IV
40       4-7-1982    TSO Table IV
41       4-7-1982    TSO Table IV
43       4-21-1982   TSO Table I
46       6-16-1982   35.07
50       11-17-1982  TSO Table IV
59       8-17-1983   Ch. 72, Schd. II
66       6-29-1984   31.25
68       9-5-1984    70.01
69       10-3-1984   31.07
71       12-5-1984   TSO Table IV
75       4-17-1985   TSO Table IV
79       9-4-1985    TSO Table IV
81       9-18-1985   TSO Table IV
                     92.15 -
90       12-17-1986  92.17,
                     92.99
                     50.01 -
93       2-4-1987    50.04,
                     50.99
95       4-15-1987   TSO Table IV
96       5-20-1987   TSO Table IV
98       6-17-1987   TSO Table IV
106      6-1-1988    TSO Table IV
112      8-3-1988    TSO Table IV
118      11-16-1988  TSO Table IV
119      11-16-1988  TSO Table IV
123      4-10-1989   TSO Table IV
124      4-10-1989   TSO Table IV
125      4-19-1989   TSO Table IV
                     50.15 -
126      5-17-1989   50.20,
                     50.99
132      7-19-1989   TSO Table IV
133      8-16-1989   TSO Table IV
134      9-6-1989    TSO Table IV
137      12-6-1989   TSO Table IV
143      6-20-1990   TSO Table IV
146      7-18-1990   TSO Table IV
150      10-17-1990  TSO Table IV
152      5-15-1991   TSO Table IV
157      7-3-1991    TSO Table IV
159      9-3-1991    TSO Table IV
164      12-18-1991  TSO Table IV
167      4-1-1992    TSO Table IV
172      7-15-1992   35.05
174      8-5-1992    TSO Table IV
                     93.01 -
175      10-7-1992   93.14,
                     93.99
178      12-16-1992  TSO Table IV
182      3-3-1993    TSO Table IV
188      8-18-1993   TSO Table IV
189      9-1-1993    30.01,
                     35.03
192      12-30-1993  TSO Table IV
194      1-19-1994   TSO Table IV
195      1-19-1994   TSO Table IV
196      4-20-1994   TSO Table IV
197      5-4-1994    TSO Table IV
199      6-8-1994    35.01,
                     35.99
                     92.01 -
148      8-17-1994   92.04,
                     92.99
202      10-19-1994  TSO Table IV
203      10-19-1994  TSO Table IV
204      11-2-1994   TSO Table IV
206      1-4-1995    TSO Table IV
209      1-18-1995   TSO Table IV
210      1-18-1995   TSO Table IV
213      1-18-1995   70.04
                     31.01 -
                     31.04,
                     31.06,
                     31.07,
                     31.26,
                     33.01,
                     33.02,
215      2-1-1995    33.15,
                     34.01 -
                     34.11,
                     34.25 -
                     34.29,
                     34.40,
                     70.03,
                     151.03
216      3-1-1995    Ch. 71, Schd. I
218      3-15-1995   34.11
219      4-19-1995   TSO Table III
220      4-19-1995   TSO Table III
221      5-3-1995    TSO Table IV
222      5-17-1995   TSO Table III
223      5-17-1995   TSO Table IV
224      5-17-1995   TSO Table IV
229      6-7-1995    TSO Table III
228      6-27-1995   TSO Table IV
234      8-2-1995    Ch. 71, Schd. II
233      8-16-1995   TSO Table III
236      8-16-1995   TSO Table III
232      9-6-1995    70.02
237      9-6-1995    TSO Table I
240      10-4-1995   TSO Table IV
245      10-18-1995  TSO Table IV
243      11-1-1995   TSO Table IV
246      11-1-1995   TSO Table IV
247      11-1-1995   TSO Table IV
249      11-15-1995  TSO Table III
250      11-15-1995  TSO Table IV
251      12-6-1995   TSO Table IV
253      12-6-1995   TSO Table IV
252      12-20-1995  TSO Table IV
254      12-20-1995  TSO Table IV
256      2-7-1996    TSO Table IV
257      2-21-1996   70.04
258      2-21-1996   33.01
259      3-20-1996   TSO Table III
261      4-3-1996    35.06
262      4-24-1996   TSO Table IV
263      4-24-1996   TSO Table IV
264      6-5-1996    TSO Table IV
265      6-5-1996    TSO Table IV
267      6-26-1996   34.07
270      6-26-1996   33.01
                     90.01 -
                     90.04,
269      7-16-1996   90.06 -
                     90.10,
                     90.99
272      7-16-1996   TSO Table IV
273      7-16-1996   TSO Table IV
276      10-15-1996  35.02
279      12-3-1996   34.07
284      5-6-1997    33.01
                     33.01,
                     34.03,
290      8-19-1997   34.07,
                     34.08,
                     34.10
                     51.01 -
294      10-21-1997  51.09,
                     51.99
298      2-18-1998   31.20
302      6-2-1998    TSO Table II
304      7-9-1998    31.26
306      7-21-1998   TSO Table II
312      3-2-1999    31.21,
                     31.99
313      4-6-1999    33.16
315      4-27-1999   33.03
319      5-18-1999   31.21 
320      5-18-1999   31.21
321      6-15-1999   31.24
322      7-6-1999    34.07
324      - -         31.24
325      9-8-1999    154.03
326      9-8-1999    33.01
329      11-16-1999  70.05
330      11-16-1999  Ch. 71, Schd. II
331      11-16-1999  Ch. 71, Schd. II
332      11-16-1999  Ch. 71, Schd. II
333      11-16-1999  70.03
343      6-20-2000   35.02
344      7-6-2000    Ch. 71, Schd. II
346      8-15-2000   90.07
347      8-15-2000   TSO Table I
                     31.26,
351      9-19-2000   33.17,
                     33.19,
                     34.25
352      10-17-2000  151.01 -
                     151.05
                     153.01 -
353      11-21-2000  153.05,
                     153.99
354      11-21-2000  Ch. 71, Schd. II
355      12-5-2000   33.01
357      1-3-2001    33.01
359      4-17-2001   TSO Table III
                     152.01 -
360      5-15-2001   152.09,
                     152.99
361      5-30-2001   Ch. 71, Schd. II
363      7-3-2001    154.01
370      2-5-2002    52.01,
                     52.02
371      2-5-2002    31.28
375      5-21-2002   34.07
378      6-18-2002   35.08
379      7-16-2002   Ch. 71, Schd. II
385      4-1-2003    35.04
388      6-3-2003    Ch. 71, Schd. II
389      6-3-2003    Ch. 71, Schd. II
390      6-3-2003    Ch. 71, Schd. II
391      6-3-2003    Ch. 71, Schd. II
392      6-17-2003   31.21,
                     31.99
395      8-19-2003   Ch. 71, Schd. II
397      9-16-2003   Ch. 71, Schd. II
399      10-7-2003   31.22
400      12-16-2003  TSO Table III
                     110.01 -
404      2-17-2004   110.08,
                     110.99
                     90.25 -
403      3-2-2004    90.31,
                     90.99
410      5-14-2004   30.02,
                     30.99
411      6-22-2004   33.01
412      6-22-2004   155.01
413      8-24-2004   Ch. 71, Schd. II
417      10-5-2004   Ch. 71, Schd. II
418      10-5-2004   90.12
419      10-19-2004  Ch. 71, Schd. II
423      2-1-2005    31.23
426      6-21-2005   111.01 -
                     111.09
429      7-19-2005   33.01
431      8-2-2005    111.06
434      10-4-2005   Ch. 71, Schd. II
435      11-1-2005   Ch. 71, Schd. II
438      2-22-2006   Ch. 71, Schd. II
440      4-18-2006   50.35,
                     50.99
442      6-20-2006   33.01
445      8-15-2006   Ch. 71, Schd. II
446      9-6-2006    33.01
451      12-19-2006  Ch. 71, Schd. II
459      7-3-2007    34.07
460      7-3-2007    33.01
461      7-3-2007    33.01
464      12-4-2007   TSO Table III
468      4-1-2008    154.01
470      5-6-2008    35.04
473      7-15-2008   151.01
481      6-17-2009   33.18
485      10-20-2009  155.01
486      10-20-2009  31.24,
                     31.99
489      2-2-2010    152.02,
                     152.99
498      10-19-2010  TSO Table II
                     150.01 -
                     150.04,
                     150.15 -
                     150.25,
499      12-7-2010   150.40 -
                     150.42,
                     150.55 -
                     150.61,
                     150.99
503      5-17-2011   Ch. 71, Schd. II
506      8-2-2011    31.05
514      11-1-2011   Ch. 71, Schd. II
521      6-5-2012    34.08
523      8-7-2012    Ch. 71, Schd. II
526      10-23-2012  31.28
528      12-18-2012  Ch. 71, Schd. II
529      12-18-2012  Ch. 71, Schd. II
534      6-18-2013   Ch. 71, Schd. II
536      6-18-2013   TSO Table I
537      8-20-2013   Ch. 71, Schd. II
540      9-19-2013   31.05
544      4-15-2014   34.05
499      8-19-2014   150.56,
                     150.60
550      9-16-2014   Ch. 71, Schd. II
                     32.01 -
                     32.10,
556      3-17-2015   32.99,
                     App. A,
                     App. B
557      3-17-2015   92.04,
                     92.99
564      8-18-2015   33.18
575      7-19-2016   91.01 -
                     91.07
579      6-21-2016   Adopting Ordinance
580      7-19-2016   Ch. 71, Schd. II
                     112.01 -
584      11-15-2016  112.13,
                     112.99
585      11-15-2016  33.01
591      6-20-2017   33.20
592      6-20-2017   33.01
596      7-18-2017   Ch. 71, Schd. II
600      10-17-2017  34.12
604      11-21-2017  Adopting Ordinance
605      11-21-2017  112.02,
                     112.11
616      9-18-2018   Adopting Ordinance
622      4-16-2019   70.06
626      7-16-2019   Ch. 71, Sch. II
627      8-20-2019   Adopting Ordinance
634      12-17-2019  Ch. 71, Sch. II
636      3-17-2020   51.05
                     90.01,
                     90.03,
638      5-19-2020   90.04,
                     90.07 -
                     90.10
639      5-19-2020   90.12,
                     90.13
645      8-18-2020   Adopting Ordinance
647      8-18-2020   90.12
648      9-15-2020   Ch. 71, Sch. II
653      1-19-2021   Ch. 71, Sch. II
659      6-29-2021   Adopting Ordinance
662      10-19-2021  90.02
664      12-21-2021  33.21
669      6-22-2022   Adopting Ordinance
673      11-17-2022  Ch. 71, Sch. II
676      12-20-2022  Ch. 71, Sch. II
678      12-20-2022  31.21
680      6-20-2023   Adopting Ordinance
681      7-18-2023   31.05
682      8-15-2023   TSO Table IV
683      6-29-2023   151.04
684      9-19-2023   31.03
686      10-20-2023  35.04
687      10-20-2023  151.01 -
                     151.05
688      10-20-2023  TSO Table II
689      12-19-2023  TSO Table IV
690      12-19-2023  34.27
                     113.01 -
25-695   5-20-2025   113.07,
                     113.99
698      6-27-2025   33.01
700      10-21-2025  70.07
701      12-16-2025  Adopting Ordinance
                    
 
