ELIZABETHTOWN, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-6 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 22-2025, passed 8-18-2025
State legislation current through KRS Pamphlet 2021
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF ELIZABETHTOWN, KENTUCKY
 
Mayor
Jeffrey H. Gregory
Council
Tony Bishop     Matt Deneen
Marty Fulkerson Julia Springsteen
Cindy D. Walker Virgil Willougby
 
Edward J. Poppe City Administrator
Ken Howard      City Attorney
Jessica Graham  City Clerk/ABC Administrator
Michael Page    Engineering
Sarah Vaughn    Events
Scott Reynolds  Facilities
Jeff Hawkins    Finance
Mark Malone     Fire Chief
Matthew Hobbs   Gas System Engineer
Seth Breitner   Parks and Recreation
Joe Reverman    Planning and Development
Jeremy Thompson Police Chief
Don Hill        Public Works
Matt Grogan     Safety Officer
Rita Davis      Storm Water
Corey Bond      Wastewater
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 17-2021
AN ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF ELIZABETHTOWN, KENTUCKY
ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF ELIZABETHTOWN, REVISING,
AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF ELIZABETHTOWN DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
CODE OF ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent Ordinances of the City of
Elizabethtown are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Kentucky empower and
authorize the City of Elizabethtown to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
   WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Elizabethtown has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of
Elizabethtown of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at the earliest legal date.
   NOW BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ELIZABETHTOWN,
KENTUCKY:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Elizabethtown as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted by
reference pursuant to KRS 83A.060(5) and shall constitute the "Code of
Ordinances of the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky" published by American Legal
Publishing Corporation, Copyright 2021.
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
PARALLEL REFERENCES
INDEX
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as provided by law. The Clerk
of the City of Elizabethtown is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of
such Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk as provided in KRS 83A.060
(5).
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.   
Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be necessary for the immediate
preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the people of
this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date provided by law.
   BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that the Mayor of the City of Elizabethtown and/or
his designee is hereby authorized and directed to take all steps necessary to
perfect this Ordinance.
   BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that this Ordinance be published in summary form.
   READ THE FIRST TIME this 2nd day of August 2021.
   READ, ADOPTED AND APPROVED this 16th day of August 2021.
   Published August 20, 2021.
               ________________________________________
                  JEFFREY H. GREGORY, MAYOR
ATTESTED TO:
___________________________________
JESSICA J. GRAHAM, CITY CLERK
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Short titles of ordinances
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Rules of construction
   
10.04   Computation of time
   
10.05   Writings and signatures
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Revivor
   
10.08   Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance
   
10.09   Construction of section references
   
10.10   Ordinances repealed
   
10.11   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.12   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.13   Reference to offices
   
10.14   Errors and omissions
   
10.15   Historical and statutory references
   
10.16   Adoption of standard codes by reference
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city as referenced,
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections shall be known and designated as the
“Elizabethtown Code of Ordinances”. Code, title, chapter and section headings
do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
(KRS 446.140) (Prior Code, § 10.01)
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTION. Includes all proceedings in any court of the state or City Council,
boards or commissions.
(KRS 446.010(1))
   ANIMAL. Includes every warm-blooded living creature, except a human being.
(KRS 446.010(2))
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. When used in this code, shall
denote the City of Elizabethtown, irrespective of its population or legal
classification.
   COMPANY and CORPORATIONS. May extend and be applied to any corporation,
company, person, partnership, joint stock company or association.
(KRS 446.010(9); KRS 446.010(10))
   COUNCIL. The city legislative body.
(KRS 83A.010(5))
   COUNTY. Hardin County, Kentucky.
   DIRECTORS. When applied to corporations, includes managers or trustees.
(KRS 446.010(13))
   DOMESTIC. When applied to corporations, means all those incorporated or
formed by authority of the state.
(KRS 446.010(14))
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal converted to domestic habitat.
(KRS 446.010(15))
   EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY. The Mayor.
(KRS 83A.010(6))
   EXECUTIVE ORDER. An order issued by the Mayor which is binding upon the
officers and employees of the city and any governmental agency over which the
city has jurisdiction.
(KRS 83A.010(7))
   FEDERAL. Refers to the United States.
(KRS 446.010(17))
   FOREIGN. When applied to corporations, includes all those incorporated or
formed by authority of any other state.
(KRS 446.010(18))
   KAR. Kentucky Administrative Regulations.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   KRS. Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and all
rights thereto and interest therein, other than a chattel interest.
(KRS 446.010(23))
   LEGISLATIVE BODY. The City Council.
(KRS 91A.010(8))
   LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER. A City Council member.
(KRS 83A.010(8))
   LIVESTOCK. Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, alpacas, llamas, buffaloes
or any other animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine, equine or camelid
species.
(KRS 446.010(25))
   MISDEMEANOR. An offense for which the criminal fine cannot exceed the amount
set forth in KRS 534.040(2)(a), or a term of imprisonment not to exceed the
periods set forth in KRS 532.090(1), or both.
(KRS 83A.065)
   MUNICIPAL ORDER. An official act of the City Council which is binding upon
the officers and employees of the city and any governmental agency over which
the city has jurisdiction.
(KRS 83A.010(9))
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
   OATH. Includes AFFIRMATION in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath.
(KRS 446.010(28))
   OFFICER. Any person elected to a position by the voters or any person
appointed to a position which:
      (1)   Is created by the Constitution, the General Assembly or a city;
      (2)   Possesses a delegation of a portion of the sovereign power of
government;
      (3)   Has powers and duties to be discharged which are conferred directly
or by implication by the city;
      (4)   Has duties performed independently and without control of a
superior power other than the law;
      (5)   Has some permanency;
      (6)   Requires an official oath;
      (7)   Is assigned by a commission or other written authority; and
      (8)   Provides for an official bond if required by proper authority.
(KRS 83A.010(10))
   ORDINANCE. An official action of a city legislative body, which is a
regulation of a general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local law or
is an appropriation of money.
(KRS 83A.010(11))
   PEACE OFFICER. Includes sheriffs, constables, coroners, jailers,
metropolitan and urban-county government correctional officers, marshals,
police officers and other persons with similar authority to make arrests.
(KRS 446.010(31))
   PERSON. May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and corporate,
societies, communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships,
registered limited liability partnerships, joint stock companies and limited
liability companies.
(KRS 446.010(33))
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property, except real.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county, state
or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale
of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGULAR ELECTION. The election in even numbered years at which members of
Congress are elected and the election in odd-numbered years at which state
officers are elected.
(KRS 446.010(37))
   SWORN. Includes AFFIRMED in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath.
(KRS 446.010(43))
   STATE. The State of Kentucky.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the city.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such
premises, alone or with others.
   VACANCY IN OFFICE. Such as exists when there is an unexpired part of a term
of office without a lawful incumbent therein, or when the person elected or
appointed to an office fails to qualify according to law, or when there has
been no election to fill the office at the time appointed by law; it applies
whether the vacancy is occasioned by death, resignation, removal from the
state, county, city or district, or otherwise.
(KRS 446.010(46))
   VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with.
(KRS 446.010(47))
   VIOLATION. An offense for which the criminal fine cannot exceed the amount
set forth in KRS 534.040(2)(c).
(KRS 83A.065)
   YEAR. Calendar year.
(KRS 446.010(49))
(Prior Code, § 10.02)
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Singular includes plural. A word importing the singular number only
may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one
person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be
applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things.
(KRS 446.020(1))
   (B)   Masculine includes feminine. A word importing the masculine gender
only shall extend and be applied to females as well as males.
(KRS 446.020(2))
   (C)   Liberal construction. All sections of this code shall be liberally
construed with a view to promote their objects and carry out the intent of
Council.
(KRS 446.080(1))
   (D)   Retroactivity. No ordinance shall be construed to be retroactive,
unless expressly so declared.
(KRS 446.080(3))
   (E)   Technical terms. All words and phrases shall be construed according to
the common and approved usage of language, but technical words and phrases and
such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law,
shall be construed according to such meaning.
(KRS 446.080(4))
   (F)   Exact wording of ordinances. From and after the passage, approval and
publication of this section.
      (1)   The exact wording of all ordinances as appear in this code of
ordinances have been edited by the publisher and many non-essential words and
phrases contained in the original signed and attested ordinance do not appear
therein.
      (2)   For the exact wording of all ordinances, reference is made in the
histories and parallel references to the original ordinance filed and
maintained in the City Clerk’s office at the City Hall.
(Prior Code, § 10.03) (Ord. passed 6-6-1988)
§ 10.04 COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order of
court, or by any applicable ordinance or regulation, the day of the act, event
or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be
included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it
is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday or a day on which the public office in
which a document is required to be filed is actually and legally closed, in
which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not one of
the days just mentioned. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less
than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be
excluded in the computation.
   (B)   When an ordinance, regulation or order of court requires an act to be
done either a certain time before an event or a certain time before the day on
which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be excluded in computing the
time. If the day thereby computed on which or by which the act is required to
be done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or a day on which the public
office in which the act is required to be completed is actually and legally
closed, the act may be done on the next day which is none of the days just
mentioned.
   (C)   If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act is
directed to be done, on a particular day of a month and that day is Sunday, the
proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the next day that is
not a legal holiday.
(KRS 446.030)
   (D)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a reasonable
time or reasonable notice to be given, such REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE shall
mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty
or compliance with such notice.
(Prior Code, § 10.04)
§ 10.05 WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.
   (A)   When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party thereto,
it shall not be deemed to be signed unless the signature is subscribed at the
end or close of the writing.
   (B)   Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the English
language.
(KRS 446.060) (Prior Code, § 10.06)
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any part of any ordinance be held unconstitutional or unenforceable, the
remaining parts shall remain in force, unless the ordinance provides otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 10.07)
§ 10.07 REVIVOR.
   (A)    A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is revived when
the ordinance that repealed it is repealed by another ordinance enacted at the
same meeting of Council.
   (B)   A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived by the
enactment of a repealer of the ordinance that repealed it at the same or any
subsequent meeting of Council as long as it takes effect prior to the effective
date of the original repealer.
   (C)   An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to an amendment which is repealed at the same meeting of
Council which enacted the amendment.
   (D)   An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains unchanged
with respect to that amendment if the ordinance making the amendment is
repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of Council as long as the
repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of the original
amendment.
   (E)   No other action of Council repealing a repealer or an amendment shall
have the effect of reviving the original language of the repealer or amendment
as the case may be.
(KRS 446.100) (Prior Code, § 10.08)
§ 10.08 RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.
   No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to any
offense committed against a former ordinance, nor as to any act done, or
penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance
takes effect; except that, the proceedings thereafter had shall conform, so far
as practicable, to the laws in force at the time of such proceedings. If any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any provision of the new
ordinance, such provision may, by the consent of the party affected, be applied
to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance takes effect.
(KRS 446.110) (Prior Code, § 10.09)
§ 10.09 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, such reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(Prior Code, § 10.10)
§ 10.10 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 10.11)
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication.
   (B)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
deemed to affect the validity of any of the following ordinances, and all such
ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect under
their own terms and conditions:
      (1)   Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for
the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or evidence of
the city’s indebtedness;
      (2)   Any ordinance authorizing the borrowing of funds on behalf of the
city;
      (3)   Any ordinance authorizing the execution of any contract, deed,
lease or other legal instrument;
      (4)   Any ordinance authorizing the purchase or sale of property or the
expenditure of city funds;
      (5)   Any appropriation or apportionment or ordinance providing for an
annual budget;
      (6)   Any ordinance authorizing the transfer of city funds;
      (7)   Any ordinance granting any franchise or other right;
      (8)   Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or reducing the city
limits;
      (9)   Any zoning or subdivision ordinance;
      (10)   Any ordinance providing for the appointment or salary of city
employees, not in conflict herewith;
      (11)   Any ordinance opening, closing, accepting, improving or providing
for the grade of any street or other public way;
      (12)   Any ordinance establishing for the purpose of promoting public
projects;
      (13)   Any ordinance levying or establishing any tax;
      (14)   Any ordinance establishing rates, fees and charges for any city
utility; or
      (15)   Any ordinance establishing rules and procedures for service by any
city utility.
(Prior Code, § 10.12)
§ 10.12 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   Any chapter, section or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance with
the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. Any
chapter, section or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded
from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent ordinances as
printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances
until Council shall adopt a new code of ordinances.
   (B)   The method of amendment set forth by city ordinance should be used by
the city to amend, add or repeal a chapter, section or division of this code of
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 10.13)
§ 10.13 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
(Prior Code, § 10.14)
§ 10.14 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be
corrected, and the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of such error.
(Prior Code, § 10.15)
§ 10.15 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a KRS cite is included in the history, this indicates that
the text of the section reads word-for-word the same as the statute. Example:
(KRS 83A.090) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   If a KRS cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that
statute for further information. Example:
         § 31.10 MAYOR.
         The executive authority of the city shall be vested
          in and exercised by the Mayor.
         (Ord. 10, passed 1-1-1980)
         Statutory reference:
            Powers and duties of the Mayor, see KRS 83A130
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city, the prior code section number shall be indicated in the
history by “(Prior Code, §             )”.
(Prior Code, § 10.16)
§ 10.16 ADOPTION OF STANDARD CODES BY REFERENCE.
   The Council may adopt the provisions of any local, statewide or nationally
recognized standard code and codifications of entire bodies of local
legislation by an ordinance that identifies the subject matter by title, source
and date and incorporates the adopted provisions by reference without setting
them out in full, if a copy accompanies the adopting ordinance and is made a
part of the permanent records of the city.
(KRS 83A060(5)) (Prior Code, § 10.17)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with
any prohibited act of this code and when no specific penalty is provided, the
violation of any provision of this code shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall
be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500; provided that, the fine for an
offense under this code shall not be less than, nor greater than, the fine
imposed by any state statute for the same offense. Each day any violation of
any provision of this code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Applicable court costs shall be added in every case.
   (B)   Whenever it is allowed by a subject ordinance, enforcement may be
taken through the Code Enforcement Board, per ordinance enacted on 4-30-2003 by
Ord. 09-2003.
(Prior Code, § 10.99) (Ord 13-2003, passed 6-16-2003)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
32.   CITY COUNCIL
      
33.   CODE OF ETHICS
      
34.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
35.   PUBLIC SAFETY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
      
36.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
37.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN
Section
   
30.01   Form of government
   
30.02   Governing officers
   
30.03   Salaries of elected officers
§ 30.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government provided for the city shall be known as the “Mayor-
Council Plan”.
(Prior Code, § 30.01)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see KRS 83A.130(1)
§ 30.02 GOVERNING OFFICERS.
   (A)   The city shall be governed by an elected executive, who shall be
called Mayor, and by an elected legislative body, which shall be called the
City Council, and by such other officers and employees as are provided for by
statute or city ordinance.
   (B)   The City Council shall be composed of six members.
(Prior Code, § 30.02)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see KRS 83A.030(1) and (2)
§ 30.03 SALARIES OF ELECTED OFFICERS.
   The salaries of elected officers are set out from time to time by City
Council.
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Oath; bond
   
31.02   Compensation
Elected Officials
   
31.15   Election procedure
   
31.16   Mayor; term of office
   
31.17   Council members
Non-Elected Officials
   
31.30   Establishment of non-elected city offices
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 OATH; BOND.
   (A)   Oath. Each officer of the city shall, before entering upon the
discharge of duties of the office, take the following oath: “I do solemnly
swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the Constitution of
this Commonwealth, and the Constitution of the United States, and be faithful
and true to the Commonwealth of Kentucky, so long as I continue a citizen
thereof, and that I will faithfully execute, to the best of my ability, the
office of                                       , according to law; and I do
further solemnly swear (or affirm) that, since the adoption of the present
Constitution, I being a citizen of this United States, have not fought a duel
with deadly weapons within this State, nor out of it, nor have I sent or
accepted a challenge to fight a duel with deadly weapons, nor have I acted as a
second in carrying a challenge, nor aided or assisted any person thus
offending, so help me God”, as established by § 228 of the Kentucky
Constitution.
   (B)   Certification. Certification of the person administering the oath of
office to an elected official shall certify in writing that the oath was
administered and the date of its administration. Said certification shall be
filed in accordance with KRS 62.020.
   (C)   Bond.
      (1)   All officers, officials and employees of cities, counties, urban
county governments, charter county governments, and special districts who
handle public funds in the execution of their duties shall give a good and
sufficient bond to the local governing body for the faithful and honest
performance of his or her duties and as security for all money coming into that
person’s hands or under that person’s control. The bond amount shall be based
upon the maximum amount of public funds the officer, official or employee
handles at any given time during a fiscal year cycle. The local governing body
shall pay the cost of the bond.
      (2)   Elected officials who post bond as required by statute, and
employees of their offices covered by a blanket or umbrella bond, shall be
deemed to have complied with division (C)(1) above.
(Prior Code, § 31.01)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see KRS 61.100
§ 31.02 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   City Council shall establish the compensation of every elected city
officer not later than the first Monday in May in the year in which the officer
is elected. An elected officer’s compensation shall not be changed after the
election or during the term of office.
      (1)   An elected officer’s compensation shall not be changed after the
election or during the term of office, except to equate the compensation of
Mayors and Council members with the purchasing power of the dollar. The
Department for Local Government computes by the second Friday in February of
every year the annual increase or decrease in the consumer price index of the
preceding year by using 1949 as the base year in accordance with § 246 of the
Constitution of the commonwealth.
      (2)   The City Council shall set the compensation of these officers in
accordance with KRS 83A.070 at a rate no greater than that stipulated by the
Department for Local Government.
   (B)   The City Council shall fix the compensation of each appointed city
officer by ordinance and may change it by ordinance.
   (C)   The City Council shall establish the compensation of city employees in
accordance with the personnel and pay classification plan of the city.
   (D)   All fees and commissions authorized by law shall be paid into the city
treasury for the benefit of the city and shall not be retained by any officer
or employee.
(Prior Code, § 31.02)
Statutory reference:
   Compensation, see KRS 83A.070 and 83A.075
ELECTED OFFICIALS
§ 31.15 ELECTION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The city hereby determines that the nomination and election of
candidates for Mayor and City Council shall be elected on a nonpartisan basis
in the general election in November, every four years in the case of the Mayor,
beginning with 1998, and every two years beginning in 1996 for members of City
Council. The city hereby elects to forego conducting a nonpartisan primary
election for the nomination of candidates for Mayor and City Council,
regardless of the number of candidates running for the offices.
   (B)   All candidates for election to the office of Mayor and for Council
members for the six seats on the City Council shall file nomination papers with
the County Clerk no earlier than the first Wednesday after the first Monday in
November of the year preceding the year in which the office will appear on the
ballot and not later than the first Tuesday after the first Monday in June
before the day fixed by KRS Ch. 118 for holding a regular election for the
office. The nomination papers shall be filed not later than 4:00 p.m. local
time, when filed as provided by the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   (C)   The election of Mayor and Council members shall be governed by state
law.
(Prior Code, § 31.20)
Statutory reference:
   Creation, abolishment of city offices, see KRS 83A.080(3), (4)
   Election of city officers, see KRS 83A
§ 31.16 MAYOR; TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Election; term of office. The Mayor of the city shall be elected by
the voters of the city at a regular election. A candidate for Mayor shall be a
resident of the city for not less than one year prior to the election. The term
of office begins on the first day of January following the election and shall
be for four years and until a successor qualifies.
   (B)   Qualifications. The Mayor shall be at least 21 years of age, shall be
a qualified voter in the city and shall reside in the city throughout the term
of office.
   (C)   Vacancy. If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, it shall be
filled according to the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   (D)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The executive authority of the city is hereby vested in and shall
be exercised by the Mayor. The Mayor shall enforce the Mayor-Council Plan, city
ordinances and orders, and all applicable statutes. The Mayor shall supervise
all departments of city government and the conduct of all city officers and
employees under their jurisdiction and require each department to make reports
to the Mayor as required by ordinance or as the Mayor deems desirable.
      (2)   The Mayor shall maintain liaison with related units of local
government respecting interlocal contracting and joint activities.
      (3)   The Mayor shall report to the Council and to the public on the
condition and needs of city government as the Mayor finds appropriate or as
required by ordinance, but not less than annually. The Mayor shall make any
recommendations for actions by the Council found in the public interest.
      (4)   Subject to disapproval of the Council, the Mayor shall promulgate
procedures to ensure orderly administration of the functions of city government
and compliance with statutes or ordinances. Upon promulgation or upon revision
or rescission of the procedures, copies shall be filed with the person
responsible for maintaining city records.
      (5)   Any delegation of the Mayor’s power, duties or responsibilities to
subordinate officers and employees and any expression of official authority to
fulfill executive functions shall be made by executive order. Executive orders
shall be sequentially numbered by years and kept in a permanent file.
      (6)   All bonds, notes, contracts and written obligations of the city
shall be made and executed by the Mayor or agent designated by executive order.
      (7)   The Mayor shall be the appointing authority with power to appoint
and remove all city employees, including police officers, except as tenure and
terms of employment are protected by statute, ordinance or contract and except
for employees of the Council.
      (8)   The Mayor shall provide for the orderly continuation of the
functions of city government at any time he or she is unable to attend to the
duties of office by delegating responsibility for any function to be performed,
in accordance with division (D)(5) above. However, the Mayor may not delegate
the responsibility of presiding at meetings of the Council, and the authority
to approve ordinances or promulgate administrative procedures may only be
delegated to an elected officer. With approval of the Council, the Mayor may
rescind any action taken in the Mayor’s absence under this section within 30
days of such action. If, for any reason, the disability of the Mayor to attend
to the Mayor’s duties persists for 60 consecutive days, the office of Mayor may
be declared vacant by a majority vote of the Council and the provisions of
division (C) above shall apply.
      (9)   The Mayor of the city, in addition to the powers otherwise set out
by ordinances, state statute or state constitution shall have the power to take
immediate steps wherein he or she deems that an emergency exists; this
includes, but is not limited to, acts of God, and the threat of immediate
damage to persons or property which exists because of fire, inclement weather,
chemicals, bacteria or other causes, or where life or property of citizens of
the city is found to be threatened. The Mayor may determine that an emergency
exists and/or that a curfew should be imposed and the same shall be enforced by
the Mayor through any and all the city departments. No prior notice shall be
required under this section. However, an announcement should be made as public
as possible under the circumstances as determined by the Mayor. Violators of
such declaration of the Mayor shall be deemed an emergency and all violators or
perpetrators who violate any curfew or other order shall be arrested,
incarcerated and punished according to this division (D)(9), determined by the
Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 31.21) (Ord. 29-2012, passed 12-17-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see KRS 83A.040(1), (3), (4), (7), (8), (9), (10)
§ 31.17 COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   For provisions concerning City Council, see Ch. 32 of this code of
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 31.22)
NON-ELECTED CITY OFFICIALS
§ 31.30 ESTABLISHMENT OF NON-ELECTED CITY OFFICES.
   (A)   The following are non-elected city offices:
      (1)   City Attorney;
      (2)   City Clerk;
      (3)   City Administrator;
      (4)   Finance Director;
      (5)   City Treasurer;
      (6)   Director of Planning and Development;
      (7)   Police Chief;
      (8)   Fire Chief;
      (9)   Director of Engineering;
      (10)   Director of Public Works;
      (11)   Director of Wastewater Treatment;
      (12)   Director of Parks and Recreation;
      (13)   Director of Natural Gas System Manager/Engineer;
      (14)   Director of Storm Water Management;
      (15)   Director of Facilities Management; and
      (16)   City Alcohol Beverage Control Administrator.
   (B)   The duties and responsibilities of each city officer shall include,
but are not limited to, all requirements of state statutes, city ordinances,
and the officer’s job description. Copies of job descriptions are on file at
the city’s personnel office.
   (C)   Compensation shall be as established by the City Council as set forth
in §
31.02 of this chapter.
   (D)   Each non-elected officer shall take the oath of office as required by
state statute.
   (E)   All non-elected city officers shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of City Council.
   (F)   All non-elected officers may be removed by the Mayor at will unless
otherwise provided by statute or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 31.35) (Ord. 07-2006, passed 3-6-2006; Ord. 01-2009, passed 1-
20-2009; Ord. 30-2012, passed 12-17-2012; Ord. 10-2016, passed 6-20-2016; Ord.
09-2018, passed 2-20-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Non-elected city offices, see KRS 83A.080(1), (2)
CHAPTER 32: CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Members; election, qualifications, compensation
   
32.02   Vacancies
   
32.03   Powers and duties
Rules of Procedure
   
32.15   Mayor as presiding officer
   
32.16   Meetings
   
32.17   Quorum
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 MEMBERS; ELECTION, QUALIFICATIONS, COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Election; term of office. Each Council member shall be elected at-
large by the voters of the city at a regular election. A candidate for City
Council shall be a resident of the city for not less than one year prior to the
election. Terms of office begin on the first day of January following the
election and shall be for two years.
   (B)   Qualifications. A member shall be at least 18 years of age, shall be a
qualified voter in the city and shall reside in the city throughout the term of
office.
   (C)   Compensation. For provisions concerning compensation, see §
31.02 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 32.01) (Ord. 29-2012, passed 12-17-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see KRS 83A.040(4)
§ 32.02 VACANCIES.
   Vacancies on the Council shall be filled according to KRS 83A.175.
(Prior Code, § 32.02)
§ 32.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The legislative authority of the city is hereby vested in and shall be
exercised by the elected Council of the city. The Council may not perform any
executive functions, except those functions assigned to it by statute.
   (B)   The Council shall establish all appointive offices and the duties and
responsibilities of those offices and codes, rules and regulations for the
public health, safety and welfare.
   (C)   The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for sufficient revenue to
operate city government and shall appropriate the funds of the city in a budget
which provides for the orderly management of city resources.
   (D)   The Council may investigate all activities of city government. The
Council may require any city officer or employee to prepare and submit to it
sworn statements regarding the performance of his or her official duties. Any
statement required by the Council to be submitted or any investigation
undertaken by the Council, if any office, department or agency under the
jurisdiction of the Mayor is involved, shall not be submitted or undertaken
unless and until written notice of the Council’s action is given to the Mayor.
The Mayor may review any statement before submission to the Council and to
appear personally or through his or her designee on behalf of any department,
office or agency in the course of any investigation.
(Prior Code, § 32.03)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see KRS 83A.130(11), (12), (13)
RULES OF PROCEDURE
§ 32.15 MAYOR AS PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   Pursuant to KRS Ch. 83A, the duly elected Mayor shall preside at
regular and special meetings of the City Council. Further, in the event of a
regular or special meeting of the City Council, and the Mayor is absent, a
presider will be selected on a rotating basis from a list of Council members
who want to preside and who are in attendance at the meeting. That Council
member shall not lose his or her vote on action taken by the City Council.
   (B)   The Mayor may participate in Council proceedings, but shall not have a
vote, except when casting the deciding vote in case of a tie.
(Prior Code, § 32.20) (Ord. passed 7-19-1982)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see KRS 83A.130(5)
§ 32.16 MEETINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held for the
purpose of the conduct of business of the City Council and the schedule shall
be made available to the public at the City Clerk’s office, City Hall, upon
request.
      (2)   The regular meetings shall be held on the first and third Mondays
of each month at 4:30 p.m., local time.
      (3)   In addition, work sessions of the City Council shall be held on the
second and fourth Monday, at 4:30 p.m. local time, for the purpose of
discussion and consideration of the business of the city.
       (4)   Except as determined by executive authority, meetings of the City
Council shall be held at the Pritchard Community Center, 404 South Mulberry
Street, Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
      (5)   Whenever any regular Council meeting (Monday meetings) falls on a
holiday, the meeting shall be held automatically on the following day at the
same time and at the same place.
   (B)   (1)   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or
upon written request of a majority of the Council.
      (2)   In the call, the Mayor or Council shall designate the purpose, time
and place of the special meeting with sufficient notice for the attendance of
Council members and for compliance with KRS Ch. 61.
   (C)   At a special meeting, no business may be considered other than that
set forth in the designation of purpose.
   (D)   The minutes of every meeting shall be signed by the person responsible
for maintaining city records and by the officer presiding at the meeting.
(Prior Code, § 32.21) (Ord. passed 1-1-1952; Ord. passed 10-25-1982; Ord. 3-
1990, passed 2-5-1990; Ord. 31-1991, passed 8-19-1991; Ord. 22-2023, passed 9-
18-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see KRS 83A.130(11)
§ 32.17 QUORUM.
   Unless otherwise provided by statute, a majority of the Council constitutes
a quorum and a vote of a majority of a quorum is sufficient to take action.
(Prior Code, § 32.22)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see KRS 83A.060(6)
CHAPTER 33: CODE OF ETHICS
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Definitions
Standards of Conduct
   
33.15   Conflicts of interest
   
33.16   Conflicts of interest in contracts
   
33.17   Withdrawal from participation
   
33.18   Receipts of gifts
   
33.19   Use of city resources
   
33.20   Misuse of confidential information
   
33.21   Political solicitation
   
33.22   Patronage
   
33.23   Honoraria
   
33.24   Endorsements
   
33.25   Complicity with or knowledge of other’s violations
   
33.26   Meeting attendance
Financial Disclosure
   
33.40   Who must file
   
33.41   When to file; amended statement
   
33.42   Financial statement form
   
33.43   Control of financial statements
   
33.44   Content of financial statement
   
33.45   Noncompliance with filing
   
33.46   Public viewing
   
33.47   Nepotism prohibited
Enforcement
   
33.60   County Board of Ethics
   
33.61   Training and education
   
33.62   Annual reports and review
   
33.63   Filing and investigation of complaints
   
33.64   Hearings
   
33.65   Appeals
   
33.66   Limitations of actions
   
33.67   Advisory opinions
   
33.68   Prohibited conduct against those who disclose violations
 
   
33.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF ETHICS. The "Hardin County Board of Ethics" which is created and
vested by this chapter with responsibility of enforcing the requirements of the
duly enacted city and county's Code of Ethics.
   BUSINESS. Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual,
holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust, professional service
corporation or any legal entity through which business is conducted for profit.
   CANDIDATE. Any individual who seeks nomination or election to a city or
county office. An individual is a CANDIDATE when the individual files a
notification and declaration for nomination for office with the County Clerk or
Secretary of State, or is nominated for office by a political party, or files a
declaration of intent to be a write-in candidate with the County Clerk or
Secretary of State.
   CITY. The Cities of Elizabethtown, Radcliff, Vine Grove and West Point,
Kentucky.
   CITY OR COUNTY AGENCY. Any board, commission, authority, non-stock
corporation or other entity created, either individually or jointly, by the
city or county.
   CITY BUSINESS. Any discussion of specific city issues that goes beyond
general information.
   CLERK. The administrative official designated as the custodian of its
records by the county's Board of Ethics which shall be the Hardin County Court
Clerk unless the Hardin County Court Clerk disqualifies in any matter pending
before the Board of Ethics in writing to the Chairperson of the Board of
Ethics. Such disqualification shall be mandatory in any Board of Ethics matter
directly involving the Hardin County Clerk and shall be permissive in any Board
of Ethics matter directly involving a county elected official, county appointed
official or county employee. In the event of such disqualification, the
Chairperson of the Board of Ethics shall appoint one of the city clerks to act
as custodian of records for the matter.
   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Information obtained in the course of holding
public office or employment, or as a contractor to the city which is not
available to members of the public and which the officer or employee is not
authorized to disclose except to designated individuals or bodies, including
written and non-written information. When such information is also available
through channels open to the public, officers and employees are not prohibited
from disclosing the availability of those channels.
   CONSULTANT. An independent contractor, professional person, or entity
engaged by the city or advising a city officer, and in a position to influence
a city decision or action or having access to confidential information.
   COUNTY. Hardin County, Kentucky.
   DOMESTIC PARTNER. An adult, unrelated by blood, with whom an unmarried or
separated officer or employee has an exclusive committed relationship,
maintains a mutual residence, and shares basic living expenses.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person, whether full time or part time, and whether paid or
unpaid, who is employed by or provides service to the city or county. The term
EMPLOYEE shall not include any contractor or subcontractor or any of their
employees.
   FINANCIAL BENEFIT. Any money, service, license, permit, contract,
authorization, loan, discount, travel, entertainment, hospitality, gratuity,
any promise of any of these, or anything else of value. This term does not
include legal campaign contributions.
   FINANCIAL INTEREST. A relationship to something where a direct or indirect
financial benefit has been, will be, or might be received as a result of the
relationship.
   HOUSEHOLD. Anyone whose primary residence is in the officer's or employee's
home, including nonrelatives who are not paying rent, or staff.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER. A spouse, domestic partner, and whether by blood,
adoption, marriage, guardianship, or domestic partnership, an unemancipated
child residing in the officer's or employee's household, or a person claimed by
the officer or employee or the officer's or employee's spouse as a dependent
for tax purposes.
   OFFICER. Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether paid or
unpaid, who is one of the following:
      (1)   The Mayor;
      (2)   A legislative body member;
      (3)   County Clerk;
      (4)   Circuit Court Clerk;
      (5)   County Attorney;
      (6)   Jailer;
      (7)   Coroner;
      (8)   Surveyor;
      (9)   Constable;
      (10)   Sheriff;
      (11)   County Judge Executive;
      (12)   Any person who occupies a non-elected office created under KRS
83A.080; and
      (13)   Property Value Administrator.
   OFFICIAL ACT. Any legislative, administrative, appointive, or discretionary
act of any public official or employee of the city or any agency, board,
committee, or commission thereof.
   PERSONAL BENEFIT. Includes benefits other than those that are directly
financially advantageous. These include financial benefits to immediate family
members, business associates, as well as non-financial benefits to these people
and to oneself.
   PERSONAL INTEREST. A relationship to something where a personal benefit has
been or reasonably will be obtained by certain action or inaction with respect
to it.
   SUBORDINATE. Another official or employee over whose activities an official
or employee has direction, supervision, or control.
   TRANSACTION. Any matter, including but not limited to contracts, work,
business with the city, the sale or purchase of real estate by the city, and
any request for zoning amendments, variances, or special permits pending before
the city, upon which a public officer or employee performs an official act or
action.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
§ 33.15 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   Every officer and employee of the city shall comply with the following
standards of conduct:
   (A)   No officer, employee, board or commission member, nor any immediate
family member of any officer, employee or board or commission member, shall
have an interest in a business or engage in any business, transaction or
activity, which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of the
officer's, employee's, board or commission member's public duties.
   (B)   No officer, employee, board or commission member shall intentionally
use or attempt to use his or her official position with the city to secure
unwarranted privileges or advantages for himself or herself or others.
   (C)   No city government officer, employee, board or commission member shall
act in his or her official capacity in any matter where he or she, a member of
his or her immediate family or a business organization in which he or she has
an interest, has a direct or indirect financial or personal involvement that
might reasonably be expected to impair his or her objectivity or independence
of judgment.
   (D)   No city government officer, employee, board or commission member shall
undertake any employment or service, compensated or not, which might reasonably
be expected to prejudice his or her independence of judgment in the exercise of
his or her official duties.
   (E)   Every officer, employee, board or commission member who has a
prohibited financial interest which the officer, employee, board or commission
member believes or has reason to believe may be affected by his or her
participation, vote, decision or other action taken within the scope of his or
her public duties shall disclose the interest to the governing body of the city
or city agency served by the officer, employee, board or commission member and
the disclosure shall be entered on the official record of the proceedings of
the governing body. The officer, employee, board or commission member shall
refrain from taking any action with respect to the matter that is the subject
of the disclosure.
   (F)   No city government officer, employee, board or commission member or
member of his or her immediate family, or business organization in which he has
an interest, shall solicit or accept any gift, favor, loan, political
contribution, service, promise of future employment, or other thing of value
based upon an understanding that the gift, favor, loan, contribution, service,
promise or other thing of value was given or offered for the purpose of
influencing him or her, directly or indirectly, in the discharge of his or her
official duties. This provision shall not apply to the solicitation or
acceptance of contributions to the campaign of an announced candidate for
elective public office of government by the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   (G)   No city government officer, employee, board or commission member shall
be prohibited from giving or receiving an award publicly presented in
recognition of public service, or reasonable hosting, including travel and
expenses, entertainment, meals or refreshments furnished in connection with
public events, appearances, ceremonies or fact-finding trips related to
official city government business, or commercially reasonable loans made in the
ordinary course of a lender's business.
   (H)   No city government officer shall be prohibited from accepting a
gratuity for solemnizing a marriage.
   (I)   No city government officer, employee, board or commission member, or
business organization in which he or she has an interest shall represent any
person or party other than the local government in connection with any cause,
proceeding, application or other matter pending before any agency in the local
government in which he or she serves.
   (J)   No city government officer shall be deemed in conflict with these
provisions if, by reason of his or her participation in the enactment of any
ordinance, resolution or other matter required to be voted upon or which is
subject to executive approval or veto, no material or monetary gain accrues to
him or her as a member of any business, profession, occupation or group, to any
greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to accrue to any
other member of such business, profession, occupation or group.
   (K)   No elected city government officer shall be prohibited from making an
inquiry for information or providing assistance on behalf of a constituent, if
no fee, reward or other thing of value is promised to, given to or accepted by
the officer or a member of his or her immediate family, whether directly or
indirectly, in return therefor.
   (L)   Nothing shall prohibit any city government officer, employee, board or
commission member or members of his or her immediate family, from representing
himself, herself or themselves, in negotiations or proceedings concerning his,
her or their own interests.
   (M)   No officer, employee, board or commission member shall be deemed in
violation of any provision of this section it by reason of the officer's,
employee's, board or commission member's participation, vote, decision, action
or inaction, no financial benefit accrues to the officer, employee, board or
commission member, a family member, an outside employer or a business in which
the officer, employee, board or commission member, or any family member has a
financial interest, or any business with which the officer, employee, board or
commission member, or any family member is negotiating or seeking prospective
employment, or other business or professional relationship, as a member of any
business, occupation, profession or other group, to any greater extent than any
gain could reasonably be expected to accrue to any other member of the
business, occupation, profession or other group.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.16 CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS IN CONTRACTS.
   (A)   No officer, employee, board or commission member of the city shall
directly or through others undertake, execute, hold or enjoy, in whole or in
part, any contract made, entered into, awarded or granted by the city or a city
agency, except as follows:
      (1)   The prohibition in division (A) above shall not apply to contracts
entered into before an elected officer filed as a candidate for city office,
before an appointed officer was appointed to a city or city agency office, or
before an employee was hired by the city or city agency. However, if any
contract entered into by a city or city agency and the officer, employee, board
or commission member, before he or she became a candidate, was appointed to
office, or was hired as an employee, is renewable after he or she becomes a
candidate, assumes the appointed office, or is hired as an employee, then the
prohibition in division (A) above shall apply to the renewal of the contract.
      (2)   (a)   The prohibition in division (A) above shall not apply if the
contract is awarded after public notice and competitive bidding, unless the
officer, employee, board or commission member is authorized to participate in
establishing the contract specifications, awarding the contract or managing
contract performance after the contract is awarded.
         (b)   If the officer, employee, board or commission member has any of
the authorities set forth in the preceding sentence, then the officer,
employee, board or commission member shall have no interest in the contract,
unless the requirements set forth below are also satisfied:
            1.   The specific nature of the contract transaction and the nature
of the officer's, employee's, board or commission member's interest in the
contract are publicly disclosed at a meeting of the governing body of the city
or county, or city or county agency and refrain from participating in voting;
            2.   The disclosure is made a part of the official record of the
governing body of the city or city agency before the contract is executed;
            3.   A finding is made by the governing body of the city or city
agency that the contract with the officer, employee, board or commission member
is in the best interest of the public and the city or city agency because of
price, limited supply or other specific reasons; and
            4.   The finding is made a part of the official record of the
governing body of the city or city agency before the contract is executed.
   (B)   Any violation of this section shall result in a civil fine payable to
the Commission not to exceed $500. Additionally, a violation of this section
shall be grounds for a recommendation of removal from office or employment with
the city or county in accordance with any applicable provisions of state law
and ordinances, rules or regulations of the city or county.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.17 WITHDRAWAL FROM PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   An officer or employee must refrain from acting on or discussing,
formally or informally, a matter before the city if acting on the matter or
failing to act on the matter may personally or financially benefit the officer,
employee or a member of the officer or employee's immediate family member as
defined in this chapter. Such officer or employee should leave the room if it
is a public meeting conducted under KRS 61.810 and KRS 61.815.
   (B)   Withdrawal at a meeting requires public announcement, on the record,
of the reason for withdrawal.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.18 RECEIPT OF GIFTS.
   No officer, employee, board or commission member of the city or any city
agency shall directly or indirectly through any other person or business,
solicit or accept any gift having a fair market value of more than $200,
whether in the form of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment,
hospitality, thing or promise, or any other form, under circumstances in which
it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence, or
could reasonably be expected to influence the officer, employee, board or
commission member in the performance of his or her public duties. Certain items
are typically excluded from the prohibition. Examples of these items include
but are not limited to:
   (A)   Gifts received from family members.
   (B)   Gifts accepted on behalf of the city and transferred to the city.
   (C)   Reasonable travel and travel-related expenses, cost of admission,
food, beverages, and entertainment furnished in connection with certain
specified public events, appearances, ceremonies, economic development
activities, or fact-finding trips related to official government business.
   (D)   Usual and customary loans made in the ordinary course of business.
   (E)   Awards, including certificates, plaques, and commemorative tokens
presented in recognition of public service.
   (F)   Informational, promotional, and educational items.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.19 USE OF CITY RESOURCES.
   No officer, employee, board or commission member of the city shall use or
permit the use of any city time, funds, personnel, equipment or other personal
or real property for the private use of any person, unless:
   (A)   The use is specifically authorized by a stated city policy; or
   (B)   The use is available to the general public, and then only to the
extent and upon the terms that the use is available to the general public.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.20 MISUSE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   No officer, employee, board or commission member of the city or any
city agency shall intentionally use or disclose information acquired in the
course of his or her official duties, if the primary purpose of the use or
disclosure is to further his or her personal financial interest or that of
another person or business.
   (B)   Information shall be deemed confidential, if it is not subject to
disclosure pursuant to the state's Open Records Law, KRS 61.872 to 61.884, at
the time of its use or disclosure.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.21 POLITICAL SOLICITATION.
   (A)   An officer, employee, or municipal candidate may not request or
authorize anyone else to request that any subordinate or potential future
subordinate, participate or not participate in any political activity,
including the making of a campaign contribution.
   (B)   An officer, employee, or municipal candidate may not engage in any
political activity for the city while on duty, in uniform, using city funds,
supplies, vehicles, or facilities during any period of time during which they
are normally expected to perform services for the city for which compensation
is paid.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.22 PATRONAGE.
   No officer or employee may promise an appointment or use their influence to
obtain an appointment to any position as a reward for any political activity or
contribution.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.23 HONORARIA.
   (A)   No officer, employee, board or commission member of the city or a city
agency shall accept any compensation, honorarium or gift with a fair market
value greater than $200 in consideration of an appearance, speech or article
unless the appearance, speech or article is both related to the officer's,
employee's, board or commission member's activities outside of government
service and is unrelated to the officer's, employee's, board or commission
member's service with the city or county.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an officer, employee, board or
commission member of the city from receiving and retaining from the city or on
behalf of the city actual and reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the
officer, employee, board or commission member in connection with an appearance,
speech or article, provided that the officer, employee, board or commission
member can show by clear and convincing evidence that the expenses were
incurred or received on behalf of the city or city agency, and primarily for
the benefit of the city and not primarily for the benefit of the officer,
employee, board or commission member or any other person.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.24 ENDORSEMENTS.
   (A)   No officer or employee in their official capacity may publicly endorse
products or services for their own personal or financial interest or for their
family member's personal or financial interest.
   (B)   However, this does not prohibit an officer or employee from answering
inquiries by other governmental officials, consumer organizations, or product
information services regarding products or services.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.25 COMPLICITY WITH OR KNOWLEDGE OF OTHER'S VIOLATIONS.
   No officer or employee may directly or indirectly induce, encourage, or aid
anyone to violate any provision of this code. If an officer or employee knows
or has reasonable suspicion to believe that someone has violated this code,
they are required to report it to the Ethics Board pursuant to §
33.63.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.26 MEETING ATTENDANCE.
   All elected city officers and members of city boards and commissions are
expected to attend their meetings. It is a violation of this code to miss more
than one-third (33%) of the meetings in a 12-month period, absent a valid
reason.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
§ 33.40 WHO MUST FILE.
   The following shall file an annual statement of financial interests with the
Board of Ethics:
   (A)   Elected city and county officials; and
   (B)   Candidates for elected city and county office.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.41 WHEN TO FILE; AMENDED STATEMENT.
   (A)   The initial statement of financial interests required by this section
shall be filed with the Board of Ethics, or the administrative official
designated in writing as the custodian of its records, no later than 4:00 p.m.
on April 15, 2026. All subsequent statements of financial interest shall be
filed no later than 4:00 p.m. on April 15 each year; provided that:
      (1)   A newly-appointed officer shall file his or her initial statement
no later than 30 days after the date of the appointment; and
      (2)   A candidate for city or county office shall file his or her initial
statement no later than 30 days after the date on which the person becomes a
candidate for elected city or county office. A write-in candidate shall file
within 24 hours from the date of the filing of his or her affidavit for write-
in candidacy.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics may grant a reasonable extension of time for
filing a statement of financial interests for good cause shown.
   (C)   In the event there is a material change in any information contained
in a financial statement that has been filed with the Board of Ethics, the
officer, employee, board or commission member shall, no later than one year
after becoming aware of material change, file an amended statement with the
Board of Ethics.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.42 FINANCIAL STATEMENT FORM.
   (A)   The statement of financial interests shall be filed on a form
prescribed by the Board of Ethics or the administrative official designated by
the Board of Ethics.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics, along with the Clerk, will annually review the
list of officials and employees required to file annual disclosure statements
to determine whether the lists are complete and accurate. Within 90 days after
it has been formed, and by February 1 each year thereafter, the Board of
Ethics, along with the Clerk (assisted by each city clerk), must create a list
of the names and offices or positions of all officials and employees and others
required to file annual disclosure statements pursuant to §
33.44; and notify all such persons of their obligation to file an annual
disclosure statement.
   (C)   The Board of Ethics or Clerk, as designated by the Board, shall
deliver a copy of the form to each officer and employee required to file the
statement by first class mail, email, or hand delivery no later than March 1 of
each year.
   (D)   The failure of the Board of Ethics or Clerk to deliver a copy of the
form to any officer or employee shall not relieve the officer or employee of
the obligation to file the statement.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.43 CONTROL OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics shall be the official custodian of the statements
of financial interests and shall have control over the maintenance of the
statements of financial interests. The statements of financial interests shall
be maintained by the Board of Ethics as the custodian, as public documents,
available for public inspection immediately upon filing.
   (B)   A statement of financial interests shall be retained by the Board of
Ethics, or the designated administrative official, for a period of five years
after filing; provided that:
      (1)   Upon the expiration of three years after a person ceases to be an
officer, employee, board or commission member of the city or county or city or
county agency, the Board of Ethics shall cause to be destroyed any statements
of financial interests or copies of those statements filed by the person; and
      (2)   Upon the expiration of three years after any election at which a
candidate for elected city or county office was not elected or nominated, the
Board of Ethics shall cause to be destroyed any statements of financial
interests or copies of those statements filed by the person.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.44 CONTENT OF FINANCIAL STATEMENT.
   (A)   The financial disclosure statement should be filed with the Board of
Ethics by all filers who are subject to the jurisdiction of the Board of
Ethics. Failure to do so will result in a civil fine of a maximum of $500
payable to the Board of Ethics.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any officer or
candidate to disclose any specific dollar amounts nor the names of individual
clients or customers of business listed as sources of income.
   (C)   Each statement shall be signed and dated by the individual filing the
statement of financial interest.
   (D)   The financial disclosure statement should include the following
information:
      (1)   Name of filer;
      (2)   Current business address, business telephone number and home
address of filer;
      (3)   Title of filer's public office or office sought;
      (4)   Occupations of filer and spouse;
      (5)   Position held by the filer and any member of the filer's immediate
family in any business organization or nonprofit entity from which the filer or
any member of the filer's immediate family received compensation in excess of
$10,000 during the preceding calendar year, and the name, address, and
telephone number of the business organization or non-profit entity;
      (6)   Name, address and telephone number of each source of income from
within the commonwealth of both filer and spouse which exceeded $10,000 during
the preceding calendar year;
      (7)   Name, address and telephone number of each business organization
located within the commonwealth in which the filer or any member of the filer's
immediate family had an interest of $10,000 at fair market value or 5%
ownership interest or more during the preceding calendar year;
      (8)   The location and type (commercial, residential, agricultural) of
all real property within the county, other than the filer's primary residence,
in which the filer or the filer's spouse had an interest of $10,000 or more
during the preceding calendar year; and
      (9)   Offices or directorships held by the officer, candidate, nominee,
employee, board or commission member or members of his or her immediate family
as of December 31 of the reporting year. Non-profit, charitable and religious
organizations shall be excluded from this disclosure.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.45 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH FILING.
   (A)   Each person required to file a statement of financial interests who
fails to file the statement by the due date, files an incomplete statement, or
files a statement in a form other than that prescribed by the Ethics Board
shall be notified of such by the Board or their designee. The notice shall
specify the type of failure or delinquency, shall establish a date by which the
failure or delinquency shall be remedied, and shall advise the person of the
penalties for a violation.
   (B)   Any person who fails or refuses to file the statement or remedy a
deficiency in the filing identified in the notice under division (A) within the
time established in the notice shall be guilty of a civil offense and shall be
subject to a civil fine imposed by the Ethics Board in an amount not to exceed
$25 per day, up to a maximum civil fine of $500. Any civil fine imposed by the
Ethics Board, under this section, may be recovered by the city or county in a
civil action in the nature of debt if the offender fails or refuses to pay the
penalty within a prescribed period of time.
   (C)   Any person who intentionally files a statement of financial interests
which they know to contain false information or intentionally omits required
information, shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to a maximum
civil fine of $500 and/or a referral and recommendation for prosecution for the
appropriate criminal offense.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.46 PUBLIC VIEWING.
   All financial disclosure statements shall be open records. Each individual
or organization requesting to view financial disclosure statements shall
complete a form giving full name, address, telephone number and organization/
individual represented if other than the individual making the request. One
copy of this form shall be attached to the statement so requested and shall
become a part of the record.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.47 NEPOTISM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Nepotism is prohibited and the city's personnel policies and
procedures shall specifically define the rules and regulations concerning
nepotism and enforcement.
   (B)   No officer, employee, board or commission member shall participate in
any action relating to the employment or discipline of a family member; except
that, this prohibition shall not prevent an elected or appointed official from
voting on or participating in the development of a budget which includes
compensation for a family member; provided that, the family member is included
only as a member of a class of persons or a group, and the family member
benefits to no greater extent than any other similarly situated member of the
class or group.
   (C)   The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to any relationship
or situation that would violate the prohibition, but which existed prior to
adoption of this chapter.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 33.60 COUNTY BOARD OF ETHICS.
   (A)   Establishment. The Board of Ethics is established having the
authorities, duties and responsibilities as set forth in this chapter to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Composition of Board of Ethics.
      (1)   Appointment. The Board of Ethics shall consist of five members who
shall be appointed by the executive authority of the city or county, subject to
the approval of the legislative body (if different from the executive
authority). The executive authorities of the Cities of Elizabethtown, Radcliff,
Vine Grove and West Point, and the Judge Executive of the county shall each
appoint one of the five members of the Board of Ethics as outlined in this
section.
      (2)   Term. The initial members of the Board of Ethics shall be the duly
appointed existing members, or if vacant those appointed within 60 days of the
effective date of this chapter. The members shall serve for a term of three
years; except that, with respect to the members initially appointed, if any,
one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, two members shall be
appointed for a term of two years and two members shall be appointed for a term
of three years. The length of the initial term of a member appointed by an
executive authority shall be determined by a random draw. Thereafter, all
appointments shall be for a term of three years. The members may be reappointed
for any number of consecutive terms.
      (3)   Requirements. No member of the Board of Ethics shall hold any
elected or appointed office, whether paid or unpaid, or any position of
employment with the city or county or any city or county agency. Each member of
the Board of Ethics shall have been a resident of the city or county for at
least one year prior to the date of the appointment and shall reside in the
city or county throughout the term in office. The members of the Board of
Ethics shall be chosen by virtue of their known and consistent reputation for
integrity and their knowledge of local government affairs.
      (4)   Removal. A member of the Board of Ethics may be removed by the
executive authority appointing them, subject to the approval of the legislative
body (if different from the executive authority) for misconduct, inability or
willful neglect of duties. Before any member of the Board of Ethics is removed
from office under this section, the member shall be afforded the opportunity
for a hearing before the executive authority and the legislative body (if
different from the executive authority).
      (5)   Vacancies. Vacancies on the Board of Ethics shall be filled within
60 days by the executive authority appointing them, subject to the approval of
the legislative body (if different from the executive authority). If a vacancy
is not filled by the executive authority within 60 days, the remaining members
of the Board of Ethics shall fill the vacancy. All vacancies shall be filled
for the remainder of the unexpired term.
      (6)   Compensation. Members of the Board of Ethics shall serve without
compensation, unless otherwise approved by the legislative bodies, but shall be
reimbursed for all necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties, subject to authorization by each legislative body.
      (7)   Chairperson. The Board of Ethics shall, upon the initial
appointment of its members, and annually thereafter, elect a Chairperson from
among the membership. The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full
voting member of the Board.
      (8)   Meetings. Meetings of the Board of Ethics shall be held, as
necessary and at least annually, upon the call of the Chairperson or at the
written request of a majority of the members.
      (9)   Voting. The presence of three or more members shall constitute a
quorum and the affirmative vote of three or more members shall be necessary for
any official action to be taken. Any member of the county's Board of Ethics who
has a conflict of interest with respect to any matter to be considered by the
Board shall disclose the nature of the conflict, shall disqualify himself or
herself from voting on the matter, and shall not be counted for purposes of
establishing a quorum.
      (10)   Minutes. Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Board of
Ethics and the vote of each member on any issue decided by the Board of Ethics
shall be recorded in the minutes.
   (C)   Facilities. Each appointing local government shall remit $1,000
annually by March 1 to the Board of Ethics for the provision of necessary
materials, supplies, administrative, accounting, legal expenses and clerical
staff needed for the conduct of its business and shall make facilities
available without charge upon request of the Board of Ethics for the conduct of
its business.
   (D)   Power and duties. The Board of Ethics shall have the following power
and duties:
      (1)   To receive and investigate complaints, hold hearings and make
findings of fact and determinations with regard to alleged violations of the
provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   To issue orders in connection with its investigations and hearings
requiring persons to submit in writing and under oath reports and answers to
questions that are relevant to the proceedings and to order testimony to be
taken by deposition before any individual designated by the Board who has the
power to administer oaths;
      (3)   To administer oaths and to issue orders requiring the attendance
and testimony of witnesses and the production of documentary evidence relating
to an investigation or hearing being conducted by the Board;
      (4)   To refer any information concerning violations of this chapter to
the executive authority of the city or county, the city or county legislative
body, the governing body of any city or county agency, the City or County
Attorney or other appropriate person or body, as necessary;
      (5)   To render advisory opinions to the city or county and city or
county agency officers, employees, board or commission members regarding
whether a given set of facts and circumstances would constitute a violation of
any provision of this chapter;
      (6)   To enforce the provisions of this chapter with regard to all
officers, employees, board or commission members of the city or county and city
and county agencies who are subject to its terms by issuing appropriate orders
and imposing penalties authorized by this chapter;
      (7)   To control and maintain all statements of financial interests that
are required to be filed by this chapter and to ensure that the statements are
available for public inspection in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and the state's Open Records Law, being KRS 61.870 through 61.884;
      (8)   To develop and submit any reports regarding the conduct of its
business that may be required by the executive authority or legislative body of
the city or county; and
      (9)   To adopt rules and regulations and to take other actions, as
necessary, to implement the provisions of this chapter; provided that, the
rules, regulations and actions are not in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter or any state or federal law.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.61 TRAINING AND EDUCATION.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics will, after passage or amendment of the ethics
code, make this ethics code available to all officials, employees, candidates,
and to municipal residents.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics will hold annual workshops for new and experienced
officials, Board of Ethics members, and employees to discuss this code, its
values and goals, its enforcement, and the ways in which it has affected the
officials' and employees' work and the working of the city and county
government.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.62 ANNUAL REPORTS AND REVIEW.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics must prepare and submit an annual report to the
legislative body summarizing the activities, decisions, and advisory opinions
of the Board of Ethics. The report may also recommend changes to the text or
administration of this ethics code. The report must be submitted no later than
November 30 of each year, covering the previous year and must be filed with the
county clerk and made available on the county website.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics will periodically (no less than every five years)
review this ethics code, the enforcement of the ethics code, and the Ethics
Board's rules, regulations, and administrative procedures to determine whether
they promote integrity, public confidence, and participation in city
government, and whether they set forth clear and enforceable, common-sense
standards of conduct.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.63 FILING AND INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   All complaints alleging any violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be submitted to the Board of Ethics, or the administrative
official designated by the Board of Ethics. All complaints shall be in writing,
signed by the complainant, and shall meet any other requirements established by
the Board of Ethics.
   (B)   The Hardin County website shall maintain a current address and or
email address to which any written ethics complaint can be submitted and the
Board shall maintain a process for timely receipt and processing of any
complaint consistent with this chapter.
   (C)   The Board of Ethics shall acknowledge receipt of a complaint to the
complainant within ten working days from the date of receipt. Within 30 days of
the receipt of a complaint, the Board of Ethics shall conduct a preliminary
inquiry based upon the allegations contained in the complaint and determine:
      (1)   If the complaint is within the jurisdiction of Board of Ethics; and
      (2)   If the complaint alleges reasonable grounds that a violation of the
applicable ordinance has occurred.
   (D)   All proceedings and records relating to a preliminary inquiry being
conducted by the Board of Ethics shall be confidential until a final
determination is made by the Board of Ethics, except the Board of Ethics may
turn over to the Commonwealth's Attorney or County Attorney evidence which may
be used in criminal proceedings.
   (E)   If the Board of Ethics determines based on its preliminary inquiry (1)
that the complaint is not within its jurisdiction; or (2) that the complaint
does not allege reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this chapter
has occurred the Board of Ethics shall summarily terminate the inquiry, reduce
the conclusion to writing and transmit a copy of its decision to the
complainant and to the officer, employee, board or commission member against
whom the complaint was filed.
   (F)   If the Board of Ethics concludes, based upon its preliminary inquiry,
(1) that the complaint is within its jurisdiction; and (2) that it contains
allegations sufficient to establish reasonable grounds to believe that a
violation has occurred, the Board of Ethics shall notify the officer, employee,
board or commission member who is the subject of the complaint and shall issue
an order to initiate a hearing to determine whether there has been a violation
and afford a person who is the subject of the complaint an opportunity to
respond to the allegations in the complaint.
   (G)   The person shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to
appear and be heard under oath, to offer evidence in response to the
allegations and cross examine witnesses against him/her at the hearing.
   (H)   Any person who knowingly files with the Board a false complaint
alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter by an officer, employee,
board or commission member of the city or county or any city or county agency
shall be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $1,000 payable to the
Commission.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.64 HEARINGS.
   (A)   Notice of hearings. If the Board of Ethics determines that a hearing
regarding allegations contained in the complaint is necessary, the Board of
Ethics shall issue an order setting the matter for a hearing within 30 days of
the date the order is issued, unless both the complainant and the alleged
violator agree and the Board of Ethics consents to a later date.
   (B)   The order setting the matter for hearing, along with a copy of any
pertinent regulations of the Board of Ethics relating to the hearing, shall be
sent to the alleged violator within 24 hours of the time the order setting a
hearing is issued. The alleged violator shall have at least ten days' prior
notice of any hearing.
   (C)   Hearing procedure:
      (1)   The Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure and the Kentucky Rules of
Evidence shall not apply to hearings conducted by the Board of Ethics; however,
the hearings shall be conducted in accordance with this section and in
accordance with any additional rules and regulations adopted by the Board of
Ethics so as to afford all parties the full range of due process rights
required by the nature of the proceedings.
      (2)   Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the alleged violator, or
his or her representative, shall have a reasonable opportunity upon request to
examine all documents and records, intended to be introduced at the hearing by
the complainant in connection with the matter to be heard.
      (3)   Hearings shall be recorded by either video, audio or stenographic
means. All testimony in a Board of Ethics hearing shall be taken under oath and
administered by the presiding officer, who is a member of the Board of Ethics.
      (4)   The complainant and the alleged violator shall have the right to
call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine witnesses,
to submit evidence and to be represented by retained counsel.
      (5)   All hearings of the Board of Ethics shall be conducted pursuant to
Kentucky Open Meetings Act (KRS 61.810, et seq.).
      (6)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Ethics shall, as
soon as practicable, begin deliberations pursuant to KRS 61.810 for the purpose
of reviewing the evidence before it and making a determination whether a
violation of this chapter has been proven by clear and convincing evidence.
      (7)   Within 30 days after completion of the hearing, the Board of Ethics
shall issue a written report of its findings and conclusions.
      (8)   If the Board of Ethics concludes in its report that no violation of
this chapter has occurred, it shall immediately send written notice of this
determination to the officer, employee, board or commission member who was the
subject of the complaint and to the complainant.
      (9)   If the Board of Ethics concludes in its report that, after
consideration of the evidence produced at the hearing, there is clear and
convincing proof of a violation of the ordinance, the Board of Ethics may do
one or more of the following:
         (a)   Issue an order requiring the violator to cease and desist the
violation;
         (b)   Issue a written reprimand of the violator for the violation(s).
The reprimand shall be provided to the executive authority and governing body
(if different than the executive authority) of the city or county or city or
county agency with which the violator serves;
         (c)   Issue an order requiring the violator to pay a civil penalty of
up to $1,000; or
         (d)   Refer evidence of criminal violations of this chapter or state
law to the County Attorney or Commonwealth's Attorney of the jurisdiction for
review of criminal prosecution.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.65 APPEALS.
   Any person who is found guilty of a violation of any provision of this
chapter by the Board of Ethics may appeal the finding to the circuit court of
the county within 30 days after the date of the final action by the Board of
Ethics by filing a petition with the court against the Board. The Board shall
transmit to the clerk of the court all evidence considered by the Board at the
public hearing.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.66 LIMITATIONS OF ACTIONS.
   Except when the period of limitation is otherwise established by state law,
an action for a violation of this chapter must be brought within one year after
the person complained about leaves office or employment.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.67 ADVISORY OPINIONS.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics may render advisory opinions concerning matters
under its jurisdiction, based upon real or hypothetical facts and
circumstances, upon its own initiative, or when requested by any officer,
employee, board or commission member of the city or county or a city or county
agency who is covered by this chapter.
   (B)   An advisory opinion shall be requested in writing and shall state
relevant facts and ask specific questions.
   (C)   The Board of Ethics may adopt regulations, consistent with the state's
Open Records Law, being KRS 61.870 through 61.884, to establish criteria under
which it will issue confidential advisory opinions. All other advisory opinions
shall be public documents; except that, before an advisory opinion is made
public, it shall be modified so that the identity of any person associated with
the opinion shall not be revealed.
   (D)   A written advisory opinion issued by the Board of Ethics shall be
binding on the Board of Ethics in any subsequent proceeding concerning the
facts and circumstances of the particular case if no intervening facts or
circumstances arise which would change the opinion of the Board of Ethics if
they had existed at the time the opinion was rendered. However, if any fact
determined by the Board of Ethics to be material was omitted or misstated in
the request for an opinion, the Board of Ethics shall not be bound by the
opinion.
   (E)   A written advisory opinion issued by the Board of Ethics shall be
admissible in the defense of any criminal prosecution or civil proceeding for
violations of this chapter for actions taken in reliance on that opinion.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.68 PROHIBITED CONDUCT AGAINST THOSE WHO DISCLOSE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   No officer, employee, board or commission member of the city or city
agency shall be subject to reprisal, or directly or indirectly use, or threaten
to use, any official authority or influence in any manner whatsoever which
tends to discourage, restrain, deter, prevent, interfere with, coerce or
discriminate against any person who in good faith reports, discloses, divulges
or otherwise brings to the attention of the Board of Ethics or any other agency
or official of the city, county or the commonwealth any facts or information
relative to an actual or suspected violation of this chapter.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed as prohibiting disciplinary or
punitive action if an officer, employee, board or commission member of the city
or any city agency discloses information which he or she knows:
      (1)   To be false or which he or she discloses with reckless disregard
for its truth or falsity;
      (2)   To be exempt from required disclosure under the provisions of the
state's Open Records Act, KRS 61.870 through 61.884; or
      (3)   Is confidential under any other provision of law.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Except when another penalty is specifically set forth in this
ordinance or by state or federal laws, any officer or employee of the city or
any city agency who is found by the Board of Ethics to have violated any
provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a civil offense and may be
subject to a civil fine imposed by the Board not to exceed $1,000, which may be
recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender
fails to pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time.
   (B)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under this
chapter, any officer or employee of the city or any city agency who is found by
the Board of Ethics to have violated any provision of this chapter shall
forfeit to the city or the city agency an amount equal to the economic benefit
or gain, which the officer or employee is determined by the Board to have
realized as a result of the violation. The amount of any forfeiture may be
recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender
fails to pay the amount of the forfeiture within a prescribed period of time.
(Ord. 16-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
CHAPTER 34: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
34.001   Meeting times and terms of office
Airport Board
   
34.015   Establishment; nature
   
34.016   Purpose and duties
Code Enforcement Board
   
34.030   Definitions
   
34.031   Creation and membership
   
34.032   Administration
   
34.033   Powers
   
34.034   Appointment; terms; removal from office; oath; compensation
   
34.035   Organization; meetings; quorum; alternate Board members
   
34.036   Conflict of interest
   
34.037   Jurisdiction
   
34.038   Powers
   
34.039   Enforcement proceedings
   
34.040   Hearing; notice; final order
   
34.041   Presentation of cases
   
34.042   Appeals; final judgment
   
34.043   Ordinance fine schedule
   
34.044   Liens, fines, charges and fees
   
34.045   Lienholder notification system
   
34.046   Liens
Historic Preservation Commission (EHPC)
   
34.060   Intent and declaration of public policy
   
34.061   Purpose
   
34.062   Definitions
   
34.063   Establishment; members and officers; vacancies; conflict of interest
   
34.064   Meetings
   
34.065   Purposes and duties
   
34.066   Staffing, right to receive and spend funds
   
34.067   Historic districts and landmarks
   
34.068   Certificates of appropriateness
Tourist and Convention Commission
   
34.080   Commission established; tax levied
   
34.081   Payment of tax
   
34.082   Amount of tax
   
34.083   Liability for tax
   
34.084   Scope of tax
   
34.085   Bonding; reports
   
34.086   Depository
   
34.087   Powers of Commission; fiscal year; effective date
   
34.088   Accounting; enforcement; audits; civil action
   
34.089   Appointments to Bureau
   
34.090   Costs of litigation and audits
   
34.091   Confidentiality
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.001 MEETING TIMES AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The following boards, commissions and committees are established.
   (A)   The city’s Tourism and Convention Bureau (formerly “Elizabethtown
Visitors and Information Commission”) shall meet at the office of the
Commission 1030 North Mulberry Street, Elizabethtown, Kentucky, at 9:00 a.m. on
the first Wednesday of each month. Members shall serve three-year terms.
   (B)   The city’s Planning Commission shall meet as needed on the second and
fourth Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. at the Pritchard Community Center,
404 South Mulberry Street, Elizabethtown, Kentucky. Members shall serve four-
year terms.
   (C)   The city’s Code Enforcement Board shall meet as needed on the third
Tuesday of each month at 5:30 p.m. at the Pritchard Community Center, 404 South
Mulberry Street, Elizabethtown, Kentucky. Members shall serve three-year terms.
   (D)   The city’s Board of Zoning Adjustment shall meet as needed at 4:00
p.m. on the first Tuesday of each month at the Pritchard Community Center, 404
South Mulberry Street, Elizabethtown, Kentucky. Members shall serve four-year
terms.
   (E)   See §§
35.30 through
35.39 regarding the Civil Service Commission.
   (F)   The city’s Airport Board shall meet as needed on the second Monday of
each month at noon at Addington Field in the airport office. Members shall
serve four-year terms.
   (G)   The Housing Authority of the city shall meet as needed on the first
Thursday of the month of March, June, September and December and an annual
meeting held on May 19 of each year at 4:00 p.m. at the Housing Authority
Office in the Huddleston House, Public Square, Elizabethtown, Kentucky. Members
shall serve four-year terms.
   (H)   The county’s Board of Ethics shall meet as needed on the first
Wednesday of January, Wednesday after April 15 and as necessary. Members shall
serve three-year terms.
   (I)   The Historic Preservation Committee shall meet as needed on the first
Thursday of each month at 9:30 a.m. at the Pritchard Community Center, 404
South Mulberry Street, Elizabethtown, Kentucky. Members shall serve for a
three-year term.
(Prior Code, § 34.01) (Ord. 18, passed 11-16-1992; Ord. 15-1998, passed 9-8-
1998; Ord. 04-2000, passed - -; Ord. 9-2003, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 11-2004,
passed - -; Ord. 28-2005, passed 10-17-2005; Ord. 14-2006, passed 7-17-2006;
Ord. 12-2013, passed 8-19-2013; Ord. 08-2018, passed 2-20-2018; Ord. 22-2023,
passed 9-18-2023)
AIRPORT BOARD
§ 34.015 ESTABLISHMENT; NATURE.
   There is hereby established an airport board to be known as the
“Elizabethtown Airport Board”.
(Prior Code, § 34.05)
§ 34.016 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The purpose of the Board shall be to establish, maintain, operate and
expand necessary, desirable or appropriate airport and air navigation
facilities to serve the citizens of the city and surrounding communities. In
furtherance of its purposes, the Board shall have all the duties and powers,
and be subject to all the limitations, set forth in KRS Ch. 183 and in other
applicable statutes.
   (B)   The Airport Board shall each year submit an audit report in writing to
the City Council concerning its operations and activities for the prior 12-
month period.
(Prior Code, § 34.06)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see KRS 183.132, 183.133
CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD
§ 34.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABATEMENT COSTS. The city’s necessary and reasonable costs for and
associated with clearing, preventing unauthorized entry to or demolishing all
or a portion of a structure or premises, or taking any other actions with
regard to a structure or premises necessary to remedy a violation and to
maintain and preserve the public health, safety and welfare in accordance with
any city ordinance.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD. An administrative body created and acting under the
authority of the Local Government Code Enforcement Board Act, being KRS 65.8801
through 65.8839.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER/CITATION OFFICER. A citation officer as prescribed
by KRS 83A.087 which shall have the authority to issue citations and which
shall include city police officers, safety officers, code enforcement officers,
building inspectors, the Director of Planning and Development, the Director of
Storm Water Management, fire prevention officers, building officials and Code
Officials.
   FINAL ORDER. Any order:
      (1)   Issued by the Code Enforcement Board following a hearing in
accordance with §
34.040 of this chapter;
      (2)   Created because a violator neither paid, nor contested, the
citation within seven days as provided in §
34.040 of this chapter; or
      (3)   Created because a violator failed to appear at a hearing the
violator requested to contest the citation as provided in §
34.042 of this chapter.
   IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which is likely to cause serious or life
threatening injury or death at any time.
   ORDINANCE. An official action of the local government body, which is a
regulation of a general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local law and
shall include any provision of a code of ordinances adopted by the city
legislative body which embodies all or part of an ordinance.
   OWNER. A person, association, corporation, partnership or other legal entity
having a legal or equitable title in real property.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures upon it.
(Prior Code, § 34.90) (Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 20-2008, passed 12-
22-2008; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 34.031 CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby created pursuant to KRS 65.8801 to KRS 65.8839 within the
city, a Code Enforcement Board which shall be composed of five members, all of
whom shall be residents of the city for a period of at least one year prior to
the appointment to the Board and shall reside there throughout the term in
office.
(Prior Code, § 34.91) (Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 34.032 ADMINISTRATION.
   The administration of the duties of the Code Enforcement Board and
coordination of the enforcement thereunder are assigned to the Director of the
Department of Planning and Development. The Director of the Department of
Planning and Development may assign these duties to a member of that
Department. This Department is charged with the coordination of all other city
departments as it pertains to the issuance of code enforcement citations.
(Prior Code, § 34.92) (Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 34.033 POWERS.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Board shall have the power to issue remedial
orders and impose civil fines as a method of enforcing city ordinances when a
violation of the ordinance as been classified as a civil offense.
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Board shall not have the authority to enforce any
ordinance that violation of which constitutes an offense under any provision of
the Kentucky Revised Statutes, including specifically, any provision of the
Kentucky Penal Code and any moving motor vehicle offense.
(Prior Code, § 34.93) (Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 34.034 APPOINTMENT; TERMS; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; OATH; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The Board shall consist of five members. Members of the Code
Enforcement Board shall be appointed by the Mayor of the city, subject to the
approval of the City Council.
   (B)   (1)   The initial appointment to the Code Enforcement Board shall be
as follows:
         (a)   One member appointed for a one-year term;
         (b)   Two members appointed for a two-year term; and
         (c)   Two members appointed for a three-year term.
      (2)   All subsequent appointment shall be for a term of three years. A
member may be re-appointed, subject to the approval of the legislative body.
   (C)   The Mayor may appoint, subject to the approval of the City Council,
two alternate members to serve On the Code Enforcement Board in the absence of
regular members. Alternate members shall meet all of the qualifications and
shall be subject to all of the requirements that apply to regular members of
the Code Enforcement Board. Alternates shall be appointed for a term of three
years.
   (D)   Any vacancy on the board shall be filled by the Mayor, subject to
approval of the City Council within 60 days of the vacancy. If the vacancy is
not filled within that time period, the remaining Code Enforcement Board
members shall fill the vacancy.
   (E)   A Code Board member may be removed from office by the Mayor for
misconduct, inefficiency or willful neglect of duty. The Mayor must submit a
written statement to the member and the City Council setting forth the reasons
for removal.
   (F)   All members of the Code Enforcement Board must, before entering upon
the duties of their office, take the oath of office prescribed by § 228 of the
Kentucky Constitution.
   (G)   No member of the Code Enforcement Board may hold any elected or non-
elected office, paid or unpaid, or any position of employment with the city.
   (H)   Each member shall be a resident of the city during their entire
service on the Board.
(Prior Code, § 34.94) (Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-
19-2016)
§ 34.035 ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS; QUORUM; ALTERNATE BOARD MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Board shall annually elect a Chair from among its members and
other officers as deemed appropriate. The Board may establish other offices
through the adoption of bylaws to guide the operation of the Board. The
Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full voting member of the
Board.
   (B)   Regular meetings of the Code Enforcement Board shall be held on the
third Tuesday of every month at 5:30 p.m. Meetings other than those regularly
scheduled shall be special meetings held in accordance with the requirements of
the state’s Open Meetings Law, being KRS 61.800 through 61.850.
   (C)   All meetings and hearings of the Code Enforcement Board shall be held
in accordance with the requirements of KRS 65.8815(5) and the state’s Open
Meetings Act.
   (D)   The vote of a majority of a quorum of the Board shall be necessary for
any official action to be taken.
   (E)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Code Enforcement
Board and the vote of each member on any issue decided by the Board shall be
recorded in the minutes. The minutes shall be kept by the Department of
Planning and Development acting as Secretary for the Board under §
34.032 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 34.95) (Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 27-2003, passed 9-
2-2003; Ord. 12-2013, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 34.036 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   Any member of the Code Enforcement Board who has any direct or indirect
financial or personal interest in any matter to be decided, shall disclose the
nature of the interest and shall disqualify himself or herself from voting on
the matter in which he or she has an interest and shall not be counted for
purposes of establishing a quorum. The members shall be subject to the
restrictions of the City/County Code of Ethics.
(Prior Code, § 34.96) (Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 34.037 JURISDICTION.
   The Code Enforcement Board shall have jurisdiction to enforce and shall
enforce those city ordinances and code provisions which specifically provide
for Code Board Enforcement authority.
(Prior Code, § 34.97) (Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 34.038 POWERS.
   The city’s Code Enforcement Board shall have the following powers and
duties:
   (A)   To adopt rules and regulations to govern its operations and the
conduct of its hearings;
   (B)   To conduct hearings to determine if there has been a violation of an
ordinance over which it has jurisdiction;
   (C)   To subpoena alleged violators, witnesses and evidence to its hearings.
Subpoenas issued by the Code Enforcement Board may be served by any Code
Enforcement Officer;
   (D)   To take testimony under oath. The presiding officer at the hearing
shall have the authority to administer oaths for the purpose of taking
testimony;
   (E)   To make findings of fact and issue orders necessary to remedy any
violation of a city ordinance or code provision which the Board is authorized
to enforce; and
   (F)   To impose civil fines, as authorized, on any person found to have
violated an ordinance over which the Board has jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 34.98) (Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 34.039 ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS.
   The following requirements shall govern all enforcement proceedings before
the Board.
   (A)   Enforcement proceedings before the Code Enforcement Board shall only
be initiated by the issuance of a citation by the Code Enforcement Officer or
other authorized personnel.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) below, if a Code Enforcement
Officer believes, based on his or her personal observation or investigation,
that a person has violated a city ordinance, he or she shall issue a notice of
violation to the offender allowing the offender a specified period of time to
remedy the violation without fine. If the offender fails or refuses to remedy
the violation within the time specified, the Code Enforcement Officer is
authorized to issue a citation.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from taking immediate
action to remedy a violation of its ordinances where there is reason to believe
that the violation presents a serious threat to public health, safety and
welfare, or if in the absence of immediate action, the effects of the violation
will be irreparable or irreversible.
   (D)   The Code Enforcement Officer is not required to issue a notice of
violation to an owner when the Board has previously issued an order for
compliance relating to the violation.
   (E)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a citation by one of the
following methods:
      (1)   Personal service to the alleged violator;
      (2)   Leaving a copy of the citation with any person 18 years of age or
older who is on the premises, if the alleged violator is not on the premises at
the time the citation is issued; or
      (3)   Posting a copy of the citation in a conspicuous place on the
premises and mailing a copy of the citation by regular, first-class mail to the
owner of record of the property, if no one is on the premises at the time the
citation is issued.
   (F)   The citation issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The date and time of issuance;
      (2)   The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued;
      (3)   The date and time the offense was committed;
      (4)   The facts constituting the offense;
      (5)   The section of the code or the number of the ordinance violated;
      (6)   The name of the Code Enforcement Officer;
      (7)   The physical address of the premises where the violation occurred;
      (8)   The civil fine that will be imposed for the violation if the person
does not contest the citation;
      (9)   The maximum civil fine that may be imposed if the person elects to
contest the citation;
      (10)   The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil
fine or to contest the citation; and
      (11)   A statement that if the person fails to pay the civil fine set
forth in the citation or contest the citation, within the time allowed, the
person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing before the Code
Enforcement Board to contest the citation and that the determination that the
violation was committed shall be final; the citation as issued shall be deemed
a final order determining that the violation was committed and imposing the
civil fine as set forth in the citation; and the person shall be deemed to have
waived the right to appeal the final order to District Court.
   (G)   After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall notify the Code Enforcement Board by delivering the citation to
the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his or her
designee.
   (H)   (1)   The person to whom the citation is issued shall respond to the
citation within seven days of the date of issuance by either paying the civil
fine or requesting, in writing, a hearing before the Code Enforcement Board to
contest the citation. If the person fails to respond to the citation within
seven days, the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing
and the determination that a violation was committed shall be considered final.
In this event, the citation as issued shall be deemed a final order determining
that the violation was committed and imposing the civil fine as set forth in
the citation, and the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to appeal
the final order to District Court.
      (2)   Notice of a final order shall be provided to the cited violator by:
regular first-class mail; certified mail, return receipt requested; personal
delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person’s usual place of residence
with any individual residing therein who is 18 years of age or older and who is
informed of the contents of the notice.
   (I)   If the alleged violator does not contest the citation within the time
prescribed, the Code Enforcement Board shall enter a final order determining
that the violation was committed and impose the civil fine set forth in the
citation. A copy of the final order shall be served on the person guilty of the
violation.
(Prior Code, § 34.99) (Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-
19-2016)
§ 34.040 HEARING; NOTICE; FINAL ORDER.
   (A)   When a hearing has been requested, the Code Enforcement Board shall
schedule a hearing.
   (B)   Not less than seven days before the date of the hearing, the Code
Enforcement Board shall notify the requestor of the date, time and place of
hearing. The notice may be given by regular first-class mail, certified mail,
return receipt requested; by personnel delivery; or by leaving the notice at
the person’s usual place of residence with any individual residing therein who
is 18 years of age or older and who is informed of the content of the notice.
   (C)   Any person requesting a hearing before the Code Enforcement Board who
fails to appear at the time and place set for the hearing shall be deemed to
have waived the right to a hearing to contest the citation and the
determination that a violation was committed shall be final. The Code
Enforcement Board shall enter a final order determining the violation was
committed and shall impose the civil fine set forth in the citation, and the
alleged violator shall be deemed to have waived the right to appeal the final
order to District Court. A copy of the final order shall be provided to the
cited violator by regular first-class mail, personal delivery or by posting the
order on the premises.
   (D)   All testimony shall be taken under oath and recorded. Testimony shall
be taken from the Code Enforcement Officer, the alleged violator, and any
witnesses to the violation offered by the Code Enforcement Officer or alleged
violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process
shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings.
   (E)   The Code Enforcement Board shall, based on the evidence, determine
whether a violation was committed. If it determines that no violation was
committed, an order of dismissing the citation shall be entered. If it
determines that a violation was committed, an order may be issued upholding the
citation and either imposing a fine up to the maximum authorized by this or
other ordinance or requiring the offender to remedy a continuing violation to
avoid a fine, or both.
   (F)   Every final order of the Code Enforcement Board shall be reduced to
writing, which shall include the date the order was issued. A copy shall be
furnished to the person named in the citation. If the person named in the
citation is not present when the final order is issued, the order shall be
delivered in accordance with the procedures set forth in division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 34.100) (Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 24-2016, passed
12-19-2016)
§ 34.041 PRESENTATION OF CASES.
   Each case before the Code Enforcement Board shall be presented by the
Director of the Department of Planning and Development or by an appointed Code
Enforcement Official for the city. The City Attorney shall be counsel to the
Code Enforcement Board.
(Prior Code, § 34.101) (Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 34.042 APPEALS; FINAL JUDGMENT.
   (A)   An appeal from any final order of the Code Enforcement Board may be
made to the county’s District Court within 30 days of the date the order is
issued. The appeal shall be initiated by the filing of a complaint and copy of
the Code Enforcement Board’s order in the same manner as any civil action under
the Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure.
   (B)   If no appeal from a final order of the Code Enforcement Board is filed
within the time period set in division (A) above, the Code Enforcement Board’s
order shall be deemed final for all purposes.
(Prior Code, § 34.102) (Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 34.043 ORDINANCE FINE SCHEDULE.
   Violation of ordinances that are enforced by the City Code Enforcement Board
shall be subject to the following schedule of civil fines.
   (A)   If a citation for a violation of an ordinance is not contested by the
person charged with a violation, the penalties set forth in this division (A)
shall apply; however, the Board may waive all or any portion of a penalty for
an uncontested violation, if in its discretion, the Board determines that such
waiver will promote compliance with the ordinance in issue.
Violation First Offense Second Offense All Others
Violation                               First Offense Second Offense All Others
Erosion control (all development,       $200          $500           $1,000
except single-family)
Erosion control (single-family          $100          $250           $500
residential)
Fire and security alarms                $100          $250           $500
Illicit discharge and illicit           $100          $500           $500
Noise                                   $20                          $250
Non-maintenance grease traps - exterior $200          $200           $200
Non-maintenance grease traps -          $50           $50            $50
undersink
Nuisances                               $150          $200           $300
Property Maintenance Code               $200          $250           $350
Sanitary sewer surcharge                $100          $250           $500
Sewer use violations
   Interior under sink traps         $50           $50            $100
   Exterior traps                    $200          $200           $400
   Reporting                         $5 per day    $5 per day     $5 per day
   All other greasetrap violations   *             *              *
Zoning                                  $200          $250           $500
All other violations                    $50**         $75**          $200**
NOTES TO TABLE:
* As determined according to related ordinance
** Unless specifically mandated by related ordinance
 
   (B)   If the citation is contested and a hearing before the Code Board is
required, the following maximum penalties may be imposed at the discretion of
the Code Board.
Violation First Offense Second Offense All Others
Violation                  First Offense Second Offense    All Others
Nuisances                  $250          $400              $500
Property Maintenance Code  $500          $750              $1,000
Sewer use violations:
   Interior under sink  $100          $100              $200
traps
   Exterior traps       $400          $750              $1,000
   Reporting            $10 per day   $10 per day       $10 per day
   All other greasetrap Up to $25,000 Up to $25,000 per Up to $25,000 per
violations                 per day       day               day
Zoning                     $500          $750              $1,000
All other violations       $500*         $750*             $1,000*
NOTES TO TABLE:
* Unless additional fees are established by the adopting ordinance
 
(Prior Code, § 34.103) (Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 07-2004, passed 5-
17-2004; Ord. 03-2005, passed 2-21-2005; Ord. 04-2007, passed 2-20-2007; Ord.
07-2008, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 22-2008, passed 12-22-2008)
§ 34.044 LIENS, FINES, CHARGES AND FEES.
   (A)   The city shall possess a lien on property owned by the person found by
a final, non-appealable order of the Code Enforcement Board, or by a final
judgment of the court, to have committed a violation of a city ordinance for
all fines assessed for the violation and for all charges and fees incurred by
the city in connection with the enforcement of the ordinance.
   (B)   The lien shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk. The lien
shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording and shall bear
interest until paid. The lien shall continue for ten years following the date
of the non-appealable final order or final court judgment.
   (C)   The lien shall take precedence over all other subsequent liens, except
state, county, school board and city taxes, and may be enforced by judicial
proceedings.
   (D)   In addition to the remedy prescribed in division (A) above, the person
found to have committed the violation shall be personally responsible for the
amount of all fines assessed for the violation and for all charges and fees
incurred by the city in connection with the enforcement of the ordinances. The
city may bring a civil action against the person and shall have the same
remedies as provided for the recovery of a debt.
(Prior Code, § 34.104) (Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 24-2016, passed
12-19-2016)
§ 34.045 LIENHOLDER NOTIFICATION SYSTEM.
   The city shall obtain and maintain priority over previously filed liens, as
provided in §
34.044 of this chapter, in accordance with the following provisions.
   (A)   Individuals and entities, including, but not limited to, lienholders,
may register with the city to receive electronic notification of final orders
entered pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   In order to receive the notification, the registrant shall submit the
following information to the City Clerk:
      (1)   Name;
      (2)   Mailing address;
      (3)   Phone number; and
      (4)   Electronic mailing address.
   (C)   A registrant may use the electronic form provided on the city website
to submit the information required by division (B) above. It shall be the
responsibility of the registrant to maintain and update the required contact
information with the city. The city shall inform a registrant of any evidence
received that the electronic mailing address is invalid or not functional so
that the registrant may provide an updated electronic mailing address.
   (D)   At least once a month, the city shall send electronic mail
notification of all final orders entered pursuant to this subchapter since the
last date of notification to each party registered pursuant to this section.
The notification shall provide an electronic link to the city code enforcement
database located on the city website. The database shall include the following
information regarding each final order:
      (1)   The name of the person charged with the violation;
      (2)   The physical address of the premises where the violation occurred;
      (3)   The last known mailing address for the owner of the premises where
the violation occurred;
      (4)   A copy of the full citation;
      (5)   A copy of the full final order; and
      (6)   The status of the final order regarding its ability to be appealed
pursuant to this subchapter.
   (E)   If an appeal is filed on a final order pursuant to this subchapter,
the city shall send electronic mail notification to all registrants.
   (F)   Within ten days of the issuance of a final order pursuant to this
subchapter, the city shall update its code enforcement database to reflect the
issued final order, and shall post the notification required by division (D)
above containing an updated link to the code enforcement database on the city
website.
   (G)   The city shall maintain the records created under this section for ten
years following their issuance.
(Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 34.046 LIENS.
   (A)   A lienholder of record who has registered pursuant to §
34.045 of this chapter may, within 45 days from the date of issuance of
notification under §
34.045(B) of this chapter:
      (1)   Correct the violation, if it has not already be abated; or
      (2)   Pay all civil fines assessed for the violation, and all charges and
fees incurred by the city in connection with enforcement of the ordinance,
including abatement costs.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from taking immediate
action if necessary under §
34.039 of this chapter.
   (C)   The lien provided by §
34.044 of this chapter shall not take precedence over previously recorded liens
if:
      (1)   The city failed to comply with the requirements of §
34.044 of this chapter for notification of the final order; or
      (2)   A prior lienholder complied with division (A) above.
   (D)   A lien that does not take precedence over previously recorded liens
under division (C) above shall, if the final order remains partially
unsatisfied, continue to take precedence over all other subsequent liens,
except liens for state, county, school board and city taxes.
   (E)   The city may record a lien before the 45-day period established in
division (A) above expires. If the lien is fully satisfied prior to the
expiration of the 45-day period, the city shall release the lien in the County
Clerk’s office where the lien is recorded within 15 days of the satisfaction.
   (F)   Failure of the city to comply with §§
34.044 and
34.045 of this chapter, or failure of a lien to take precedence over previously
filed liens as provided in division (C) above, shall not limit or restrict any
other remedies the city has against the property of the violator.
(Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016)
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION (EHPC)
§ 34.060 INTENT AND DECLARATION OF PUBLIC POLICY.
   (A)   The City Council finds that buildings within the city having historic,
architectural or cultural value have been significantly altered or destroyed
notwithstanding the feasibility and desirability of preserving these buildings
or altering them in an appropriate way.
   (B)   The Council finds that the historic and architectural character of the
city is of vital importance in maintaining the economy of the city.
   (C)   The Council finds that the city has played an important role in the
development of the state and that the history of the city is shown today
through buildings representing the activities and events during its growth. The
Council finds that the city has buildings that represent the persons who live
or have lived in the city during a period of more than 100 years. It is the
finding of the City Council that the distinctive and significant character of
the city can only be maintained by protecting and enhancing its historic,
architectural and cultural heritage and by preventing unnecessary injury to its
historic district and its landmarks which are a civic and community asset.
   (D)   The Council finds that the Federal and Kentucky Governments have
passed laws to protect historic districts and landmarks and that the National
Historic Preservation Act, being 54 U.S.C. §§ 3000101 et seq., was amended in
1980 to establish a certified local government program creating a new federal-
state-local partnership to encourage the efforts by cities to protect and
preserve their historic districts and landmarks.
   (E)   The Council finds that the adoption of an ordinance to provide an
historic preservation program will benefit all the residents of the city and
all the owners of property.
   (F)   The City Council declares as a matter of public policy that the
preservation, protection and use of historic districts and landmarks are a
public benefit because they have a special character and historic,
architectural and cultural value and thus serve as visible reminders of the
history and heritage of the city, state and nation. The Council declares as a
matter of public policy that this subchapter is required in the interest of the
health, prosperity, safety, welfare and economic well-being of the people.
   (G)   The Council finds that the Main Street Program has contributed to the
revival of the central business district in the city, that it has increased the
awareness of the value of the older buildings in the city and that the historic
preservation program will strengthen the current revitalization work in the
city.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 34.061 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to effect the goals as set forth in the
above findings and declarations of public policy and specifically, but not
exclusively, to:
   (A)   Effect and accomplish the preservation, protection and use of the
historic district and individual landmarks which have a special character and
historic, architectural and cultural value to the city, state and nation;
   (B)   Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the
people and safeguard the city’s history and heritage as embodied and reflected
in its historic district and landmarks;
   (C)   Stabilize and improve property values in such district and in the city
as a whole;
   (D)   Foster civic pride in the value of notable accomplishments of the
past;
   (E)   Strengthen the economy of the city;
   (F)   Protect and enhance the city’s attractions to residents and visitors;
and
   (G)   Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of
the city.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 34.062 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERATION. Any construction, replacement or change to the exterior of a
building or structure when it is visible to the public. An ALTERATION shall
include a proposed sign or changes to an existing sign. Painting and ordinary
maintenance and repairs shall not be considered ALTERATIONS.
   BUILDING. Any structure designed or constructed for residential, commercial,
industrial or other use.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (COA). The permit, issued by the city’s
Historic Preservation Commission, which provides for its approval for work or
demolition to be done in the historic district or on a landmark.
   CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT (CLG). A government meeting the requirements of
the National Historic Preservation Act and the implementing or regulations of
the U.S. Department of the Interior and the state’s Heritage Council.
   COMMISSION. The Elizabethtown Historic Preservation Commission.
   COUNCIL. The Elizabethtown City Council.
   DEMOLITION. Any act that destroys in whole or in part, a landmark or a
building or structure in the historic district.
   DESIGNATED PROPERTY. A landmark or a building or structure in an historic
district. DESIGNATED PROPERTY shall include all lots within an historic
district and the entire lot containing a landmark.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area of architectural, historical or cultural
significance which meets one or more of the criteria contained in this
subchapter and which has been designated by the city.
   LANDMARK. A building or structure of architectural, historical or cultural
significance which meets one or more of the criteria contained in this
subchapter and which has been designated by the city.
   MAJOR STRUCTURAL CHANGE. Structural alterations and structural repairs made
within any 12-month period costing in excess of 50% of the value of the
structure, as determined by comparison of the extent/value of the alterations
involved and the replacement value of the structure at the time the plans for
the alteration are approved.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. An addition to an existing building or structure or the
construction a new building or structure.
   ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS. Any work, the purpose of which is to
correct deterioration or to prevent deterioration of a designated historic
property. The work shall restore the property to its appearance prior to
deterioration or shall result in the protection of its present appearance. The
work shall involve the use of the same building materials or available
materials that are as similar to the original materials as feasible. Work that
changes the external appearance of a property shall be considered an alteration
for the purposes of this subchapter.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Elizabethtown Planning Commission.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location to the ground or attached to something having permanent
location on the ground.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 34.063 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERS AND OFFICERS; VACANCIES; CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby created the Elizabethtown Historic Preservation
Commission (EHPC), an administrative body of the city. Hereafter to be known as
“the Commission” or the “Commission”.
      (2)   The Commission shall consist of the following: five qualified
persons, competent and informed on historical, architectural and cultural
traditions of the city. The five qualified persons shall be appointed by the
Mayor and approved by the City Council. One member of the City Council shall
sit as an ex officio non-voting liaison member of the Commission.
      (3)   At least two Commission members are required by state law to be in
preservation-related professions. This includes the professions of historic
preservation, architectural history, architecture, history, archaeology,
historic preservation planning or related disciplines, such as American
studies, urban planning, American civilization, cultural geography or
anthropology. When one or two professional members are not available, the Mayor
may appoint other persons interested in historic preservation to serve. When
the Commission reviews an issue that is normally evaluated by a professional
member and that field is not represented by the Commission, the Commission
shall seek expert advice before rendering its decision. All members must have a
demonstrated interest in historic preservation.
   (B)   (1)   Of the original members, one shall be appointed for a term of
one year; two shall be appointed for a two-year term and two for a three-year
term. Terms commence on July 1 of each year and conclude on June 30 of the
following year. Thereafter, members shall serve for three-year staggered terms.
Members shall be exempt from any provision of any other ordinance of the city
limiting the number of terms that a member of any board or commission may hold.
Commission members may serve for as many succeeding terms as such member may be
appointed to by the Mayor.
      (2)   The Commission shall select from among its members a Chairperson
and Vice-Chairperson. The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be citizen
members. The officers shall serve for one-year terms. At the first regularly
scheduled meeting of each calendar year, officer elections shall be held.
Officers may be elected for succeeding terms. The Chairperson shall preside at
meetings and the Vice-Chairperson shall preside in the absence of the
Chairperson. The Secretary shall be appointed a member of the city staff
designated by the Mayor and shall record the proceedings of each meeting.
   (C)   Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled within 60 days. When a
vacancy occurs during a term of office, it shall be filled within 60 days, and
the person selected shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
   (D)   No member of the Commission shall vote on any matter that may affect
the property, income or business interest of that member.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 34.064 MEETINGS.
   (A)   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public. The
Commission shall comply with all applicable Kentucky Revised Statutes and
Kentucky Administrative Regulations relating to open meetings.
   (B)   The Commission shall adopt and make public rules for the transaction
of its business and shall hold monthly public meetings and special public
meetings, when necessary.
   (C)   All meetings shall have a previously available agenda and shall comply
with the state’s Open Meeting Statute, KRS 61.805. A simple majority of the
membership shall be required for decisions involving historic districts and
landmarks.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 34.065 PURPOSES AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Specific powers. In addition to the powers and duties stated
elsewhere, the Commission shall make action necessary and appropriate to
accomplish the purpose of this subchapter. These actions may include, but are
not limited to, the following.
      (1)   The Commission shall perform all the functions assigned under
federal law, state law or city ordinance to the Commission.
      (2)   The Commission shall survey and study the entire city which might
include, but shall not be limited to research and investigation of potential
and existing historical sites, buildings, neighborhoods and shall obtain
suggestions from the public by available means, including, but not limited to,
public hearings, requests for written suggestions, oral and written surveys. In
making its survey of historic buildings and areas, the Commission shall conduct
this work in accordance with the guidelines of the state’s Heritage Council.
The Commission shall provide that its survey and preservation plan shall be
maintained and continued.
      (3)   The Commission shall use the preservation plan to assist the city
and the county in their overall planning efforts.
      (4)   The Commission shall maintain and update a list of all historical
landmarks, buildings, sites and neighborhoods in the city having historical
significance. Such lists shall contain a brief description of the site or area
and shall list the reasons for inclusion in the list. The listing of sites may
also include drawings, photographs, descriptions and other documents.
      (5)   The Commission shall inform property owners, adjacent property
owners and tenants of a property’s inclusion on the list. The Commission shall
also inform the City Council, state authorities dealing with historical areas
and historic landmarks and the appropriate federal authorities of a property’s
inclusion. The Commission shall take all steps necessary to gain state and
federal recognition of these sites.
      (6)   The Commission shall recommend to the City Council the designation
of historic districts and individual landmarks.
      (7)   The Commission shall present recommendations to the City Council on
proposed ordinances and guidelines to preserve protect and restore all such
historic areas, historic buildings, historic landmarks and neighborhoods.
      (8)   The Commission shall regulate alterations visible to the public
that are proposed for designated property; regulate demolitions, relocations
and new construction involving designated property.
      (9)   The Commission shall work with and advise the federal, state and
county governments and others parts of city government.
      (10)   The Commission shall advise and assist property owners and other
persons and groups including neighborhood organizations who are interested in
historic preservation.
      (11)   The Commission shall review applications for a certificate of
appropriateness in any historic district as referred to them by the city’s
Planning Commission, the city’s Board of Zoning Adjustment or other duly
constituted body.
      (12)   Individual sites, structures, which are determined to be of
historic significance or which stand alone and are suitable as monuments shall
be located and designated by the Commission. Upon discovery of such sites, or
locations, the Commission may recommend to the City Council the establishment
of the historical monument and its possible acquisition by the city. Upon such
acquisition, provision shall be made for continuous and proper maintenance of
the monument.
      (13)   The Commission may initiate and encourage plans for the
preservation and rehabilitation of individual historic buildings.
      (14)   The Commission shall, on a regular basis, give recognition to
owners and tenants who maintain or rehabilitate their historic buildings with
care and thus contribute to the preservation of the history of the city.
   (B)   Certified local government program. In the development of the
Certified Local Government Program, the city may ask the Commission to perform
other responsibilities that may be delegated to the city under the National
Historic Preservation Act, being 54 U.S.C. §§ 3000101 et seq.
   (C)   Nominations to national register of historic places.
      (1)   Initiation of nominations. To participate in the Certified Local
Government Program, the city shall initiate all local nominations to the
National Register of Historic Places and shall request the Mayor and the
Commission to submit recommendations on each proposed nomination to the
National Register. The Mayor and the Commission shall obtain comments from the
public that shall be included in their National Register recommendations.
Within 60 days of the receipt of a nomination from a private individual or the
initiation of a nomination by the city, the city shall inform the state’s
Heritage Council and the owner of the property of the two recommendations
regarding the eligibility of the property. If the Mayor and Commission are not
in agreement, both opinions are forwarded in the city’s report. If both the
Mayor and Commission recommend the property not be nominated, the state’s
Heritage Council shall inform the property owner, the state’s Historic
Preservation Review Board and the State Historic Preservation Officer, and the
property will not be nominated unless an appeal is filed with the state’s
Historic Preservation Officer.
      (2)   Review of nominations. If the Mayor and the Commission agree that a
property should be nominated, or if either of them feel that a property should
be nominated, the nomination will receive a preliminary review by the state’s
Historic Preservation Review Board. The Review Board shall make a
recommendation to the state’s Historic Preservation Officer who decides whether
to forward the nomination to the U.S. Secretary of the Interior who shall make
the decision on listing the property on the National Register. The Mayor, the
Commission or the property owner may appeal the final decision by the state’s
Historic Preservation Officer.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 34.066 STAFFING, RIGHT TO RECEIVE AND SPEND FUNDS.
   (A)   Staff. The Commission may avail itself of such staff as needed from
time to time as assigned by the Mayor. Assignments shall be consistent with
policies established by the city.
   (B)   Right to receive and spend funds. The Commission, in addition to any
appropriations made by the city, shall have the right to receive, hold and
spend funds which it may legally receive from any and every source both in and
out of the commonwealth for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 34.067 HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND LANDMARKS.
   (A)   Adoption of guidelines. Before its first public hearing on a
designation, the Commission shall adopt general guidelines that will apply to
historic districts and landmarks and will assist owners in the preservation and
rehabilitation of their property. The guidelines shall include the Secretary of
the Interiors Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating
Historic Buildings and may include other guidelines that will apply to all
designated property in the city. In its guidelines and in its decisions, the
Commission shall not limit new construction to any one architectural style but
shall seek to preserve the character and integrity of the historic districts
and landmarks. The Commission may expand or amend the guidelines it has adopted
provided it holds a public hearing on the changes and submits the proposed
changes to the City Council for its comments.
   (B)   Public hearings and notice. To initiate the designation process, the
Commission shall assemble information about the district or property being
considered for designation and shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed
designation. Advertised notice of the hearing shall be given, including
conspicuous posting in the proposed district or on the lot of the proposed
landmark for 14 consecutive days immediately prior to the hearing. Notice shall
also be given in a local news publication serving the city. At least 14 days
prior to the public hearing, written notice shall be given by first class mail
to the owners of property under consideration and the owners of all adjoining
property. The Secretary of the Commission or other officer of the Commission
shall certify that the notices were mailed. Written notice shall be considered
sufficient when it is mailed to the person listed as the owner of record in the
office of the county’s Property Valuation Administrator (PVA).
   (C)   Recommendations and designations. The Commission shall recommend to
the City Council the designation of historic districts and individual
landmarks, and the City Council may make these designations by the enactment of
ordinances.
   (D)   Criteria for designation. A historic district or a landmark shall
qualify for designation when it meets one or more of the following criteria
which shall be discussed in a Commission report making its recommendations to
the City Council:
      (1)   Its character as an established and geographically definable
residential neighborhood, united by culture, architectural styles or physical
plan and development;
      (2)   Its character as a geographically definable area possessing a
significant concentration of buildings or structures united by past events or
by its plan or physical development;
      (3)   Its value as a reminder of the cultural or archeological heritage
of the city, state or nation;
      (4)   Its location as a site of a significant local, state or national
event;
      (5)   Its identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the development of the city, state or nation;
      (6)   Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer or
architect whose individual work has influenced the development of the city,
state or nation;
      (7)   Its value as a building that is recognized for the quality of its
architecture and that retains sufficient elements showing its architectural
significance; or
      (8)   Its distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style
valuable for the study of a period, method of construction or use of indigenous
materials.
   (E)   Recommendation and report to City Council. After evaluating the
testimony at its public hearing, survey information and other material it has
assembled, the Commission shall make its recommendation to the City Council
with a written report on the area or property under consideration. The report
shall contain information about the buildings identified for inclusion in the
proposed designation.
   (F)   Notification of designation. The Commission shall notify each owner of
the decision relating to its property and its designation as a landmark or as a
part of a historic district. The Commission shall also give notice of the
designation to the government offices of the city, which shall retain them for
future reference. The Commission shall also send a map of the approved historic
district to the Planning Commission and request the Planning Commission to make
a note on the zoning map of the existence of the historic district and make the
map of it available to the public. The Commission shall also request the
Planning Commission to include the approved historic district and approved
landmarks in the Comprehensive Plan and any amendments thereto and such new
Comprehensive Plan as may thereafter be adopted.
   (G)   Amendment or recision of a designation. The amendment or recision of
any designation shall be accomplished through the same steps as were followed
in the original designation.
   (H)   Action by City Council. The City Council shall approve, modify or
disapprove the proposed designation within 60 days after receiving the
recommendation and report of the Commission.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 34.068 CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (A)   Certificate of appropriateness required.
      (1)   A certificate of appropriateness from the Commission shall be
required before a person may undertake the following actions affecting a
landmark or a property in a historic district:
         (a)   Alteration of the exterior part of a building or structure that
is visible to the public;
         (b)   New construction;
         (c)   Demolition; or
         (d)   Relocation.
      (2)   A certificate of appropriateness is required even when the proposed
work does not require a building permit. When seeking a building permit from
the city for a project involving designated property, a person must submit a
certificate of appropriateness approving any of the work listed in this
subchapter.
   (B)   Application to Commission. An applicant shall be referred to the
Commission when proposing an exterior alteration visible to the public, new
construction, demolition or relocation affecting a landmark or a property in a
historic district. The applicant shall supply the Commission with the
information required in order to render a decision on the application for a
certificate of appropriateness. The applicant shall provide, where applicable,
drawings of the proposed work, photographs of the existing building or site and
adjacent properties, and information about the building materials to be used.
When an applicant proposes to demolish a landmark or building or structure
within a historic district, if applicable, the applicant shall submit detailed
plans for the replacement building or structure and the time table for
completion of the new construction.
   (C)   Consultation with applicant. Before an applicant prepares plans, he or
she may bring a tentative proposal to the Commission for comments. The
Commission shall be aware of the importance of finding a way to meet the
current needs of the applicant. The Commission shall also recognize the
importance of approving plans that will be reasonable and economically feasible
for the applicant to implement.
   (D)   Guidelines for decision on applications. In rendering a decision on an
application, the Commission shall use its adopted guidelines. The Commission
shall consider the effect of the proposed work on the landmark or the property
in the historic district upon which work is to be performed, and the
relationship between such work and other adjacent or nearby buildings and
property. In evaluating the effect and the relationship, the Commission shall
consider historical and architectural significance, architectural style,
design, texture, materials and color. The certificate from the Commission shall
not relieve the applicant from complying with the requirements of other state
and local laws and regulations.
   (E)   Action by Commission; notice to applicants.
      (1)   The Commission shall hold a public meeting on each certificate of
appropriateness within 30 days after a completed application is received. The
Commission shall render a decision on the application within 45 days after the
receipt of a completed application provided that the Commission may extend the
time for decision an additional 60 days when the application is for demolition
or new construction. The Commission shall approve or disapprove each
application, and it shall give its reasons for its decision using the criteria
contained in this section and in its guidelines.
      (2)   Should the Commission, by majority vote, determine that the
application has a significant impact on the neighborhood and/or a historic
district, in lieu of approving or disapproving the application at the public
meeting, the Commission, by majority vote, may set a public hearing on the
certificate of appropriateness which shall be held within 45 days of the date
of the vote. The Commission may suggest modifications to an application and may
then approve a certificate of appropriateness providing for revisions in the
plans submitted. If the Commission fails to decide on an application within the
specified time period, the application shall be deemed approved.
      (3)   Applicants, and all owners of property that adjoin the property for
which the certificate of appropriateness is sought, shall be given notice of
the public meetings and hearings relating to their application and shall be
informed of the Commission’s decision. Advertised notice of the public hearing
shall be given, including conspicuous posting on the property for 14
consecutive days immediately prior to the hearing. Notice of a public hearing
shall also be given in a local news publication serving the city. The
Commission may include in its application fee a charge for the cost of giving
notice of the public hearing.
      (4)   Upon approval of the application, the applicant will receive a
certificate of appropriateness.
   (F)   Length of validity of certificate of appropriateness. A certificate of
appropriateness shall remain valid for one year after it is issued. Work is
required to start before the end of the one-year period. If the approved work
has not been completed within two years after the certificate of
appropriateness was issued, the Commission shall review the situation and may
require an application for a certificate of appropriateness for the work that
remains to be done.
   (G)   Stop work order; injunction. In the event work is being performed
without the required certificate of appropriateness, the city shall issue a
stop work order. All work shall cease on the designated property. No additional
work shall be undertaken as long as such stop work order shall continue in
effect. The Commission shall meet with the owner or tenant to resolve the
problem. The City Attorney may seek in Circuit Court an injunction and any
other appropriate relief in order that the intent of this subchapter be carried
out. The procedures authorized in this section may be used in the event work is
being performed not in accordance with the certificate of appropriateness
issued by the Commission.
   (H)   Demolition of landmark, building or structure in historic district.
When an applicant wishes to demolish a landmark or a building or structure in a
historic district, the Commission may negotiate with the applicant to determine
if there is a viable alternative to demolition. The Commission may ask
interested individuals and organizations for assistance in seeking an
alternative to demolition and in obtaining estimates on rehabilitation costs
for the threatened building. After its public meeting, the Commission may
determine that a building or structure in a historic district may be demolished
if it does not contribute to the historic district. On all other demolition
applications, the Commission shall study the question of economic hardship on
the applicant and shall determine whether the landmark or the property in a
historic district has a reasonable and beneficial use without the approval of
the demolition application. In the case of an income-producing building, the
Commission shall also determine whether the applicant can obtain a reasonable
return from his or her building. The Commission may ask applicants for
additional information to be used in making these determinations. If economic
hardship or obtaining a reasonable return is not proven, the Commission shall
deny the demolition application unless the Commission finds grounds to grant
the demolition application under the points contained in this subchapter. When
the Commission approves demolition of a building or structure, that approval
shall be valid for one year from the date of final action taken by the
Commission. If demolition has not commenced and completed within one year, the
Commission shall review the circumstances and shall require a new application
to authorize the demolition, or to authorize any work remaining.
   (I)   Moving a landmark, building or structure in historic district. When an
applicant wishes to move a landmark, building or structure in a historic
district, or when an applicant wishes to move a building or structure to a lot
containing a landmark, or to a property in a historic district, the Commission
shall consider the contribution the building or structure makes to its present
setting; whether there are definite plans for the site to be vacated; whether
the building or structure can be moved without significant damage to its
physical integrity; and the compatibility of the building or structure to its
proposed site and adjacent properties. These considerations shall be in
addition to the points contained in this subchapter.
   (J)   Emergency situations.
      (1)   When a property is damaged by fire, a storm or other unexpected
event, the owner or tenant may receive approval from the Chairperson or Vice-
Chairperson of the Commission for work to be done in response to this
emergency. At its next meeting, the Commission shall be informed of the
certificate of appropriateness that was issued. In situations requiring
temporary action, an owner may do work in order to protect temporarily his or
her property from further damage provided he or she reports this work to the
Commission within two business days.
      (2)   In any case where the city determines that there are emergency
conditions dangerous to life, health or property affecting a landmark or a
property in a historic district, the city may order the remedying of these
conditions without the approval of the Commission. When it is possible, the
city shall consult with the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of the Commission
about the action being taken. If consultation is not possible, the city shall
notify the Commission of the action taken after the completion of the work.
   (K)   Routine alterations; ordinary maintenance.
      (1)   The Commission shall prepare a list of routine alterations that
shall receive immediate approval from the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of
the Commission without a public meeting, when an applicant complies with the
specifications of the Commission. The list shall include paint colors
appropriate for different types of buildings. At each meeting, the Commission
shall be informed of the certificates of appropriateness that have been issued
under this provision.
      (2)   Ordinary repairs and maintenance may be undertaken without a
certificate of appropriateness provided this work on a landmark or a property
in a historic district does not change its exterior appearance that is visible
to the public. Every person in charge of a landmark or a property in a historic
district shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such
buildings or structures; and all interior portions thereof which, if not so
maintained, may cause such buildings or structures to deteriorate or to become
damaged or otherwise to fall into a state of disrepair. The purpose of this
provision is to prevent a person from forcing the demolition of his or her
building by neglecting it and by permitting damage to the building because of
weather or vandalism. No provision in this subchapter shall be interpreted to
require an owner or tenant to undertake an alteration or to restore his or her
building to its original appearance. The provisions of this section shall be in
addition to the provisions of the state’s Building Code requiring buildings and
structures to be kept in good repair.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 8-6-2012)
TOURIST AND CONVENTION COMMISSION
§ 34.080 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; TAX LEVIED.
   The City Council establishes the “Elizabethtown Tourist and Convention
Bureau” and levies a transient room tax per KRS 91A.390. The imposition and
collection of this transient room tax shall be on 3-1-1993 and each day
thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 117.01) (Ord. 4, passed 2-8-1993)
Cross-reference:
   Restaurant tax, see §§
121.01 through
121.11
§ 34.081 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (A)   These revenues shall be due and payable to the city’s Director of
Finance no later than the thirtieth day following the last day of each month,
together with a return on a form furnished by or obtained from the city’s
Director of Finance. The tax return form shall be accompanied by a check for
the total amount of tax and any penalties then due and owing.
   (B)   Any tax imposed by this section which shall remain unpaid after it
becomes due and payable, as set forth herein, shall have added to it a penalty
of 10% of the tax due, regardless of the period of any delinquency, together
with interest at a rate of 2% for each month of delinquency or fraction thereof
until paid. For example, taxes to be paid in the sum of $100 for a particular
month would then result in a tax bill of $100 principal sum of tax, plus $10
for the 10% penalty, plus $24 for 12 months’ delinquency, totaling $134, if the
original $100 tax was not paid for a period of 12 months past its due date. The
tax imposed by this section shall be in addition to other general taxes and the
occupational or business license tax presently in force.
(Prior Code, § 117.02) (Ord. 4, passed 2-8-1993)
§ 34.082 AMOUNT OF TAX.
   A transient room tax of 3% is hereby imposed on the rate, rent or other
charge for every occupancy of a suite, room, rooms, cabins, lodgings,
campsites, or other accommodations charged by any hotel, motel, inn, tourist
camp, tourist cabin, campgrounds, recreational vehicle parks, or any other
place in which accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for
consideration or any person that facilitates the rental of the accommodations
by brokering, coordinating, or in any other way arranging for the rental of the
accommodations. Transient room taxes shall not apply to rooms, lodgings,
campsites, or accommodations supplied for a continuous period of 30 days or
more to a person. Regardless of whether the city has entered into an agreement
with a third party online rental company renting or leasing accommodations
subject to this subchapter to collect the transient room tax, all persons,
firms, organizations or businesses subject to this subchapter shall remain
liable for filing the appropriate return and paying any transient room tax not
collected or paid by the third party online rental company.
(Ord. 37-2022, passed 12-5-2022)
§ 34.083 LIABILITY FOR TAX.
   All persons, companies, corporations or like or similar persons, groups or
organizations doing business as motor courts, motels, hotels, inns or like or
similar accommodations businesses shall collect and pay the transient room tax
as stated above.
(Prior Code, § 117.04) (Ord. 4, passed 2-8-1993)
§ 34.084 SCOPE OF TAX.
   The tax shall be for room and/or space charges only.
(Prior Code, § 117.05) (Ord. 4, passed 2-8-1993)
§ 34.085 BONDING; REPORTS.
   The Treasurer of the Commission and any other person writing checks or
handling funds shall be bonded to the city in an amount commensurate to the
largest amount of money on hand in any given month. The Commission Treasurer
shall make an itemized quarterly report to the City Council showing expenses
and outlays for each month.
(Prior Code, § 117.06) (Ord. 4, passed 2-8-1993)
§ 34.086 DEPOSITORY.
   The City Council will determine the depository of the Commission funds.
(Prior Code, § 117.07) (Ord. 4, passed 2-8-1993)
§ 34.087 POWERS OF COMMISSION; FISCAL YEAR; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The City Council forbids the commission to issue revenue bonds or to borrow
money beyond the fiscal year without the express approval of the City Council.
Effective 3-1-1993, the fiscal year will begin July 1 of each year and
terminate on June 30 following. This section will become effective on 3-1-1993.
(Prior Code, § 117.08) (Ord. 4, passed 2-8-1993)
§ 34.088 ACCOUNTING; ENFORCEMENT; AUDITS; CIVIL ACTION.
   (A)   The City Council will name a certified public accountant to make an
annual or specific audit. The city shall collect and enforce this chapter
through its Director of Finance. In the absence of voluntary compliance, the
Director of Finance may charge the subject entities reasonable fees for the
costs of any audit required by the Director of Finance.
(Prior Code, § 117.09)
   (B)   The Director of Finance shall have the authority to audit the subject
businesses books for enforcement purposes. If the tax is not paid within 90
days of the due date, the Director of Finance may bring a civil action to
enforce this section.
(Prior Code, § 117.10)
(Ord. 4, passed 2-8-1993)
§ 34.089 APPOINTMENTS TO BUREAU.
   All appointments shall be made to the Tourist and Convention Bureau pursuant
to KRS 91A.360 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 117.11) (Ord. 4, passed 2-8-1993)
§ 34.090 COSTS OF LITIGATION AND AUDITS.
   All costs of litigation and audits shall be borne wholly by the Convention
and Tourist Bureau.
(Prior Code, § 117.12) (Ord. 4, passed 2-8-1993)
§ 34.091 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   All returns and other information which comes into the hands of the Director
of Finance or any of his or her employees shall be confidential and shall not
be revealed to any person or organization without an order of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 117.13) (Ord. 4, passed 2-8-1993)
CHAPTER 35: PUBLIC SAFETY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Police and Fire Departments established
   
35.02   Motor vehicle accidents and technical rescues; user fees
   
35.03   Civil service classifications
Police Department
   
35.15   Carrying concealed weapons authorized
   
35.16   Disposition of fees for arrests; subpoenas and the like
Civil Service Commission
   
35.30   Composition and purpose
   
35.31   Quorum
   
35.32   Meetings
   
35.33   Distribution of regulations
   
35.34   Departmental regulations
   
35.35   Procedure for entry level examinations
   
35.36   Absence from city employment
   
35.37   Disciplinary action and hearings
   
35.38   Qualifications of applicants; probationary period for Police Department
   
35.39   Qualifications of applicants; probationary period for Fire Department
   
35.40   Application of Civil Service system
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS ESTABLISHED.
   There being created and established a full-time Police Department and Fire
Department for the protection and benefit of the citizens of the city, the
provision of this chapter are hereby reaffirmed.
(Prior Code, § 37.00) (Ord. 5-2000, passed 4-3-2000)
§ 35.02 MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENTS AND TECHNICAL RESCUES; USER FEES.
   The city desires to implement a fair and equitable procedure by which to
collect motor vehicle accidents (MVA) and technical rescue fees from insurance
companies and non-tax payers and establish a billing system in accordance with
state and federal laws, regulations and guidelines.
   (A)   (1)   The city’s Fire Department shall establish fees for the delivery
of Fire Department services, personnel, supplies and equipment to the scene of
motor vehicle accidents and technical rescues. The rate of the user fees shall
be that which is the usual, customary and reasonable costs, which includes any
services, personnel, supplies and equipment and may fluctuate based on the
needs of the accident.
      (2)   The user fees may include police services for traffic control and
accident reconstruction for certain accidents involving fatalities.
   (B)   The user fees shall be filed to the motor vehicle or accident
insurance companies, representing an add-on-cost of the claim for damages.
   (C)   The city may make rules or regulations and from time-to-time and may
amend, revoke or add rules and regulations not inconsistent with this section
as it may deem necessary or expedient in respect to billing for these fees or
the collection thereof.
(Prior Code, § 37.20) (Ord. 07-2005, passed 3-31-2005)
§ 35.03 CIVIL SERVICE CLASSIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The following number and classifications of the city’s Police and Fire
Departments are hereby created.
      (1)   Police Department.
 
                Classification
Job Title       (Classification and salary schedule on file in office of the
                Director of Finance)
Police officers 6P
Sergeants       7P
Lieutenants     7L
 
      (2)   Fire Department.
 
Job Title        Classification (Classification and salary schedule on file in
                 the office of the Director of Finance)
Fire Captains    8F
Fire Lieutenants 7F
Firefighters     6F
 
   (B)   The Chief of Police and any Deputy Chiefs/Majors of Police, the Fire
Chief, any Deputy Chiefs and any Battalion Chiefs are specifically excluded
from the classified service, but are protected under the provisions of KRS
90.380.
   (C)   All radio operators, school guards and meter attendants are
specifically excluded from the above classified service in the city.
(Prior Code, § 37.17) (Ord. 27-2011, passed 12-21-2011; Ord. 11-2016, passed 6-
20-2016)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 35.15 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   All members of the city’s Police Department who carry deadly weapons
on or about their persons, in their regularly scheduled duties as police
officers for the city, may carry concealed deadly weapons on or about their
persons at all times within the state.
   (B)   Deadly weapons that may be carried by members of the city’s Police
Department within the state are those weapons that are usually carried by such
officers in performing their duties while on regularly scheduled shift of duty
for the city.
(Prior Code, § 37.01) (Ord. passed 11-16-1970)
§ 35.16 DISPOSITION OF FEES FOR ARRESTS; SUBPOENAS AND THE LIKE.
   The Chief of Police and members of the city’s Police Department, when
executing warrants of arrest, processes, subpoenas and attachment for witnesses
and other duties as prescribed by law, and are due a fee for same, the same
shall be paid into the city treasury or General Fund, it appearing that the
Chief of Police and members of the city’s Police Department are employed on
salaries.
(Prior Code, § 37.02) (Ord. 10-1990, passed 3-19-1990)
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
§ 35.30 COMPOSITION AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   In accordance with KRS 90.300 through KRS 90.410, all references to
the “Commission” throughout this subchapter specifically relate to the city’s
Civil Service Commission unless otherwise stated.
   (B)   The Mayor, subject to the approval of the city legislative body, shall
appoint at least three, but no more than five, persons who shall constitute the
Civil Service Commission of the city. Each appointee shall be at least 30 years
of age and not related by either blood or marriage to the Mayor or any member
of the city legislative body. The appointees shall originally be appointed one
for a term of three years, one for a term of two years and all remaining
appointments shall be for a term of one year, and the successors to these
appointees shall be appointed in like manner, each for a period of three years
and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. A vacancy shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments. At
the time of any appointment, if the Mayor elects to appoint only three
Commissioners, not more than two Commissioners shall be adherents of the same
political party. If the Mayor elects to appoint more than three Commissioners
not more than three Commissioners shall be adherents of the same political
party. Each appointee shall qualify by taking an oath of office as required by
law. Each year, the Commission shall elect a Chairperson from amongst
themselves. The salaries of the members of the Commission may be fixed by the
city legislative body.
   (C)   The purpose of the city’s Civil Service Commission shall be to hold
examinations as to the qualification of all applicants for: positions within
the city’s Police or Fire Departments, for promotions therein, and to hear and
adjudicate charges against or involving members of the Police and Fire
Departments.
(Ord. 22-2019, passed 9-30-2019)
§ 35.31 QUORUM.
   Three of the five members of the city’s Civil Service Commission shall
constitute a quorum of the transaction of business and the certificate of
results of the examination. If less than five members are present, their
decision must be based upon a majority.
(Ord. 22-2019, passed 9-30-2019)
§ 35.32 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Any person having formal business before the Commission may, by
written request, petition the Chairperson of the Commission for a meeting which
shall, at the discretion of the Chairperson, be granted within ten days from
the date request is received.
   (B)   Said petition shall identify the name and address of the petitioner,
and shall state the nature of the business to be brought before the Commission.
If the Commission deems the business to be of sufficient public importance, a
public notice of same shall be published in two consecutive issues of a local
newspaper.
(Ord. 22-2019, passed 9-30-2019)
§ 35.33 DISTRIBUTION OF REGULATIONS.
   These rules and regulations and all amendments thereto shall be distributed
to the Mayor of the city, the City Attorney, the Police Chief and the Fire
Chief and to any other person upon request; and, they are subject to approval
by City Council.
(Ord. 22-2019, passed 9-30-2019)
§ 35.34 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   The Police and Fire Chiefs may adopt rules and regulations for the internal
order of their respective departments. Said rules and regulations shall not be
unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious or discriminatory in scope or application.
Violation of said regulations by an employee may be grounds for dismissal or
suspension in accordance with applicable law and policy.
(Ord. 22-2019, passed 9-30-2019)
§ 35.35 PROCEDURE FOR ENTRY LEVEL EXAMINATIONS.
   Upon receipt of notice from the Mayor of the city or from the Police Chief
or Fire Chief, of a vacancy in an entry level position in either of the Police
or Fire Departments, the Commission shall hold an examination of all applicants
and notice of this fact shall be published at least once in a newspaper of
local circulation not less than seven days, nor more than 21 days, before the
examination in accordance with KRS 424.130(1)(d).
(Ord. 22-2019, passed 9-30-2019)
§ 35.36 ABSENCE FROM CITY EMPLOYMENT.
   If a member of the Police Department or the Fire Department who has served
past the one year probationary period should leave city employment, he or she
may be rehired by the same department, with the permission of the Mayor, within
one year from his or her last date of employment without competitive
examination; provided, however, that, said reemployment shall be at the entry
level position. Refer to the city policy for details.
(Ord. 22-2019, passed 9-30-2019)
§ 35.37 DISCIPLINARY ACTION AND HEARINGS.
   (A)   The Commission may remove, suspend or reduce in grade or pay, or
reprimand any civil service regulated employee found to be guilty of an
actionable charge or charges.
   (B)   Any disciplinary action taken against any sworn police officer must
follow KRS 15.520, as appropriate.
   (C)   Any disciplinary action taken against any firefighter must follow KRS
90.260, as appropriate.
   (D)   The results of all Commission rulings shall be in writing and shall be
made a permanent part of the employee’s personnel file within the Department.
   (E)   All Commission hearings shall be private and attended only by those
persons permitted by the Commission, unless the accused employee demands a
public hearing pursuant to KRS 61.810(1)(f).
(Ord. 22-2019, passed 9-30-2019)
§ 35.38 QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS; PROBATIONARY PERIOD FOR POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Qualifications.
      (1)   All applicants for appointment as members of the city’s Police
Department shall:
         (a)   Be a citizen of the United States;
         (b)   Be at least 21 years of age;
         (c)   Possess a high school diploma or equivalent thereof;
         (d)   Possess a valid Kentucky operator’s license prior to employment;
         (e)   Be fingerprinted for and undergo a criminal background check;
         (f)   Not have been convicted of a felony;
         (g)   Not be prohibited by federal or state law from possessing a
firearm;
         (h)   Have received and read the state’s Law Officers Code of Ethics;
         (i)   Have not received a dishonorable discharge, bad conduct
discharge or general discharge under other than honorable conditions, if having
served in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States;
         (j)   Have passed a physical examination that validates that applicant
can perform peace officer duties;
         (k)   Have passed a drug screening test that is negative for the use
of any illegal controlled substance or prescription drug abuse;
         (l)   Have not had certification as a peace officer permanently
revoked in another state;
         (m)   Meet all requirements of the commonwealth, Department of
Justice, Bureau of Training, under the Police Officer Professional Standards
found under standards KRS 15.380 and KRS 15.402, KRS 95A.230 or any other
standards of any other state agency adopted by the Police Department;
         (n)   May be required to undergo and successfully pass any
psychological tests, emotional tests, physical tests and/or any other such
suitability screeners as may be approved and/or required by the state and/or
the Civil Service Commission in order to determine the psychological, emotional
and physical suitability of any applicant for the positions of police officer;
         (o)   Successfully pass, to the satisfaction of the Department, a
background investigation that demonstrates that the applicant is free from any
personal problems that would tend to render him or her unfit to be a
representative of the Police Department. The applicant shall, if requested,
sign a consent form allowing a duly authorized representative of the Police
Department to talk to any person or corporation concerning the applicants’
fitness for the position; and
         (p)   Have taken a polygraph examination that verifies the applicant
is suitable for employment.
      (2)   All applicants shall complete an application form approved by the
Commission and shall return same to the Police Department.
      (3)   All applicants unless exempt under division (A)(1)(p) above shall
pass a written examination. All examinations shall be on forms furnished and
graded by the Commission, testing company or agent employed by the Commission.
   (B)   Probationary period.
      (1)   As part of the qualification procedure, after certification as a
police officer, applicants will be placed on a probationary status for a period
of one year. Applicants will be placed on a probationary status for a period of
one year from their dates of graduation from the police academy. See KRS 95.762
(5). The purpose of the period of probation is to provide the Chief of Police
and Mayor reasonable opportunity to evaluate the appointee as to his or her
ability to perform assigned duties, to learn proper police procedures, to
accept and respond to supervision and to conduct themselves properly as a
police officer. The probationary period shall be regarded as an intrinsic part
of the process and shall be utilized for closely observing the employee’s work
for securing the most effective adjustment of a new employee to his or her
position, and the elimination of any probationary employee whose performance
does not meet the required standard of work.
      (2)   During the probation period, any employee may be dismissed by the
city without the right of the employee to a review of any kind unless the
employee has a reason to believe that the dismissal was made for political or
religious reasons or because of discrimination with respect to race, color,
sex, national origin or other protected class, in which case he or she shall
have the right to appeal to the Civil Service Commission. Notice of dismissal
within the probationary period shall be given to the employee in writing, and
no statement of reason to the employee is mandatory on the part of the city.
   (C)   Results of examination and application for entry level positions.
      (1)   The names of persons who have passed all portions of the
examination process, and who meet all other qualifications, shall be certified
and ranked in the order of their ratings earned in the examinations given for
the purpose of establishing the list. The ratings earned in the examination
process shall be divided into bands. Bands are a series of test scores, defined
by a high score and a low score, which may be indicative of a certain level of
knowledge, skill or ability. All scores falling within a given band shall be
considered tied scores of the same rank and shall be certified at the same
time. Everyone within a certain range of scores or band gets the same grade.
There will be three bands. The separation is determined by the following
scoring:
         (a)   Band A includes all scores from 90 to 100;
         (b)   Band B includes all scores from 80 to 89; and
         (c)   Band C includes all scores from 70 to 79.
      (2)   Scoring for each applicant shall be as follows:
         (a)   Oral interview: 50 points; and
         (b)   Written examination: 50 points.
   (D)   Lateral transfers.
      (1)   (a)   Any applicant who is a Kentucky POPS Certified Officer (KRS
15.380, KRS 15.402 and KRS 95A.230) and who meets KLEC standards shall not be
required to take the written examination. Said applicant shall be eligible for
priority ranking on the list and placement in Band A.
         (b)   Any applicant who is a certified officer outside of the
commonwealth may be exempted from taking the written examination at the
discretion of the Chief of the Police Department. Said applicant may be
eligible to receive priority ranking and placement in Band A at the discretion
of the Chief of the Police Department.
      (2)   The certification process shall be done by the Commission and
presented to the Mayor of the city, who shall select one individual from three
candidates certified for appointment. All candidates in a band have the same
score and are ranked and certified together. If two vacancies exist, then four
candidates are eligible for appointment. If three vacancies exist, then five
are eligible and so forth. The list thus certified to the Mayor shall always
contain at least two more eligible names than the number of vacancies to be
filled. If there are not enough candidates in the top band, then the Commission
shall also certify all of the candidates in the next band of tied scores.
      (3)   The results of said examination (written and oral) shall be open to
inspection by the applicant for 30 days following the examination.
      (4)   Five points will be added to the passing score of the written
examination for any honorably discharged member of the United States Armed
Forces (KRS 90.320(3)).
      (5)   Applicants who have successfully passed all portions of the
examination process and have met other requirements, may be retained on the
list of eligible appointees for a period of one year for any similar vacancy
and the Mayor may hire or select from this list or the Mayor may select from a
new list from a new examination whenever the number of eligible appointees on
the one year list shall be less than the number of vacancies to be filled, plus
two; however, no person shall be certified by the Commission from any eligible
list more than four times to the Mayor for the same or similar position.
   (E)   Procedures for promotion.
      (1)   Eligibility and announcement (Sergeant and Lieutenant).
         (a)   Personnel eligible for promotion to the next highest rank are
those holding the next lowest rank and successfully completed their
probationary period. Officers must have at least two years of law enforcement
experience.
            1.   Sergeant: probationary period plus two years of experience.
Total of three years.
            2.   Lieutenant: probationary period plus one year of experience as
Sergeant. Total of two years.
         (b)   A written announcement will be provided to all eligible
employees identifying the position to be filled and instructions to apply
(resumes required). The announcement will include a job description and closing
date for application. Once the application period has closed, additional
instructions will be provided to all candidates.
         (c)   All applicants will be required to sign a non-disclosure
agreement regarding the questions and/or assessments while the process is
active. The process will remain active until the final interviews (Chief's
interview) are completed.
         (d)   The position of Chief of Police (Colonel) and Deputy Chief
(Major) are non-civil service positions and are not included within the Civil
Service Ordinance.
      (2)   Procedures (Sergeant).
         (a)   All applicants will be required to submit a resume to the Deputy
Chief of Administration.
         (b)   The first step in the process will be a written examination. The
test will be developed and administered by an outside representative. The
written examination consists of 40% of the candidate's overall score.
         (c)   The second step of the promotional process will be an assessment
of the candidate's ability to navigate situational questions. The assessment
portion of the process will consist of two task-oriented questions requiring
the candidate to navigate supervisory related tasks. Each task will be worth 25
% of the candidate's overall score, 50% total. An assessment center panel shall
be established to conduct oral interviews and assessment of the candidates
based on the task-oriented and situational questions. Assessment center panels
will consist of one command level officer within the Police Department and two
from outside law enforcement organizations. Outside raters for the assessment
center must be certified law enforcement professionals of accredited law
enforcement organizations outside of Hardin County and contiguous counties.
Members must serve within the rank of Sergeant or higher.
         (d)   The third and last step in this process is the accumulation of
suitability points. This section consists of 10% of the candidate's overall
score. Although this is listed as the third step, this step may take place at
any point within the promotional process. The suitability list is identical to
the list as defined in division (F) below. Please see division (F) below for a
detailed explanation.
         (e)   Once the testing process has completed, a numerical promotional
list will be communicated to the candidates. The Chief of Police and both
Deputy Chiefs (Command Staff) will conduct a final interview with the top three
candidates. If more than one position is vacant, one additional candidate will
be interviewed. Example: two vacancies would equal the top four candidates,
three vacancies would equal the top five candidates, and the like. Once the
final interview begins, all candidates included within the final interview are
equally positioned within the promotional process. The Chief of Police, in
consultation with the Deputy Chiefs, will make their final recommendation to
the Mayor.
         (f)   Once the promotions are finalized, the Chief of Police may elect
to maintain the established list for one year or may elect to start a new
promotional process for future opportunities. If the Chief of Police elects to
maintain the current promotional list, the list will be effective for one year.
The year will start after the promotional list is published.
      (3)   Procedures (Lieutenant).
         (a)   All applicants will be required to submit a resume to the Deputy
Chief of Administration.
         (b)   The first step of the promotional process will be an assessment
of the candidate's ability to navigate situational questions. The assessment
portion of the process will consist of two task-oriented questions requiring
the candidate to navigate mid-level supervisory related tasks and a third
section consisting of approximately six interview style questions. Each task or
section will be worth 30% of the candidate's overall score, 90% total. An
assessment center panel shall be established to conduct oral interviews and
assessment of the candidates based on task-oriented and situational questions.
Assessment center panels will consist of one command level officer within the
Police Department and two from outside law enforcement organizations. Outside
members for the assessment center must be certified law enforcement
professionals of accredited law enforcement organizations outside of Hardin
County and contiguous counties. Members must serve within the rank of
lieutenant or higher.
         (c)   The last step in this process is the accumulation of suitability
points. This section consists of 10% of the candidate's overall score. Although
this is listed as the last step, this step may take place at any point within
the promotional process. The suitability list is identical to the list for
sergeant. Please see division (F) below for a detailed explanation.
         (d)   Once the promotions process has completed, a numerical
promotional list will be published for all candidates. The Chief of Police and
both Deputy Chiefs (Command Staff) will conduct a final interview with the top
three candidates. If more than one position is vacant, one additional candidate
will be interviewed. Example: two vacancies would equal the top four
candidates, three vacancies would equal the top five candidates, and the like.
Once the final interview begins, all candidates included within the final
interview are equally positioned within the promotional process. The Chief of
Police, in consultation with the Deputy Chiefs, will make their final
recommendation to the Mayor.
         (e)   Once the promotions are finalized, the Chief of Police may elect
to maintain the established list for one year or may elect to start a new
promotional process for future opportunities. If the Chief of Police elects to
maintain the current promotional list, the list will be effective for one year.
The year will start once the promotional list is published.
   (F)   Suitability rating. The suitability portion of the promotional process
is designed to reward those candidates who possess qualities favorable to
supervisory personnel. Below is a list of attributes and detractions considered
during the suitability computation. Candidates may only attain ten points or
10%.
      (1)   Additive points.
         (a)   Good conduct in grade: one point; and
         (b)   Pass PT Test: one point (within last six months of promotional
process).
      (2)   Active duty time.
         (a)   Less than four years: one point; and
         (b)   Four years or more: two points.
      (3)   Higher education.
         (a)   Associates degree: two points;
         (b)   Bachelor’s degree: three points; and
         (c)   Master’s degree: four points.
      (4)   Academies. Graduation from either the FBI National Academy or the
Southern Police Institute Administrative Officers Course shall add one point to
the above scoring.
      (5)   Years of service with the Police Department.
         (a)   Five to nine years of service: one point;
         (b)   Ten to 14 years of service: two points; and
         (c)   Fifteen years or more: three points.
      (6)   Other agencies. Years of service with other agencies may apply
after applicant has completed one year of probation.
      (7)   Deductive points. Deductions (based upon the previous year of
promotional examination):
         (a)   Detractions occurring within the previous 12 months (date of
promotional posting).
            1.   Each job performance/counseling statement: deduct one point.
            2.   Each at-fault motor vehicle collision: deduct one point.
         (b)   Suspension without pay or reduction in grade within the last 12
months (date of promotional posting).
            1.   One to 40 hours: disqualification.
            2.   Greater than 40 hours: disqualification.
            3.   Demotion: disqualification.
         (c)   Suspension without pay or reduction in grade within the last
five years (date of promotional posting).
            1.   One to 40 hours: deduct five points.
            2.   Greater than 40 hours: deduct ten points.
            3.   Demotion: deduct ten points.
   (G)   Computation of scores on promotional tests.
      (1)   To compute any applicant’s score, the Civil Service Commission
shall utilize the following calculations.
         (a)   Sergeant list.
            1.   Forty percent written exam (40% of the total exam score).
            2.   Fifty percent assessment center (25% each task).
            3.   Ten percent suitability.
         (b)   Lieutenant list.
            1.   Ninety percent assessment center (30% each task).
            2.   Ten percent suitability.
      (2)   The Commission shall certify a list of candidates and their total
scores with rankings of highest to lowest on total test scores. In accordance
with KRS 90.350(1), the Mayor may select one of the top three (or two of the
top four and the like) to fill the position.
      (3)   The Commission shall notify each candidate of his or her percentage
score on the promotional examination and how said score ranks in comparison
with the other candidates.
   (H)   Promotion probationary period.
      (1)   Any promoted officer is on probation for one year from the date of
appointment and may be reduced with or without cause within that probationary
time.
      (2)   As a safeguard against the promotion of employees beyond their
capability, the Department includes a probationary period as the final step in
the promotion process. Upon appointment to probational vacancies, officers are
on probationary status for one year from the date of promotion. After the
conclusion of the probationary period, if demoted, the officer shall be given a
written list of reasons and said demotion shall be reviewed by the Civil
Service Commission if requested by the employee.
(Ord. 22-2019, passed 9-30-2019; Ord. 09-2023, passed 5-31-2023)
§ 35.39 QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS; PROBATIONARY PERIOD FOR FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   All applicants for appointment as members of the city’s Fire
Department shall:
         (a)   Be a citizen of the United States;
         (b)   Be at least of the 18 years of age for the position sought;
         (c)   Possess a valid Kentucky operator’s license prior to employment;
         (d)   Be an orderly law-abiding citizen of sobriety and integrity;
         (e)   Be able to read, write and understand the English language;
         (f)   Not have been convicted of a felony;
         (g)   Possess a high school diploma or the equivalent thereof;
         (h)   Be free of any physical, mental or emotional defects that would
prevent the performance of his or her duties as a firefighter, and successfully
meet all physical standards and requirements of the Fire Department, and any
higher education requirements which might later be imposed by the Department;
         (i)   Meet all requirements of the commonwealth’s Fire Commission,
meet KRS 95A.230 or any other standards of any other state agency adopted by
the Fire Department;
         (j)   Be required to undergo and successfully pass any psychological
tests, emotional tests, physical tests and/or any other such suitability
screeners as may be approved and/or required by the state and/or the Civil
Service Commission in order to determine the psychological, emotional and
physical suitability of any applicant for the position of firefighter; and
         (k)   Successfully pass, to the satisfaction of the Department a
background investigation that demonstrates that the applicant is free from any
personal problems that would tend to render him or her unfit to be a
representative of the Fire Department. The applicant shall, if requested, sign
a consent form allowing a duly authorized representative of the Fire Department
to talk to any person or corporation concerning the applicants’ fitness for the
position.
      (2)   All applicants shall complete an application form approved by the
Commission, and shall return same to Human Resources Office or the office of
the Fire Chief.
      (3)   All examinations shall be on forms furnished and graded by the
Commission, testing company or agent employed by the Commission.
      (4)   As part of the qualification procedure for firefighter, applicants
will be placed on a probationary status for a period of one year from their
date of hire. (See KRS 95.762(5).) The purpose of the period of probation is to
provide the Fire Chief and Mayor reasonable opportunity to evaluate the
appointee as to his or her ability to perform assigned duties, to learn proper
fire procedures, to accept and respond to supervision and to conduct themselves
properly as a firefighter in contact with the public. The probationary period
shall be regarded as an intrinsic part of the process and shall be utilized for
closely observing the employee’s work for securing the most effective
adjustment of a new employee to his/her position, and the elimination of any
probationary employee whose performance does not meet the required standard of
work.
      (5)   During the probation period, any employee may be dismissed by the
city without the right of the employee to a review of any kind unless the
employee has a reason to believe that the dismissal was made for political or
religious reasons or because of discrimination with respect to race, color,
sex, national origin or other protected class, in which case he or she shall
have the right to appeal to the Civil Service Commission. Notice of dismissal
within the probationary period shall be given to the employee in writing;
however, no statement of reason to the employee is required on the part of the
city.
   (B)   Results of examination and application for entry level positions.
      (1)   There will be a written and oral examination for each qualified
applicant. The written exam is equal to 50% of the overall score. The applicant
must score 70% correct on the written examination to qualify for the oral exam,
which comprises the remaining 50% of the score. The average of these scores
will be calculated and then serve as the final score for banding purposes.
      (2)   Five points shall be added to the passing score on the written
examination for any honorably discharged member of the U.S. Armed Forces (KRS
90.320(3)).
      (3)   If an applicant passes the written examination and is a Kentucky
Fire Commission Certified Firefighter at the paid level (KRS 95A.230), he or
she shall be eligible for priority ranking on the qualifying list and placed in
the A Band.
      (4)   The names of persons who have passed all portions of the
examination process and who meet all other qualifications shall be certified
and ranked in the order of their score earned after the examinations given for
the purpose of establishing a list. The scores earned in the examination
process shall be divided into bands. The band is defined by a high score and a
low score, which may be indicative of the shared level of knowledge, skill or
ability of the applicants. All scores falling within a given band shall be
considered tied and shall be certified at the same time. There can be up to
three bands with the designations A, B and C.
      (5)   The certification process shall be done by the Commission and
presented to the Mayor of the city, who shall select one individual from three
candidates certified for appointment. If two vacancies exist, then four
candidates are eligible for appointment. If three vacancies exist, then five
are eligible and so forth. The list thus certified to the Mayor shall always
contain at least two more eligible names than the number of vacancies to be
filled. If there are not enough candidates in the top band, then the Commission
shall also certify all of the candidates in the next band of tied scores.
      (6)   The results of said examination (written and oral or assessment)
shall be open to inspection by the applicant for 30 days following the
examination.
      (7)   Any applicant appointed to any position with the Fire Department
may be required to pass a physical examination by a physician selected by the
city.
      (8)   Applicants who have successfully passed all portions of the
examination process and have met other requirements, may be retained on the
list of eligible appointees for a period of one year for any similar vacancy
and the Mayor may hire or select from this list or the Mayor may select from a
new list from a new examination whenever the number of eligible appointees on
the one year list shall be less than the number of vacancies to be filled, plus
two; however, no person shall be certified by the Commission from any eligible
list more than four times to the Mayor for the same or similar position.
   (C)   Procedures for promotion within the Fire Department.
      (1)   Those persons eligible for promotion to the next highest rank are
those holding the next lowest rank.
      (2)   In order to be eligible to be promoted from the lowest rank (entry
level position) within the Fire Department to the next highest rank requires
that the employee serve past a probationary period of one year and have
experience either within the city’s Fire Department or in a Chapter 95 Fire
Department equaling years of service in the lowest rank.
      (3)   For all subsequent promotion eligibility, the employee is required
to serve in their current rank for at least one year past his or her
probationary period of one year (total of two years in time and grade).
Consideration for promotion shall be based on a competitive written
examination, assessment center score or oral review and a suitability rating
with the weight to be given toward the candidates final score as follows:
         (a)   Written examination: 45 points;
         (b)   Oral interview or assessment: 40 points; and
         (c)   Suitability: 15 points.
      (4)   No Department personnel shall be present or participate in or score
the written portion of the promotional examination.
      (5)   Whenever a civil service vacancy occurs, or a new opening is
created in the city’s Fire Department of a civil service rank of sergeant or
higher, a written examination for such position shall be conducted by the Civil
Service Commission after due notice is given to all of those who are eligible
to take said test.
      (6)   In addition to a written examination, all applicants shall be
examined in person by a panel composed of representatives of fire departments,
emergency services or other fire agencies acceptable to the Civil Service
Commission. A representative of the city’s Civil Service Commission shall be in
attendance during such oral reviews. The oral review by said panel shall relate
to the candidates’ general experience, judgment and fitness for the proposed
promotion. The Chief or his or her designee will be present during the oral
review, but they shall not participate in or score same in any manner
whatsoever. An assessment center may be substituted for the oral review,
provided it meets the approval of the Civil Service Commission.   
      (7)   The suitability rating, which constitutes a maximum of 15 points of
the applicant’s total score shall be determined as follows, with each section
providing a possible five points each:
         (a)   Education. Recognizes the benefit of knowledge gained by the
applicant either through training or applicable formal education:
            1.   One point: 600 hours of Kentucky Fire Commission recorded
training or some college;
            2.   Two points: 1,200 hours of Kentucky Fire Commission recorded
training or associate’s degree;
            3.   Three points: 1,800 hours of Kentucky Fire Commission recorded
training or associate’s degree, plus additional college;
            4.   Four points: 2,400 hours of Kentucky Fire Commission recorded
training or a bachelor’s degree; and
            5.   Five points: 3,000 hours of Kentucky Fire Commission recorded
training or master’s degree or higher.
         (b)   Longevity. Recognizes the unique knowledge and experience gained
by working for the city’s Fire Department: one-half point per year of service
up to ten years, five points possible.
         (c)   Department rating. Recognizes traits or accomplishments that
indicate a likelihood an applicant will succeed in a promoted position.
         (d)   Rating for Lieutenant. Each trait or accomplishment will provide
one point:
            1.   Good conduct in grade (no written deficiency for sick leave,
conduct, equipment abuse, accident or lost work day injury, within 12 months of
the test date);
            2.   Participates in the ACO program;
            3.   Participate and pass Fitness Incentive Program;
            4.   IFSAC Instructor I Certification; and
            5.   NIMS 300 Certification.
         (e)   Rating for Captain. Each trait or accomplishment will provide
one point:
            1.   Good conduct in grade (no written deficiency of sick leave,
conduct, equipment abuse, accident or lost work injury; within 12 months of the
test date);
            2.   Participate and pass Fitness Incentive Program;
            3.   NIMS 400 Certification;
            4.   IFSAC Instructor II Certification; and
            5.   IFSAC Fire Officer I Certification.
      (8)   The Fire Chief shall furnish the suitability rating to the Civil
Service Commission prior to knowing the results of either the written
examination or the oral review of the applicants for promotion.
   (D)   Computation of scores on promotional tests.
      (1)   To compute any applicant’s score, the Civil Service Commission
shall take the sum of the percentage of correct answers, based on 100 points
possible, on the written examination by 45% to provide a possible 45 points
(i.e., an applicant who scores 100% correct on a written examination shall
receive 45 points), plus the percentage of average cumulative score as
determined by the panel on the oral examination or assessment center to equal
40 points, plus the suitability rating up to a maximum of 15 points, equaling a
total of 100 points.
      (2)   The Commission shall certify a list of candidates and their total
scores with rankings of highest to lowest based on total test scores. In
accordance with KRS 90.350(1), the Mayor will approve one of the top three (or
two of the top four and the like) to fill the position. The Commission shall
notify each candidate of his or her score on the promotional examination and
how said score ranks in comparison with the other candidates.
      (3)   As a safeguard against the promotion of employees beyond their
capability, the Department includes a probationary period as the final step in
the promotion process. Upon appointment to probation vacancies, officers are on
probationary status for one year from the date of promotion. If demoted, the
officer shall be given a written list of reasons and said demotion shall be
reviewed by the Civil Service Commission if requested by the employee.
(Ord. 22-2019, passed 9-30-2019)
§ 35.40 APPLICATION OF CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM.
   (A)   The existing Civil Service system set forth in Ordinance 22-2019 and
all amendments thereof, shall continue in full force and effect for all current
(as of the effective date of Ordinance 24-2022) City of Elizabethtown Police
and Fire Department employees currently covered by the Civil Service system.
   (B)   The existing Civil Service system set forth in Ordinance 22-2019 and
all amendments thereof, is hereby discontinued and of no force and effect for
new employees as of the effective date of Ordinance 24-2022, and all
applicants, probationary or introductory of the city’s Police and Fire
Departments with an effective date of October 1, 2022.
(Ord. 24-2022, passed 9-19-2022)
CHAPTER 36: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
   
36.01   Retirement and Pension Plan; establishment
§ 36.01 RETIREMENT AND PENSION PLAN; ESTABLISHMENT.
   All city employees must join the County Employees Retirement System
(“C.E.R.S.”), except those who elected to participate in the city’s Defined
Contribution Plan, prior to August 1989.
(Prior Code, § 36.01)
CHAPTER 37: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
37.01   Equal opportunity; federal and state compliance
Smoking in Public Places and Places of Employment
   
37.15   Findings and intent
   
37.16   Definitions
   
37.17   Application to city-owned and county-owned facilities
   
37.18   Smoking in enclosed public places
   
37.19   Smoking in places of employment
   
37.20   Smoking in outdoor arenas and stadiums
   
37.21   Reasonable distance
   
37.22   Where smoking not regulated
   
37.23   Declaration of establishment as non-smoking
   
37.24   Posting of signs
   
37.25   Non-retaliation and non-waiver of rights
   
37.26   Enforcement
   
37.27   Code Enforcement Board
   
37.28   Governmental agency cooperation
   
37.29   Other applicable laws
   
37.30   Construction
 
   
37.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 37.01 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY; FEDERAL AND STATE COMPLIANCE.
   The equal opportunity policy of the city is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Prior Code, § 36.01)
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT
§ 37.15 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   The City Council finds that:
      (1)   Whereas numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major
contributor to indoor air pollution. Breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of
disease in healthy nonsmokers. These diseases include heart disease, stroke,
respiratory disease and lung cancer;
      (2)   Whereas, the U.S. Surgeon General has issued a comprehensive
scientific report which concludes that there is no risk-free level of exposure
to secondhand smoke (Department of Health and Human Services, New Surgeon
General's Report Focuses on the Effects of Secondhand Smoke; Public Health
Service, Centers for Disease Control, 2006); and
      (3)   Whereas the smoking of tobacco is a form of air pollution, a danger
to health and a material public nuisance.
   (B)   Accordingly, the City Council adopts the foregoing as justification
for this subchapter, the purpose of which is:
      (1)   To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in
public places and places of employment;
      (2)   To guarantee the right of non-smokers to breathe smoke-free air;
and
      (3)   To recognize that the public's need to breathe smoke-free air shall
have priority over the individual's desire to smoke.
(Prior Code, § 125.01) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 37.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. A sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or
other business entity, either for profit or not for profit, including retail
establishments where good or services are sold; professional corporations and
other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or
other professional services are delivered; and private clubs.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or
her services for a non-profit entity.
   EMPLOYER. A person, business, partnership, association, corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust or non-profit entity that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
   ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all
sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the
floor to the ceiling.
   HEALTH CARE FACILITY. An office or institution providing care or treatment
of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other medical,
physiological or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control
clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories
and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians,
dentist and all specialist within these professions. This definition shall
include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semi-private rooms and
wards within health care facilities.
   PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT. An area under the control of public or private
employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment,
including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms,
conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways.
A private residence is not a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT unless it is used as a
childcare, adult day care or health care facility.
   PRIVATE CLUB. An organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the
owner, lessee or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for
club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational,
fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic purpose, but
not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to
its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by
a board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members
at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a
constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an
exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a “club” under 26 U.S.C. §
501.
   PUBLIC PLACE. An enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which
the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, bars,
educational facilities, health care facilities, hotel and motel lobbies,
laundromats, polling places, public transportation facilities, reception areas,
restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail
service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters
and waiting rooms. A private club is a PUBLIC PLACE when being used for a
function to which the general public is invited. A private residence is not a
PUBLIC PLACE unless it is used as childcare, adult day care or health care
facility.
   RESTAURANT. An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee
shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands and private and public school cafeterias,
which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or employees, as well
as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises
for serving elsewhere. The term RESTAURANT shall include a bar area within the
restaurant.
   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail store utilized primarily for the sale of
tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is
merely incidental.
   SERVICE LINE. An indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or
receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange
of money.
   SHOPPING MALL. An enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to
connect retail or professional establishments.
   SMOKING. inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product
intended for inhalation, in any manner or in any form. SMOKING also includes
the use of an e-cigarette which creates a vapor, in any manner or in any form
or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the
prohibition of smoking in this subchapter.
   SPORTS ARENA. Sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing
arenas, swimming pools, roller or ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar
places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical
exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports or other
events.
(Prior Code, § 125.02) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 37.17 APPLICATION TO CITY-OWNED AND COUNTY-OWNED FACILITIES.
   (A)   Smoking policies concerning facilities owned or operated by the city,
county or commonwealth shall be governed by regulations adopted in compliance
with KRS 61.165.
   (B)   Pursuant to KRS 61.165, smoking is prohibited in all city-owned
facilities and buildings.
(Prior Code, § 125.03) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006; Ord. 05-2007, passed
2-20-2007)
§ 37.18 SMOKING IN ENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACES.
   Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed public places, as defined in §
37.16 of this chapter, within the city.
(Prior Code, § 125.04) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006) Penalty, see §
37.99
§ 37.19 SMOKING IN PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed facilities within places of
employment. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, common work
areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices,
elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs
and restrooms.
   (B)   This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing
employees by the effective date of this subchapter and to all prospective
employees upon their application for employment.
(Prior Code, § 125.05) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006) Penalty, see §
37.99
§ 37.20 SMOKING IN OUTDOOR ARENAS AND STADIUMS.
   Smoking is prohibited in the seating areas of all outdoors arenas, stadiums
and amphitheaters.
(Prior Code, § 125.06) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006) Penalty, see §
37.99
§ 37.21 REASONABLE DISTANCE.
   Smoking is prohibited within a reasonable distance of at least 15 feet from
the outside entrance to or open windows of any enclosed area in which smoking
is prohibited by this subchapter and from the air intake of a ventilation
system serving an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited, in order to ensure
tobacco smoke does not enter that enclosed area through entrances, windows,
ventilation systems or other means.
(Prior Code, § 125.07) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006) Penalty, see §
37.99
§ 37.22 WHERE SMOKING NOT REGULATED.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter to the contrary, the
following areas shall be exempt from the provision of §§
37.18 and
37.19 of this chapter:
   (A)   Private residences, except when used as a licensed childcare, adult
day care or health care facility;
   (B)   Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as
smoking rooms; provided, however, that, not more than 20% of rooms rented to
guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. All smoking rooms on the same
floor must be contiguous. Smoke from the designated smoking rooms shall not
infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this
subchapter. The status of rooms as smoking or non-smoking may not be changed,
except to add additional non-smoking rooms;
   (C)   Retail tobacco stores; provided that, smoke from these premises does
not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of
this subchapter;
   (D)   Private clubs that have no employees; provided that, when such clubs
are being used for functions to which the general public is invited, the
prohibitions set out in §§
37.18 and
37.19 of this chapter shall apply; and
   (E)   Outdoor areas of places of employment, except those covered by the
provisions of §§
37.20 and
37.21 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 125.08) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 37.23 DECLARATION OF ESTABLISHMENT AS NON-SMOKING.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, an owner, operator,
manager or other authorized person in control of an establishment, facility or
outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility or outdoor areas
as a nonsmoking place regardless of its designation under this subchapter.
Within such premises, as an authorized non-smoking designation has been made
and signage conforming to the specifications set out in §
37.24 of this chapter is posted, smoking shall be prohibited as if otherwise
prohibited by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 125.09) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006; Ord. 18-2018, passed
6-4-2018)
§ 37.24 POSTING OF SIGNS.
   (A)   "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking” symbol,
consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a
red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted
in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by
this subchapter. The party responsible for the placement of the signage is the
owner, operator, manager or other person in control of the premises.
   (B)   (1)   A conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited
shall be posted at each entrance utilized by the public entering and exiting
public places within which smoking is prohibited by this subchapter.
      (2)   A conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited shall
be posted at each entrance utilized by employees entering and exiting places of
employment within which smoking is prohibited by this subchapter.
   (C)   All ashtrays shall be removed from any area within which this
subchapter or the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of
the area prohibits smoking, except for ashtrays displayed for sale and not for
use on the premises.
(Prior Code, § 125.10) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 37.25 NON-RETALIATION AND NON-WAIVER OF RIGHTS.
   (A)   No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner
retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment or customer because
that employee, applicant or customer exercises any rights afforded by this
subchapter or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this subchapter.
   (B)   An employee who continues to work in a setting where an employer
allows smoking in violation of this subchapter does not waive or otherwise
surrender any legal rights the employee may have against the employer or any
other party.
(Prior Code, § 125.11) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006) Penalty, see §
37.99
§ 37.26 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city's Code Enforcement Officer, the City Police Department, the
Fire Department and all other city officials and employees designated by the
Mayor or City Council shall enforce this subchapter.
   (B)   Notice of the provisions of this subchapter shall be given to all
applicants for a business license in the city.
   (C)   Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this subchapter
may initiate enforcement with any of the authorized person listed above.
   (D)   The Health Department, Fire Department or their designees shall, while
in an establishment performing otherwise legal inspections, inspect for
compliance with this subchapter.
   (E)   Owners, managers, operators or employees of establishments regulated
by this subchapter shall inform persons seen violating this subchapter of the
requirements of this subchapter. In the event an owner, manager, operator or
employee of an establishment regulated by this subchapter observes a person or
persons violating this subchapter, he or she shall immediately direct the
person or persons in violation to extinguish the item being smoked.
      (1)   In the event the person or persons violating this subchapter
complies with this directive, no violation shall exist for the owner, manager,
operator or employee witnessing the violation. In the event an owner, manager,
operator or employee of an establishment regulated by this subchapter observes
a person or person violating this subchapter and fails to immediately direct
the person or persons in violation to extinguish the items being smoked, the
owner, manager, operator or employee failing to take appropriate steps required
by this subchapter shall be in violation of this subchapter.
      (2)   In the event the person or persons violating this subchapter fails
or refuses to comply with this directive, the owner, manager, operator or
employee directing the person or persons violating this subchapter shall take
immediate and reasonable steps to obtain the removal of the person or persons
from the premises.
         (a)   As an example of the reasonableness required, if there is a
person violating this subchapter who, the owner, manager, operator or employee
of an establishment regulating by this subchapter is required to removed from
the premises, but the person is intoxicated or otherwise reasonably believed to
be unable to safely drive or conduct himself or herself if required to leave
those premises, in this event the owner, manager, operator or employee may
reasonably determine to allow the person violating this subchapter to remain on
the premises until appropriate arrangements may be made for the person's
removal.
         (b)   In the event the person or persons violating this subchapter is
timely removed from the premises, no violation shall exist for any owner,
manager, operator or employee related to the establishment in which these
events occurred. In no event is an owner or agent of the premises to forcibly
remove the person violating this subchapter. Compliance is achieved under this
division (E) if the owner or agent of the premises orders the person violating
this subchapter to leave its premises and promptly notifies the police if the
person refuses.
      (3)   In the event the person or persons violating this subchapter fails
or refuses to comply with this directive and the owner, manager, operator or
employee who observed the violation or if a different person who directed the
person or persons in violation to leave the premises, fails to take immediate
and reasonable steps to obtain the removal of the person or persons from the
premises, the owner, manager, operator or employee failing to take appropriate
steps required by this subchapter shall be in violations of this subchapter.
      (4)   In all events, the establishment in which a violation occurs shall
be in violation of this subchapter for each violation that occurs on its
premises and in connection with which the owner, manager, operator or employee
fail to take appropriate steps required by this subchapter.
      (5)   An employee who observes a person [or persons] violating this
subchapter may immediately notify his or her owner, manager or supervisor of
the violation in satisfaction of the employee's responsibility under this
subchapter. The failure of the satisfaction of the employee's responsibility
under this subchapter. The failure of the employee's owner, manager or
supervisor to take appropriate steps required by this subchapter in response to
the employee's notice shall not constitute a violation on the part of the
employee.
      (6)   In the event all duties required under this section are satisfied
yet the person violating this subchapter persists in his or her violation and/
or refuses to vacate the premises on which the violation occurred, the owner,
manager, supervisor and/or employee shall immediately contact one or more of
the agencies or departments authorized above to enforce this subchapter
informing the agency or department of the circumstances of the violation.
      (7)   The mere presence of a person smoking within premises of an
establishment governed by this subchapter does not constitute a violation on
the part of the establishment. The establishment and its agents shall only be
charged for a violation of this subchapter if the responsible agent(s) of the
establishment fail to timely satisfy each responsibility prescribed for them in
this section.
   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, the city, the
county’s Health Department, an employee or any person aggrieved by a failure to
comply with this subchapter, whether by commission or omission, including
violations on the part of an owner, operator, manager, employee or other person
(s) in control of a public place or a place of employment covered by this
subchapter may bring legal action to enforce this subchapter, either by civil
action seeking injunctive relief or by criminal complaint in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 125.12) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 37.27 CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.
   Any person or entity cited under this subchapter may appeal said citation
and request a hearing before the Code Enforcement Board. The process for said
appeal shall be governed by §§
34.030 through
34.046 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 125.14) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 37.28 GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY COOPERATION.
   The city requests the county’s Health Department for its assistance in the
effective implementation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 125.15) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 37.29 OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.
   This subchapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking
where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
(Prior Code, § 125.16) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 37.30 CONSTRUCTION.
   This subchapter shall be construed so as to further its stated purposes.
(Prior Code, § 125.17) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 37.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by
the provisions of §§
37.15 through
37.30 of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine not
exceeding $50.
      (2)   A person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a public
place or places of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of §§
37.15 through
37.30 of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by:
         (a)   A fine not exceeding $50 for a first violation within a one-year
period;
         (b)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the second violation within one
year; and
         (c)   A fine not exceeding $250 for each additional violation within
one year.
      (3)   In addition to the fines established by this division (B),
violations of §§
37.15 through
37.30 of this chapter by a person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise
controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or
revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on
which the violation occurred.
      (4)   Violation of §§
37.15 through
37.30 of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated
by the city or its designated agents by restraining order, preliminary and
permanent injunction or other means provided for by law. The city may recover
the reasonable costs of any court enforcement action seeking abatement of this
nuisance.
      (5)   Each day on which a violation of §§
37.15 through
37.30 of this chapter occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct
violation.
(Prior Code, § 125.13) (Ord. 24-2006, passed 10-16-2006)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   DISCONNECTION POLICY
      
51.   GAS
      
52.   SEWER
      
53.   ENERGY PROJECT ASSESSMENT DISTRICT
CHAPTER 50: DISCONNECTION POLICY
Section
   
50.01   Disconnection policy
   
50.02   Disconnection for non-payment; restrictions and charges on reconnection
   
50.03   City not liable for interruption of service
§ 50.01 DISCONNECTION POLICY.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the bill; and
      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his complaint and contentions to the city official
in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that
the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make
a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service
to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after
all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge.
§ 50.02 DISCONNECTION FOR NON-PAYMENT; RESTRICTIONS AND CHARGES ON
RECONNECTION.
   The following regulations shall apply to gas customers.
   (A)   After service has been discontinued for non-payment of bills, all past
due bills and fees must be paid up to date before service will be restored.
   (B)   (1)   A disconnect service charge of $50 to $75, depending on service
location shall be levied after discontinuance for nonpayment of bills.
      (2)   This service fee must be paid before service is continued.
   (C)   After services have been interrupted or discontinued for non-payment
of bills to any person, the services will not be granted to other members of
the family living under the same roof until all past-due bills have been paid
in full.
   (D)   After services have been interrupted or discontinued for non-payment
of bills, service, charges or fees and the gas meter has been sealed by the
city, it shall be unlawful for any person to break any seal on any gas meter or
to tamper or turn on the gas. In addition to any criminal conviction and
penalties, the city may collect a service charge of $50 from the service
account for the unlawful tampering or turning on of the gas.
   (E)   (1)   If gas service has been off for over one year, the city reserves
the right to remove the meter.
      (2)   To reinstate service, the customer will be required to pay a new
deposit and resolve all past due balances.
      (3)   Pressure testing and installation of the meter is the
responsibility of the customer.
      (4)   Additionally, an inspection of the meter by the city’s Gas
Department is required before service is turned back on.
(Prior Code, § 50.01) (Ord. passed 4-21-1969; Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018)
§ 50.03 CITY NOT LIABLE FOR INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.
   No claim shall be made against the city by reason of breakage of any main or
service pipe, or any other interruption of the supply, breakage of machinery or
stoppage for necessary repairs for any city utility.
(Prior Code, § 50.02)
CHAPTER 51: GAS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Conditions to provision of gas service
   
51.03   Connection permit required; tap-on fees
   
51.04   Reconnection after voluntary turn-off; fee
   
51.05   Reconnection of meter; fee
   
51.06   Requirements and fees for gas tap and extensions for subdivision and
private developments; rebate policy
Service Rate Schedules
   
51.20   General rate
   
51.21   Heat rate
   
51.22   High load rate
   
51.23   Interruptible industrial service
   
51.24   Interruptible industrial service with standby
   
51.25   Firm industrial service
   
51.26   Interruptible fixed price service
   
51.27   Curtailment notice and charge for failure to obey
   
51.28   Adjustment for increase in rate
   
51.29   Overcharges and undercharges; adjustment of errors in billing
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DWELLING UNIT. Each dwelling unit in an apartment house shall be considered
as a separate customer and shall be separately metered, except when the
apartment house is centrally heated.
   FACILITY CHARGE. The facility charge shall be charged to each account
monthly. The base rate and commodity rate shall be charged in addition to the
facility charge.
   GAS PIPING. The gas pipe from the gas meter outlet to the gas burning
appliance, apparatus or fixture.
   MCF. One mcf is 1,000 cubic feet of gas at standard temperature and
pressure.
   SERVICE LINE. The gas pipe from the city’s main to the meter location.
   SYSTEM or GAS SYSTEM. The natural gas distribution system of the city.
(Prior Code, § 51.01) (Ord. passed 4-1-1957; Ord. 18-2003, passed 6-23-2003;
Ord. 11-2012, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 51.02 CONDITIONS TO PROVISION OF GAS SERVICE.
   The city shall provide gas and gas service to any potential consumer who may
apply for service; provided that, the demand for gas by the potential consumer
can be supplied by the gas system; and, provided further that, the revenues to
be derived from supplying the potential consumer with gas and gas service
justify the cost to the city of extending the gas and gas service to the
consumer.
(Prior Code, § 51.02) (Ord. passed 4-1-1957; Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018)
§ 51.03 CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIRED; TAP-ON FEES.
   (A)   At or before the time of any initial connection of any premises to the
gas system, the owner or occupant of the premises shall be required to pay a
connection fee and deposit. The owner or occupant of the premises shall be
required to pay me cost of installing that part of the service line from the
curb or property line to the meter and regulator location. No such service line
shall be installed until the owner or occupant of the premises has paid the
connection fee to the city covering such installation. All service lines shall
be installed in accordance with the codes containing the requirements for
installing same and which codes will be available at the City Hall. The
applicable codes hereby (and as otherwise provided) adopted by reference are
the most current additions of the following codes: National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA
54); Pipeline Safety Regulations; 49 C.F.R., Kentucky Standards of Safety (Fire
Prevention Code); National Fire Code (National Fire Protection Association);
and the city’s Plans and Specifications for Gas Service Piping Installations.
The installation, construction, reconstruction and repair of all gas piping,
service lines, gas appliances, fixtures and apparatus, now or hereafter to be
placed on or in any manner directly attached to any premises served by the gas
system shall be inspected and approved by the city before any gas is turned
into any service line on the premises.
   (B)   Tapping or connection fees for gas service for customers located
inside the city as well as those who live outside the city shall be set by
ordinance passed by City Council from time to time and kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk for public inspection.
   (C)   All connections to the gas system and the installation, construction,
reconstruction and repair of gas piping, service lines, gas appliances,
fixtures and apparatus shall be made under such other regulations as the City
Council may prescribe by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 51.03) (Ord. passed 4-1-1957; Ord. passed 4-3-1972; Ord. passed
5-20-1985; Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018)
§ 51.04 RECONNECTION AFTER VOLUNTARY TURN-OFF; FEE.
   In the event the owner or occupant of any residential, commercial and
industrial establishment, or other property, building or structure of any kind,
connected with, or serviced by the natural gas system shall request that
service be cut off or discontinued, there is hereby established a turn-on fee
of $50, which shall be paid before service is resumed to the property
previously cut off or discontinued, and shall be in addition to deposits now
required.
(Prior Code, § 51.04) (Ord. passed 4-20-1959; Ord. 11-2012, passed 6-18-2012;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018)
§ 51.05 RECONNECTION OF METER; FEE.
   In the event the owner or occupant of any property as set out in §
51.04 of this chapter shall cause the gas meter to be removed, there is hereby
established a meter hook-up fee of $50 which shall be paid before the meter is
reconnected to the property, which fee shall be in addition to deposits now
required.
(Prior Code, § 51.05) (Ord. passed 4-20-1959; Ord. 11-2012, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 51.06 REQUIREMENTS AND FEES FOR GAS TAP AND EXTENSIONS FOR SUBDIVISION AND
PRIVATE DEVELOPMENTS; REBATE POLICY.
   (A)   Inside city limits.
      (1)   A tap fee shall be paid for each service. The tap fee shall be
determined annually by the city’s Finance Department based upon material, labor
and equipment costs.
      (2)   Developers of subdivisions and private developments shall pay the
city for all mainline extensions necessary to install lines to and/or within
the development. The charge for extensions shall be based upon costs determined
by the city’s Finance Department annually and shall be charged per foot of line
installed by the city or its contractor. All payments for extensions shall be
made to the city according to signed contract before constructions shall begin.
      (3)   Rebates shall be refunded once each year to the developer or owner
utilizing tap fees paid over a ten-year period. The rebate shall not exceed the
extension contract amount.
   (B)   Outside city limits.
      (1)   A tap fee shall be paid for each service. The tap fee shall be
determined annually by the city’s Finance Department based upon materials,
labor and equipment costs.
      (2)   Developers of subdivisions and private developments shall pay the
city for all mainline extensions necessary to install lines to and/or within
the development. The charge shall be determined and set annually by the city’s
Finance Department and shall be charged per foot of line installed by the city
of its contractor. All payments for extensions shall be made to the city
according to signed contract before construction shall begin.
      (3)   Rebates shall be refunded once each year to the developer or owner
utilizing tap fees paid over a ten-year period. The rebate shall not exceed the
extension contract amount.
(Prior Code, § 51.06) (Ord 18-1990, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. 21-2004, passed 10-4-
2004; Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018)
SERVICE RATE SCHEDULES
§ 51.20 GENERAL RATE.
   (A)   Rates. The general rate shall be charged to any customer not
qualifying for any other rate schedule. The rate shall consist of a facility
charge, base rate and commodity rate. The facility charge and base rate shall
be established in relation to costs of service, maintenance, debt service and
other operational costs. The commodity rate shall be determined based upon the
monthly cost of gas supply.
      (1)   Facility charge: $6;
      (2)   Base rate: $1.60 per mcf; and
      (3)   Commodity rate: (cost of gas + interstate fuel and transport
charges + loss/unaccounted for) per mcf.
   (B)   Deposit. A deposit of $100 will be required for each residential user
and a deposit of $100 for each business or commercial user. At the termination
of the service, once all outstanding balances are settled, any deposit
remaining will be refunded.
   (C)   Terms of payment. All bills are due and payable by the due date
printed on the bill. If not paid by the due date, a 10% penalty shall apply.
Bills not paid within ten days after the due date are subject to termination of
service without further notice.
(Prior Code, § 51.15) (Ord. passed 1-19-1970; Ord. passed 11-2-1987; Ord. 9-
1988, passed 3-21-1988; Ord. passed 11-22-1993; Ord. 18-2003, passed 6-23-2003;
Ord. 11-2012, passed 6-18-2012; Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018)
§ 51.21 HEAT RATE.
   (A)   Rates. The heat rate shall be charged to any customer utilizing
service for space heating purposes only:
      (1)   Facility charge: $6;
      (2)   Base rate: $2 per mcf; and
      (3)   Commodity rate: (cost of gas + interstate fuel and transport
charges + loss/unaccounted for) per mcf.
   (B)   Deposit. A deposit of $100 will be required for each residential user
and a deposit of $100 for each business or commercial user. At the termination
of the service, once all outstanding balances are settled, any deposit
remaining will be refunded.
   (C)   Terms of payment. All bills are due and payable by the due date
printed on the bill. If not paid by the due date, a 10% penalty shall apply.
Bills not paid within ten days after the due date are subject to termination of
service without further notice.
(Prior Code, § 51.16) (Ord. passed 1-19-1970; Ord. passed 11-2-1987; Ord. 9-
1988, passed 3-21-1988; Ord. passed 11-22-1993; Ord 18-2003, passed 6-23-2003;
Ord. 11-2012, passed 6-18-2012; Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018)
§ 51.22 HIGH LOAD RATE.
   The high load rate is available to customers whose use of gas during the
month of least consumption is at least 50% of the use of gas during the month
of greatest consumption. High load rate customers may be subject to curtailment
under the provisions in §
51.27 of this chapter. Such curtailment shall be based upon end use priority
standards.
   (A)   Rates.
      (1)   Facility charge: $25;
      (2)   Base rate: $1.35 per mcf; and
      (3)   Commodity rate: (cost of gas + interstate fuel and transport
charges + loss/unaccounted for) per mcf.
   (B)   Deposit. A deposit of $100 will be required on all service of this
classification. The city, at its sole discretion, reserves the right to exempt
from this requirement any person, firm or corporation, who can furnish a
satisfactory and acceptable credit rating or experience. At the termination of
the service, once all outstanding balances are settled, any deposit remaining
will be refunded.
   (C)   Terms of payment. All bills are due and payable by the due date
printed on the bill. If not paid by the due date, a 10% penalty shall apply.
Bills not paid within ten days after the due date are subject to termination of
service without further notice.
(Prior Code, § 51.17) (Ord. passed 1-19-1970; Ord. passed 11-2-1987; Ord. 9-
1988, passed 3-21-1988; Ord. passed 11-22-1993; Ord. 18-2003, passed 6-23-2003;
Ord. 11-2012, passed 6-18-2012; Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018)
§ 51.23 INTERRUPTIBLE INDUSTRIAL SERVICE.
   (A)   General. Based upon available supplies and system capacity,
interruptible industrial service may be offered to commercial/industrial
customers whose use of gas is principally for process purposes, and where space
heating is incidental. The city reserves the right to deny this service at any
time when, in the city’s opinion, the gas system lacks capacity and/or supplies
at the point of service or when this interruptible service would conflict with
priority services being rendered. All sales shall comply with the city’s
administrative and operational policies and Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission requirements. Under this rate schedule, the customer shall adhere to
all terms of §
51.27 of this chapter. This service provides natural gas supplies at monthly
market prices.
   (B)   Rates.
      (1)   Facility charge: $125;
      (2)   Base rate: $0.75 per mcf;
      (3)   Commodity rate: (cost of gas + interstate fuel and transport
charges) per mcf.
(Prior Code, § 51.18) (Ord. passed 1-19-1970; Ord. passed 11-2-1987; Ord. 9-
1988, passed 3-21-1988; Ord. passed 11-22-1993; Ord. 18-2003, passed 6-23-2003;
Ord. 38-2007, passed 11-19-2007; Ord. 11-2012, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 51.24 INTERRUPTIBLE INDUSTRIAL SERVICE WITH STANDBY.
   (A)   General. Interruptible industrial service with standby under this rate
schedule may be offered to a commercial/industrial customer who has standby
fuel capability for curtailment periods. All sales shall comply with the city’s
administrative and operational policies and Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission requirements. The city shall interrupt this service at any time
when, in the city’s opinion, the gas system lacks capacity and/or supplies at
the point of service or when the interruptible service would conflict with
other services being rendered. The customer shall adhere to all terms of §
51.27 of this chapter. This service provides natural gas supplies at monthly
market prices.
   (B)   Rates.
      (1)   Facility charge: $125;
      (2)   Base rate: $0.55 per mcf; and
      (3)   Commodity rate: (cost of gas + interstate fuel and transport
charges) per mcf.
(Prior Code, § 51.19) (Ord. passed 1-19-1970; Ord. passed 11-2-1987; Ord. 9-
1988, passed 3-21-1988; Ord. passed 11-22-1993; Ord. 18-2003, passed 6-23-2003;
Ord. 38-2007, passed 11-19-2007; Ord. 11-2012, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 51.25 FIRM INDUSTRIAL SERVICE.
   (A)   General. Based upon available supplies and system capacity, firm
industrial service may be offered by contract to commercial/industrial
customers whose use of gas is principally for process purposes and where space
heating is incidental. The city reserves the right to deny this service at any
time when, in the city’s opinion, the gas system lacks capacity and/or supplies
at the point of service or when this firm service would conflict with higher
priority services being rendered. All sales shall comply with the city’s
administrative and operational policies and Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission requirements. Under this rate schedule, the customer shall adhere to
all terms of the contract and §
51.27 of this chapter. This service provides natural gas supplies at monthly
market prices. Contracts shall be required between the firm industrial service
customer and the city for any fixed price purchase agreements. These contracts
shall be determined on a specific and short term basis at the discretion of the
city.
   (B)   Rates.
      (1)   Facility charge: $125;
      (2)   Base rate: $0.95 per mcf; and
      (3)   Commodity rate: (cost of gas + interstate fuel and transport
charges) per mcf.
(Prior Code, § 51.20) (Ord. passed 11-2-1987; Ord. 9-1988, passed 3-21-1988;
Ord. 18-2003, passed 6-23-2003; Ord. 38-2007, passed 11-19-2007; Ord. 11-2012,
passed 6-18-2012)
§ 51.26 INTERRUPTIBLE FIXED PRICE SERVICE.
   (A)   General. Interruptible fixed price service under this rate schedule
may be offered by contract to commercial/industrial customers who have
contracted for a fixed rate of gas from the city’s supplier for up to six
months. Volumes to be transported shall comply with the city’s administrative
and operational polices and Federal Energy Regulatory Commission requirements.
The city reserves the right to deny this service at any time when, in the
city’s opinion, the gas system lacks capacity at the point of service or when
this interruptible service would conflict with other services being rendered.
The customer shall adhere to all terms of the contract and §
51.27 of this chapter. The customer shall be responsible for all contractual
charges including balancing expenses, city operational costs and administrative
fees.
   (B)   Rates.
      (1)   Facility charge: $125; and
      (2)   Base rate: $0.95 per mcf.
(Prior Code, § 51.21) (Ord. 38-2007, passed 11-19-2007; Ord. 11-2012, passed 6-
18-2012)
§ 51.27 CURTAILMENT NOTICE AND CHARGE FOR FAILURE TO OBEY.
   (A)   Whenever curtailment or interruption of gas delivered hereunder is
required, the city shall issue a curtailment order to customers affected,
specifying the quantity of gas to be curtailed and the time at which such
curtailment is to be made. When restoration of service is permissible, the city
shall similarly issue a restoration order specifying the quantity of gas to be
restored and the time at which such restoration is to be made therein. A
curtailment order shall be issued at least one hour in advance of the effective
time.
   (B)   (1)   If customer fails to comply with a curtailment order calling for
curtailment or interruption and should the city not fully sever service, then
for each such failure to comply by the customer shall be deemed to have created
a “firm demand” equal to the full volume of gas taken between the effective
time of such curtailment order and the effective time of the next succeeding
restoration order. If the period of time between the effective time of such
curtailment order and the effective time of the next succeeding restoration
order exceeds 24 hours, the demand so created shall be the largest volume of
gas taken in any continuous 24-hour period while the curtailment order is in
effect. Each “firm demand” so created shall be billed to the customer at the
rate of $15 per month per 1,000 cubic feet for a period of 12 months beginning
with the month of which such demand was created.
      (2)   The city, at its discretion, may waive demand created hereunder for
minor violations or curtailment order.
(Prior Code, § 51.22) (Ord. passed 4-1-1957; Ord. passed 3-17-1975; Ord. 9-
1988, passed 3-21-1988; Ord. passed 11-22-1993; Ord. 18-2003, passed 6-23-2003;
Ord. 38-2007, passed 11-19-2007; Ord. 11-2012, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 51.28 ADJUSTMENT FOR INCREASES IN RATE.
   The rate schedules adopted herein are based upon operational costs and
commodity costs (cost of gas). Adjustments to the monthly rate schedule will be
made by the city to include the effect of commodity increases or decreases, and
such adjustments shall automatically become part of the applicable rate
schedule.
(Prior Code, § 51.23) (Ord. passed 1-3-1977; Ord. 18-2003, passed 6-23-2003;
Ord. 38-2007, passed 11-19-2007)
§ 51.29 OVERCHARGES AND UNDERCHARGES; ADJUSTMENT OF ERRORS IN BILLING.
   Where the city has supplied natural gas to a customer, if it shall be found
that at any time or times the customer has been overcharged or undercharged in
any form whatsoever under the provisions for rates and charges for the use and
services rendered by the natural gas distribution system of the city and if the
customer shall have actually paid the bills containing the overcharge or
undercharge, then within 30 days after the final determination thereof, the
city shall refund the amount of any the overcharge and the customer shall pay
the amount of any such undercharge. In the event an error is discovered in the
amount billed any statement rendered by the city, the error shall be adjusted
within 30 days of the determination thereof; provided that, claim therefore
shall have been made within 30 days from the date of discovery of the error,
but in any event, within 12 months from the date of payment.
(Prior Code, § 51.24) (Ord. passed 1-3-1977; Ord. 38-2007, passed 11-19-2007;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018)
CHAPTER 52: SEWER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Purpose
   
52.02   Sewer use ordinance adopted by reference
   
52.03   Sewer rates
   
52.04   Tapping or connection permit
   
52.05   Tapping fees for water and sewer
   
52.06   Existing provisions reaffirmed
Discharge into Sanitary Sewer System
   
52.20   Discharge of surface or storm water or ground water into the sanitary
sewer system of the city is prohibited
 
   
52.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter sets forth the requirements for usage of city sewer
distribution and collection systems and establishes certain rates and charges
for the service provided by the sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 52.01) (Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018)
§ 52.02 SEWER USE ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
    An ordinance repealing the existing city sewer use ordinance and enacting
the new sewer use ordinance and pretreatment program for the city is hereby
incorporated by reference and shall govern in all respects the publicly-owned
treatment works including the municipal sanitary sewerage collection system,
treatment plant and appurtenances thereto, setting forth policy, definitions,
rules and regulations governing the building of sewers and connections,
wastewater volume determination, pollutant discharge and discharge limits,
pretreatment program administration in part, wastewater discharge permits,
general discharge prohibition, establishing the right of the city to charge
fees and charges for administrating the city’s reasonable necessary functions
related to the aforesaid, monitoring and sampling, permittee reporting
requirements, accidental or slug discharges, spill prevention and control plans
and delineating powers and authority of the city and setting forth the methods
and procedures for enforcement of the ordinance including enforcement response
actions including penalties for violations of the ordinance and repealing prior
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 52.02) (Ord. 7, passed 4-27-1992; Ord. 11-2002, passed 7-1-2002;
Ord. 02-2013, passed 3-4-2013; Ord. 07-2016, passed 5-16-2016; Ord. 10-2020,
passed 8-17-2020; Ord. 13-2024, passed 7-8-2024; Ord. 11-2025, passed 4-21-
2025)
§ 52.03 SEWER RATES.
    The rates or charges for sewer service shall be based upon the quantity of
water supplied in each month to the respective premises as follows:
 
Number of Gallons of Sewer per Month Monthly Sewer Charge for Bills Rendered
                                     After July 1, 2025
First 2,000 gallons                  $14.46 minimum bill
Over 2,000 gallons                   $6.36/1,000 gallons
 
 
Number of Gallons of Sewer per Month Monthly Sewer Charge for Bills Rendered
                                     After July 1, 2026
First 2,000 gallons                  $16.70 minimum bill
Over 2,000 gallons                   $7.35/1,000 gallons
 
 
Number of Gallons of Sewer per Month Monthly Sewer Charge for Bills Rendered
                                     After July 1, 2027
First 2,000 gallons                  $18.95 minimum bill
Over 2,000 gallons                   $8.34/1,000 gallons
 
 
Number of Gallons of Sewer per Month Monthly Sewer Charge for Bills Rendered
                                     After July 1, 2028
First 2,000 gallons                  $19.52 minimum bill
Over 2,000 gallons                   $8.59/1,000 gallons
 
(Prior Code, § 52.03) (Ord. 35, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 33-2003, passed 11-7-
2003; Ord. 35-2007, passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 12-2012, passed 6-18-2012; Ord. 27-
2013, passed 12-2-2013; Ord. 07-2014, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-
17-2018; Ord. 10-2025, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 52.04 TAPPING OR CONNECTION PERMIT.
   (A)   Sewer mains shall be tapped or connected only by permit issued by the
city and payment by the applicant of the fees prescribed. The applicant shall
provide and install according to city specifications the lines from the tap to
the premises.
   (B)   The city will furnish and install the sewer tap and service line from
the main to the property line. The owner of the premises shall provide and
install the sewer from the property line to the premises.
   (C)   Connection to the sanitary sewerage system shall not be permitted for
property outside of the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 52.04) (Ord. 14, passed 5-20-1985; Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-
2018)
§ 52.05 TAPPING FEES FOR SEWER.
    The connection and tap fees for residents and users of the existing
municipal sanitary sewer system of the City of Elizabethtown are hereby fixed
and established as follows:
   (A)   Residential connection fee:
 
Single-family housing $1,500
Multi-family housing  $2,000/building + $300/unit
 
   (B)   Non-residential connection fee:
 
Building less than 10,000 sq. ft. $2,000
Building 10,001 - 50,000 sq. ft.  $3,500
Building above 50,000 sq. ft.     $5,000
 
   (C)   Significant industrial user connection fee:
 
All users $10,000
 
   (D)   Tap fees for sewer services shall be charged for labor and materials.
   (E)   The city may allow for the installation of clean outs at the request
of the property owner for a fee of $250. Installation shall be performed by the
city's Public Works Department.
(Prior Code, § 52.05) (Ord. 14, passed 5-20-1985; Ord. 29-1997, passed - -1997;
Ord. 07-2014, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 10-2025,
passed 4-7-2025)
§ 52.06 EXISTING PROVISIONS REAFFIRMED.
   All existing provisions as to reading of meters, rendition of bills and
payment, collection and disconnection charges and related provisions of
existing ordinances are hereby reaffirmed, re-enacted and readopted, except to
the extent that same may be inconsistent herewith.
(Prior Code, § 52.23)
DISCHARGE INTO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
§ 52.20 DISCHARGE OF SURFACE OR STORM WATER OR GROUND WATER INTO THE SANITARY
SEWER SYSTEM OF THE CITY IS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As a condition of initial or continued sewer service by the city’s
sanitary sewer system, owners or occupants of premises served by the city’s
sanitary sewer system shall eliminate surface/storm water or ground water
connections to the sanitary sewer and shall pay a surcharge in the amount of
$50 per month until such time that the property owner or occupant shall allow
the city to verify by inspection of the premises that the discharge of surface/
storm water or ground water has been eliminated.
   (B)   The city shall identify the affected properties and shall adopt
policies and procedures for the administration of this chapter including prior
notification to all owners and occupants before any enforcement action or
initiation of the surcharge.
   (C)   The surcharge shall be assessed against the receiver of the service,
whether an occupant or and owner. If no wastewater billings are otherwise made
for the property in question, the owner shall be billed for surcharge. Failure
to timely pay the surcharge shall be cause to terminate service to the affected
property.
(Prior Code, § 52.30) (Ord. 02-2007, passed 2-20-2007)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating this chapter may be cited for a civil offense
pursuant to the Code Enforcement Board Ordinance and fine schedule. Each day of
violation may be considered a separate occurrence. The civil fine shall be paid
directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of
notification, then the city may recover said fine in a civil action in a court
of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement
orders to insure compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall negate the ability of the city to pursue
civil penalties of up to $25,000 or to pursue criminal penalties as prescribed
by law.
   (C)   The citing officer may, at his or her discretion, cite the offender to
appear before the Code Enforcement Board, per Ord. 9-2003.
(Prior Code, § 52.31) (Ord. 02-2007, passed 2-20-2007)
CHAPTER 53: ENERGY PROJECT ASSESSMENT DISTRICT
Section
   
53.01   Findings and determinations; definitions
   
53.02   Creation of Energy Project Assessment District
   
53.03   Program
   
53.04   Program administration
   
53.05   EPAD petition
   
53.06   Review of EPAD petitions
   
53.07   Program assessments
   
53.08   Amendments
§ 53.01 FINDINGS AND DETERMINATIONS; DEFINITIONS. 
   The recitals to this section are incorporated herein as if set forth in this
section in their entirety and are hereby found and determined to be true and
correct. For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   CITY. The City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
   EPAD PETITION. A petition of an owner to participate in the EPAD Program as
provided in §
53.05.
   EPAD PROGRAM. The EPAD Program established by the City Council by this
chapter.
   OWNER. The owner or proposed owner of an interest in a real property in the
EPAD.
   PROGRAM ASSESSMENT. An assessment for payments to be imposed upon the real
property located in an EPAD that is being improved by an energy project.
   PROJECT FINANCING AGREEMENT. A contractual agreement between the owner, the
Program Administrator, if other than the Mayor or other city official, the city
and an approved finance lender that provides for the financing of an energy
project with all or a portion of the costs being repaid by a program
assessment.
(Ord. 22-2022, passed 8-15-2022)
§ 53.02 CREATION OF ENERGY PROJECT ASSESSMENT DISTRICT.
   There is hereby established an Energy Project Assessment District within the
entire jurisdictional boundaries, including any future annexed area, of the
city in accordance with KRS 65.205 to 65.209. Through the EPAD, the City
Council intends to operate the EPAD Program that utilizes assessments on
relevant real property to support energy projects and energy improvements (as
such, terms are defined in the Act).
(Ord. 22-2022, passed 8-15-2022)
§ 53.03 PROGRAM.
   There is hereby established within the EPAD, an EPAD Program for the
advancement of conservation and efficient use of energy and water resources.
Under the EPAD Program, owners may petition for inclusion in the EPAD Program
whereby the owner enters into a project financing agreement to provide
financing for an energy project with all or a portion of the costs being repaid
by a program assessment paid in yearly increments and included on the owner’s
real property tax bill. Any payments related to a project financing agreement
or any other costs of the EPAD Program shall be payable solely and only from
amounts collected as assessment payments and shall not be payable from the
city’s general funds.
(Ord. 22-2022, passed 8-15-2022)
§ 53.04 PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION.
   The Mayor, his or her designee or a third-party entity pursuant to
contractual agreement that the Mayor is hereby authorized to enter into, shall
serve as Program Administrator (the “Program Administrator”). The Program
Administrator shall be responsible for the general administration of the EPAD
Program and the completion of the following functions:
   (A)   Review EPAD petitions to determine compliance with applicable policies
and procedures;
   (B)   Monitor proposed energy projects and timelines for completion;
   (C)   Approve written agreements between the city and owners that submit
EPAD petitions and accepting energy projects pursuant to reasonable terms and
conditions established for each energy project;
   (D)   Provide for the collection and distribution of assessment payments
with respect to assessment payments established through the program; and
   (E)   Provide for the filing of notices of assessment as required by the
Act.
(Ord. 22-2022, passed 8-15-2022)
§ 53.05 EPAD PETITION.
   Owners pursuing the development of an energy project shall complete an EPAD
petition and submit it to the Program Administrator. The EPAD petition shall
include and require the following:
   (A)   The signature of the owner;
   (B)   The names and current addresses of all current owners of record of the
real property;
   (C)   The full legal description of the real property to which a proposed
assessment payment is to be imposed, including reference to deed book and page
number and property identification number;
   (D)   A general description of the proposed energy project;
   (E)   A proposed time schedule for undertaking and completing the proposed
energy project;
   (F)   The written consent to the proposed assessment payment by each and
every holder of a recorded mortgage lien on the affected property;
   (G)   The proposed scope of the work for the energy project;
   (H)   The estimated construction, installation and equipping budget for the
energy project; and
   (I)   Information setting forth the baseline energy or water usage
conditions and the energy or water savings projected to be achieved with
respect to the project property as a result of the energy project. The
information shall be provided by a state-licensed professional engineer, an
energy service professional or a water efficiency professional or other
relevant professional.
(Ord. 22-2022, passed 8-15-2022)
§ 53.06 REVIEW OF EPAD PETITIONS. 
   (A)   The Program Administrator shall review each EPAD petition and all
associated materials supplied therewith to determine if the EPAD petition
complies with this chapter and all other applicable rules and regulations of
the commonwealth and the city.
   (B)   If the EPAD petition complies, the Program Administrator shall approve
a form of a project financing agreement related to the financing of the costs
of the energy project. The project financing agreement shall have the customary
and reasonable terms and conditions, including but not limited to, the
imposition of a program assessment for a period of no more than 30 years. If
approved, the Program Administrator shall file a notice of assessment in the
real property records of the county as required by KRS 65.207, which shall
include the following:
      (1)   The amount of the program assessment;
      (2)   The legal description of the real property;
      (3)   The name of each owner of record of the real property; and
      (4)   A reference to the statutory assessment lien provided under this
section.
(Ord. 22-2022, passed 8-15-2022)
§ 53.07 PROGRAM ASSESSMENTS.
   The Program Administrator shall review each EPAD petition and all associated
materials supplied therewith to determine if the EPAD petition complies with
this chapter and all other applicable rules and regulations of the commonwealth
and the city.
   (A)   As enumerated in the project financing agreement, the Program
Administrator shall ensure the assessment is imposed and a statement as to the
assessment payment due is included with the tax bill for the real property, in
accordance with KRS 65.207(4)(a).
   (B)   Any program assessment shall, together with any collection fees,
accrued interest and penalties, constitute a first and prior lien against the
real property on which the program assessment is imposed from the date on which
the notice of assessment is recorded until no assessment payments remain unpaid
and the lien shall have the same priority as a lien for any other state or
local ad valorem tax upon the project property.
   (C)   Any unpaid program assessment payment shall bear the same interest
rate and penalty as other delinquent taxes included in the tax bill.
   (D)   To offset the cost of administering the program, including the cost of
collection of assessment payments, in accordance with KRS 65.206(2)(c)2 fees
may be imposed in amounts to be set forth in a project financing agreement, to
be collected as a part of the assessment payment; provided that such fee shall
not exceed the cost of the services performed.
   (E)   The Program Administrator shall ensure that the assessment payments
collected annually are paid to the city or the finance lender in accordance
project financing agreement.
(Ord. 22-2022, passed 8-15-2022)
§ 53.08 AMENDMENTS.
   Pursuant to KRS 65.206(2)(b), the City Council may amend the terms and
conditions of the EPAD Program by ordinance, except that no amendments shall be
adopted to retroactively change the conditions under which an existing program
assessment was imposed, unless the owner consents to the amendment in writing.
(Ord. 22-2022, passed 8-15-2022)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   TRUCKS
      
75.   TRAFFIC AND PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Required obedience to traffic directions
   
70.03   Powers and duties of Police Department
   
70.04   Authority for enforcement
   
70.05   Temporary regulations
   
70.06   Solicitation on crosswalks, streets and the like
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.20   Signal legends
   
70.21   Establishment and maintenance of traffic-control devices
   
70.22   Obedience to signals
   
70.23   Interference with signals
   
70.24   Unauthorized signals or markings
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this traffic code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Vehicles of the Fire Department or Police
Department, vehicles of the Commonwealth Attorney’s office when on official
business and ambulances on an authorized emergency run.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. Any portion of any street between two consecutive
intersections in which 50% or more of the frontage on either side of the street
is used for business purposes.
   CROSSWALK. The portion of the roadway included within the extension of the
sidewalk across any intersection, and such other portions of the roadway
between two intersections, as may be legally designated as crossing places and
marked by stanchions, paint lines or otherwise.
   CURB. The physical boundary of the street created by a vertical barrier.
   INTERSECTION. The part of the public way embraced within the extensions of
the street lines of two or more streets which join at an angle whether or not
one such street crosses the other.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, warnings, directions,
markings and devices placed or erected or maintained by authority of the city
or state.
   ONE-WAY STREET. A street on which vehicles are permitted to move in one
direction only.
   OPERATOR. Every person who is in actual physical control of the guidance,
starting and stopping of a vehicle.
   PARK. When applied to vehicles, to leave a vehicle standing, whether
occupied or not, for a period of time longer than is necessary to receive or
discharge passengers or property.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department or other persons or agency
authorized to perform the duties of §
70.03 of this chapter or any other acts necessary to implement and enforce this
traffic code.
   PUBLIC WAY. The entire width between property lines of every way, dedicated
passway or street set aside for public travel, except bridle paths and foot
paths.
   REVERSE TURN. To turn a vehicle on any street in such a manner as to proceed
in the opposite direction.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate and preferential use of the
street.
   ROADWAY. The portion of any street, improved, designated or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
   SIDEWALK. The hard surface walkway adjacent to or within the right-of-way of
the street which is customarily used by pedestrians.
   STOPPING. As applied to vehicles, to stop a vehicle longer than is actually
necessary to receive or discharge passengers.
   STREET. Every public way, including alleys.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, buses and other
conveyances, individually or collectively, while using any street for the
purpose of travel.
   VEHICLE.
      (1)   Includes all agencies for the transportation of persons or property
over or upon the public highways of the commonwealth and all vehicles passing
over or upon the highways.
      (2)   MOTOR VEHICLE includes all vehicles, as defined above except: road
rollers; road graders; farm tractors; vehicles on which power shovels are
mounted; construction equipment customarily used only on the site of
construction and which is not practical for the transportation of persons or
property upon the highways; vehicles that travel exclusively upon rails;
vehicles propelled by electric power obtained from overhead wires while being
operated within any municipality or where the vehicles do not travel more than
five miles beyond the city limits of any municipality; and vehicles propelled
by muscular power.
(KRS 189.010(19))
(Prior Code, § 70.01)
§ 70.02 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC DIRECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with
any lawful order, signal or direction given by a uniformed police officer, or
to fail or refuse to comply with any of the traffic regulations of this traffic
code.
   (B)   The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the driver of any
vehicle owned or used in the service of the United States Government, the
state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate
any of the provisions of this traffic code, except as otherwise permitted in
this traffic code or by state statute.
   (C)   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal
on any roadway, and every person driving any animal on any roadway, and every
person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of
this traffic code applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this traffic code which, by their very nature, can have no
application.
(Prior Code, § 70.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to direct all traffic in
conformance with this traffic code and to enforce the traffic regulations as
set forth in this traffic code, to make arrest for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents and to cooperate with other officers of the city in the
administration of the traffic laws, and in developing ways and means to improve
traffic conditions.
(Prior Code, § 70.03)
§ 70.04 AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   Authority to direct and enforce all traffic regulations of the city in
accordance with the provisions of this traffic code and to make arrests for
traffic violations is given to the Police Department and, except in case of
emergency, it shall be unlawful for any other person to direct or attempt to
direct traffic by voice, hand, whistle or any other signal.
(Prior Code, § 70.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.
   When required for the convenience and safety of the public and to alleviate
unusual traffic problems, the Chief of Police or other authorized city official
shall, at his or her discretion, have authority to impose such traffic
regulations as he or she may deem necessary for temporary periods not to exceed
two weeks. If these temporary regulations are necessary for a period longer
than two weeks, the City Clerk shall be notified in writing of the extended
order.
(Prior Code, § 70.05)
§ 70.06 SOLICITATION ON CROSSWALKS, STREETS AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall stand or enter upon any crosswalk, street, highway,
intersection or roadway within the city for the purpose of soliciting,
receiving or obtaining contributions.
(Ord. 16-2017, passed 9-18-2017) Penalty, see §
70.99
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.20 SIGNAL LEGENDS.
   Whenever traffic is regulated or controlled exclusively by a traffic-control
sign or signs exhibiting the words “Go”, “Caution” or “Stop”, or exhibiting
different colored lights for purposes of traffic control, the following colors
only shall be used, and these terms and lights shall indicate and be obeyed as
follows.
   (A)   Green alone or “Go “. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits
either such turn. However, vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time
such signal is exhibited.
   (B)   Steady yellow alone or “Caution” when shown following the green or
“Go” signal. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned
that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication
will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter
the intersection. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal may enter and
clear the intersection.
   (C)   Red alone or double red or “Stop “. Vehicular traffic facing the
signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or
at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall
remain standing until green or “Go” is shown alone.
   (D)   Flashing red alone. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop
before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point
as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall not again proceed
until it can do so without danger.
   (E)   Flashing amber alone. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall reduce
its speed and proceed cautiously across the intersection controlled by such
signal.
   (F)   “Yield Right-of-Way “. Vehicular traffic facing the “Yield Right-of-
Way” sign shall bear the primary responsibility of safely entering the primary
intersecting or merging right-of-way. All traffic facing the sign shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians within the primary
intersecting or merging right-of-way. No vehicle facing a “Yield Right-of-Way”
sign shall enter the merging or intersecting right-of-way at a speed in excess
of 15 mph; except that, this speed limit shall not apply to vehicles entering
an expressway.
   (G)   Lane lights. When lane lights are installed over any street for the
purpose of controlling the direction of flow of traffic, vehicular traffic
shall move only in traffic lanes over which green arrows appear. However, when
flashing amber lights appear above a lane all left turns shall be made from
that lane. Where red arrows appear above the lanes, vehicles shall not move
against them. If flashing amber lights show above a lane, that lane shall be
used only for passing and for left turns unless a sign at such place prohibits
the turn.
   (H)   Arrows. A green arrow has right of way over other traffic.
(Prior Code, § 70.15) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.21 ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The city shall establish and maintain all official traffic-control
devices necessary within the city on city streets.
   (B)   All traffic-control devices, including signs, shall be employed to
indicate one particular warning or regulation, shall be uniform, and as far as
possible shall be placed uniformly. All traffic-control devices and signs shall
conform to required state specifications.
(Prior Code, § 70.16)
§ 70.22 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey
the signal of any official traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code or of a traffic barrier or sign erected by any
of the public departments or public utilities of the city, or any electric
signal, gate or watchman at railroad crossings, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   However, the type and the right to or necessity for the barrier or
sign must be approved by the city.
   (B)   The sign, signal, marking or barrier shall have the same authority as
the personal direction of a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 70.17) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.23 INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNALS.
   No person shall without authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official control device or any railroad sign
or signal, or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any part thereof.
(Prior Code, § 70.18) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.24 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or display on
or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic device or
railroad sign or signal which attempts or purports to direct the movement of
traffic, or which conceals or hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or signal.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as restricting any public department
or public utility of the city in any emergency or temporarily from marking or
erecting any traffic barrier or sign whose placing has been approved by the
city.
   (B)   Every prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to be a public
nuisance and the city is empowered forthwith to remove it or cause it to be
removed.
(Prior Code, § 70.19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating §
70.06 of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not
exceed the sum of $100.
(Ord. 16-2017, passed 9-18-2017)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
Operation Generally
   
71.01   Obstructing traffic
   
71.02   Vehicles crossing sidewalks
   
71.03   Rail traffic
Special Events
   
71.15   Definitions
   
71.16   Prohibited activity
   
71.17   Permit required; exceptions
   
71.18   Application for permit
   
71.19   Standards for issuance of permit
   
71.20   Notice of rejection, approval of application for permit
   
71.21   Appeal procedure
   
71.22   Additional requirements
   
71.23   Permit application
   
71.24   Revocation of permit
   
71.25   Duties of permittee; possession of permit
   
71.26   Public conduct during special events
   
71.27   Deposit/rental fees
   
71.28   Insurance, hold harmless agreement and security plan required
   
71.29   Notices
   
71.30   Sanitation and clean-up
   
71.31   Enforcing office, powers and duties
 
   
71.99   Penalty
OPERATION GENERALLY
§ 71.01 OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or permit it to remain
standing in any street in such manner as to create an obstruction thereof.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter any
intersection or crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of
the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing
the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding the indication of
any traffic-control signal which may be located at the intersection or
crosswalk.
   (C)   Any intersection deemed by the city to be of special or critical
importance to the movement of traffic shall be marked in such distinctive
manner as to indicate its importance. Should the operator of any vehicle enter
any intersection so marked when there is insufficient room on the other side of
the intersection to accommodate the vehicle, the indication of any traffic-
control signal notwithstanding, he or she shall be deemed to have violated this
division (C) rather than division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 71.01)
§ 71.02 VEHICLES CROSSING SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive within
any sidewalk space, except at a permanent or temporary driveway or by special
permit from the Chief of Police or other authorized city official.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the
vehicle out of any alley, driveway, building or lot and across a sidewalk, or
its extension across the alley, unless the vehicle has been brought to a
complete stop immediately prior to crossing the sidewalk or its extension. On
entering the roadway from the alley, driveway or building, the operator shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. The operator
of any vehicle intending to cross a sidewalk and turn into an alley from the
roadway may do so at low speed and with caution.
(Prior Code, § 71.04)
§ 71.03 RAIL TRAFFIC.
   No rail, train or other traffic may travel at a speed greater than 40 mph
through the city.
(Prior Code, § 71.05) (Ord. passed 5-20-1985)
SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 71.15 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EVENT ORGANIZER. The responsible party and main point of contact for the
special event. The event organizer will be held responsible for submitting all
required documentation and information, and adhering to guidelines and requests
per the City Events Program Manager. They are also the day-of contact and must
provide cell phone number for all city staff working the special event or
involved in any manner and be available to city staff at any point during the
special event hours and closure.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession
of any kind, or any similar display, consisting of persons, animals or vehicles
or a combination thereof, in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public
place in the city that interferes with the normal flow, regulation of traffic
or normal use of the streets, parks or other public grounds. Only government
sponsored parades are permitted in the city on Kentucky State highways or
roadways.
   RESIDENTIAL AREA. Areas zoned or utilized primarily or exclusively for
single-family or multifamily residential use.
   SPECIAL EVENT. Any activity, whether publicly and/or privately sponsored,
which occurs upon private or public property that will affect the ordinary use
of the public property, public parks, public streets, rights-of-way or
sidewalks. This includes, but is not limited to fairs, parades, festivals, foot
runs, bicycle runs and block parties. Private social gatherings which will not
require the use of city streets other than for lawful parking are not included.
Sidewalk sales in front of existing businesses that do not interfere with foot
or vehicular traffic are not covered by this subchapter.
   TARGETED RESIDENTIAL PICKETING. A person or persons protesting which is
directed at, focused on, or taking place in front of a particular singular
residence located in a residential area.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.16 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   As a matter of public policy, the City of Elizabethtown declares its intent
to provide residential privacy for its citizens as unwilling listeners or
captive audiences within their homes from the intrusion of objectionable or
unwanted speech. Therefore, targeted residential picketing, as herein defined,
is prohibited in the city.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.17 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any
special event without first having obtained a permit as herein provided.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a special event
for which the person knows a permit has not been granted.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for
the conduct of a duly permitted special event to knowingly fail to comply with
any condition of the permit.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Funeral processions.
      (2)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
   (E)   In addition, the permittee is required to obtain all other relevant
governmental permits/licenses including Kentucky Transportation Cabinet permit
for state maintained highways/roads. Any additional permits within the city
will be coordinated after the application for permit is completed.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.18 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   An event organizer seeking issuance of a special event permit shall file an
application with the City Events Program Manager on forms promulgated by said
office not less than 60 calendar days before the date on which it is proposed
to conduct the special event. The City Events Program Manager may waive the
minimum filing period and accept an application filed within a shorter period.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.19 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The City Events Program Manager shall issue a permit as provided for
hereunder when, after consideration of the application and from such other
information as may otherwise be obtained and when city resources and facilities
can be reasonably accommodated, it finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of the special event will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route or the
special event will not disrupt traffic within the city beyond practical
solution. In addition, the conduct of the special event will not negatively
impact or burden public safety services and/or facilities including access,
response and staffing resources.
   (B)   The special event is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its
point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays to such an
extent that the welfare and safety of persons and property would be adversely
affected.
   (C)   The special event is not to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designated to be held
purely for private profit.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.20 NOTICE OF REJECTION, APPROVAL OF APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   If the applicant provides incomplete or false information or fails to
comply with the terms of this subchapter, the special event permit shall be
denied.
   (B)   If the application is denied by the City Events Program Manager, the
applicant shall be notified in writing.
   (C)   If the permit is approved by the City Events Program Manager, the
applicant should be notified in writing.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.21 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a special
event permit to the City Administrator. The appeal shall be filed within seven
business days after the date of the denial notice by filing a written notice
with the office of City Clerk. The City Administrator shall act upon the appeal
within seven business days after its receipt.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.22 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to a special event permit, other governmental licenses or
permits may be required depending on the nature of the event. It is the
applicant's responsibility to comply with all other requirements.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.23 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   The City Events Program Manager shall develop and maintain a special event
permit application that will collect the necessary information to show the
nature and scope of the special event.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.24 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   All permits issued pursuant to this section shall be temporary and do not
vest any permanent rights. Reasons for revocation of a special event permit
include applications containing incomplete or false information; the applicant
does not comply with all terms and conditions of the permit; the applicant
fails to arrange for or adequately remit all fees, deposits, insurance or bonds
to the city; or disaster, public calamity or other emergency exists. The city
police or designated city official overseeing the provisions of city services
for the special event is granted the authority to revoke the permit and
terminate the event.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.25 DUTIES OF THE PERMITTEE; POSSESSION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
   (B)   The applicant or other person heading or leading such activity, shall
have the special event permit available for review.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.26 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere
with any special event or special event assembly, or with any person, vehicle
or animal participating or used in a special event.
   (B)   No driver of a vehicle (except a police car or other emergency
vehicle) shall drive between the vehicles of persons comprising an event when
such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a
special event.
   (C)   The Chief of Police, or designee, shall have the authority, when
reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a
street or public thoroughfare or part thereof constituting a part of the route
of a special event. The city shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation
thereof. No person shall be in violation of this subchapter for parking on a
street or public thoroughfare that is unposted.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.27 DEPOSIT/RENTAL FEES.
   If required by the City Events Program Manager, the permittee shall remit a
deposit before the special event permit is issued. The type and amount of the
deposit shall be determined within the discretion of the City Events Program
Manager based on information contained in the application. The purpose of the
deposit is to pay for damages to city property and to pay the costs incurred by
the city in the facilitation (e.g. additional security or traffic control) or
cleanup of the special event. Any part of the deposit not withheld by the city
will be returned to the permittee within 30 working days after the event has
occurred. In addition to the deposit, persons requesting the rental of certain
city property shall be required to comply with established rental fees.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.28 INSURANCE, HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT AND SECURITY PLAN REQUIRED.
   (A)   If required by the City Events Program Manager, the permittee shall
obtain and present evidence of comprehensive liability insurance naming the
city as an additional insured in an amount not less than $1,000,000, and from
an insurance company satisfactory to the City Events Program Manager.
   (B)   Each vendor serving food, or providing services that are potentially
hazardous/dangerous in nature, must provide the city with proof of liability
insurance of not less than $1,000,000 in coverage and list the city as
additional insured. Examples include: selling of food, pyrotechnics, amusement
rides, hot air balloons, inflatable games, motorsports, or operating equipment
that patrons, visitors, guests or event attendees could cause themselves or
others personal injury or property damage.
   (C)   The permittee shall provide a hold harmless agreement in which the
permittee agrees to defend, pay and hold harmless the city, its officers and
employees, from any and all claims for personal or property injuries or damages
arising from or in any way connected to the special event.
   (D)   The permittee shall cooperate with the city's Police Department in
designing a security plan for the special event that may involve the use of
city police, whether on-duty or off-duty, or cadets. The decision to use city
police officers, whether on-duty or off-duty, or cadets and the number of such
employees and the rank of the police officers provided shall be within the sole
discretion of the Chief of Police, or designee, based on the appropriateness of
the request and the ability of the Police Department to provide staffing to
fulfill the requested service. Any off-duty use of city police officers in
which the police officer is in his or her police uniform or using city
equipment shall require the approval of an agreement with the Police Department
and the permittee. The city shall be reimbursed the established service costs
of contracted police officers, on-duty police officers or cadets. The Chief
Financial Officer is authorized to determine an established service cost for
each rank of police officer and cadets and to modify those established service
costs on an annual basis.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.29 NOTICES.
   If required by the Events Program Manager, the permittee shall submit a
public notification plan detailing the media and means by which they commit to
publicize their event in the two weeks leading up to the event. Permittee shall
also be required to specifically inform private property and business owners
who might be inconvenienced during the event.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.30 SANITATION AND CLEAN-UP.
   A special event permit may be issued only after adequate waste disposal
facilities have been identified and obtained by permittee. Permittee will clean
the right-of-way or other public property of rubbish and debris, returning it
to its pre-event condition immediately at the conclusion of the event. If the
permittee fails to clean up such refuse, such clean up shall be arranged by the
city and the costs charged to permittee.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.31 ENFORCING OFFICE, POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Events Program Manager is hereby charged with the enforcement of the
provisions of this subchapter and is empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate
and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter. All such
rules and regulations shall be subject to the consent and approval of the City
Administrator.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating §§ 71.15 through 71.31 shall be punished as a Class B
Misdemeanor by a fine not to exceed $250 and/or 90 days' incarceration. Each
occurrence shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 26-2021, passed 11-15-2021)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
Parking Generally
   
72.01   Obstruction of parking; double parking
   
72.02   Manner of parking
   
72.03   Limitations of stopping and parking
   
72.04   Restrictions and prohibitions on designated streets
   
72.05   Parking restricted to allow street cleaning
   
72.06   Parking in excess of certain number of hours; towing authorized
   
72.07   Parking on parade route
   
72.08   Parking on off-street facility
   
72.09   Owner responsibility
   
72.10   Parking in parks
   
72.11   Parking restrictions on Public Square; on long vehicles
   
72.12   Fire lanes
   
72.13   Cul-de-sacs
Snow Emergency
   
72.25   Announcement of snow emergency
   
72.26   Termination of emergency
   
72.27   Snow emergency routes
Restricted Parking
   
72.40   Restricted parking
   
72.41   Hours of operation
   
72.42   Enforcement; citation
   
72.43   Parking violations
   
72.44   Temporary restrictions; City Engineer duties; special event
restrictions
 
   
72.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Parades, see §§
71.15 through
71.26
   Traffic and Parking Schedules, see
Ch. 75
PARKING GENERALLY
§ 72.01 OBSTRUCTION OF PARKING; DOUBLE PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle or any other
thing that may be a nuisance, obstruction or hindrance in or on any street,
alley or sidewalk within the city either during the day or night.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any vehicle on the
roadway side of any other vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street.
(Prior Code, § 72.01) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 MANNER OF PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or park
the vehicle in a manner other than with its right-hand side toward and parallel
with the curb; except that, where parking is permitted on the left side of a
one-way street, the left-hand side shall be so parked, and except for
commercial loading and unloading on one-way streets.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any street unless its
two right wheels are within six inches of and parallel with the curb; except
that, on one-way streets where parking is permitted on the left side the two
left wheels are to be within six inches of and parallel with the curb.
   (C)   The city may establish diagonal parking at certain places, requiring
the parking of vehicles at a certain angle to the curb and within a certain
portion of the roadway adjacent thereto. However, diagonal parking shall not be
established where the roadway space required therefor would be within ten feet
of the centerline of any street. Diagonal parking places shall be designated by
suitable signs, and shall indicate by markings on the pavement the required
angle and the width of the roadway space within which the vehicle shall park.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to so park the
vehicle so that any part thereof shall extend beyond the lines marking the side
or the rear of the space assigned for one vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 72.02) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 LIMITATIONS OF STOPPING AND PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or park the
vehicle except in a case of real emergency or in compliance with the provisions
of this traffic code or when directed by a police officer or traffic sign or
signal at any time in the following places:
   (A)   On the mainly-traveled portion of any roadway or on any other place in
the roadway where vehicles stand in any manner other than as specified in §
72.02 of this chapter;
   (B)   On a sidewalk;
   (C)   In front of sidewalk ramps provided for persons with disabilities;
   (D)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (E)   Within an intersection or crosswalk, or within 25 feet of the
intersection of the right-of-way line with the intersection of any other
street, road or public way;
   (F)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking,
including for special events. This does not apply to police officers when
operating properly identified vehicles during the performance of their official
duties;
   (G)   Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, traffic sign or traffic-control
device;
(KRS 189.450(5)
   (H)   On a public street or city-owned lot upon which is placed a parking
violation notice bearing the license number of the vehicle, where the violation
notice has been altered or changed or bears a date different from the date the
vehicle is parked;
   (I)   On the public square or in any city-owned parking lot when the vehicle
is backed into the designated space;
   (J)   On any public street or city-owned parking lot which is so parked as
to block a parking space other than that in which the vehicle is parked;
   (K)   On a public street or city-owned lot where parking is prohibited and
the prohibition is so designated by appropriate signs or markings;
   (L)   On the wrong side of a public street;
   (M)   So as to block any public street, alley, sidewalk or way;
   (N)   In front of any United States drive-by mail box or depository;
   (O)   In front of, or so as to block any fire hydrant;
   (P)   On any public street, way or thoroughfare in a zone where parking is
allowed only for an allotted period of time and so designated, where the
vehicle remains parked for more than the allotted time;
   (Q)   In a private driveway or upon a public street so as to block a private
driveway without the consent of the owner or person in control of the driveway;
   (R)   In a private lot or space provided by any person for his or her own
use or the use of the tenants or customers; provided, the lot or space is
property designated by appropriate signs, where the operator of the vehicle is
not a customer or does not have the consent of the owner or person in charge
the lot or space; and, provided further that, in the case of reserved spaces in
private lots that the person so parking does not have the consent of the person
for whom the space is reserved and so marked and designated. The blocking of a
private lot or designated space therein shall be deemed illegal parking;
   (S)   On a public street or city-owned lot, at a parking space that is
reserved for any individual, department, firm or corporation and so marked and
designated by the city; and
   (T)   At any place in violation of any other ordinance of the city which is
in effect.
(Prior Code, § 72.03) (Ord. passed 3-7-1960; Ord. passed 8-20-1979) Penalty,
see §
72.99
§ 72.04 RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON DESIGNATED STREETS.
   (A)   The provisions of this section prohibiting the stopping and parking of
a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as
indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or official traffic-control devices.
   (B)   The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on parking shall
not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping or parking of vehicles in
specific places or at specified times.
   (C)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of division
(F) below giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time on
any street so marked by official signs.
   (D)   When a curb has been painted yellow in compliance with the provisions
of division (F) below, no person shall park a vehicle at any time at or
adjacent to any curb so marked.
   (E)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of division
(F) below, in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified by official signs on any day on any street so
marked.
   (F)   (1)   The city shall determine on what streets or portions thereof
stopping or parking shall be restricted or prohibited. Whenever under authority
of or by this traffic code as provided in
Ch. 75, Schd. VIII, of this code of ordinances or any other ordinance any
parking limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, or
parking areas are restricted to disabled parking, appropriate signs shall be
erected giving notice thereof. However, in lieu of erecting such signs or in
conjunction therewith, the face and top of a curb or curbs at or adjacent to
which parking is prohibited at all times may be painted a solid yellow color.
      (2)   No regulations or restrictions shall be effective unless the signs
have been erected and are in place or the curbs are painted yellow at the time
of any alleged offense, except in the case of those parking restrictions which,
by their very nature, would not require such signs and markings.
   (G)   When signs are erected in compliance with division (F) above in each
block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a time longer
than specified on official signs any day and on any street so marked.
(Prior Code, § 72.04) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 PARKING RESTRICTED TO ALLOW STREET CLEANING.
   The city is authorized to designate street cleaning areas and shall provide
suitable signs and markings on the street to be cleaned, restricting parking on
that particular day. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
stop on any street so designated.
(Prior Code, § 72.05)
§ 72.06 PARKING IN EXCESS OF CERTAIN NUMBER OF HOURS; TOWING AUTHORIZED.
   Any vehicle left parked and abandoned in any one place on any of the public
ways or streets of the city for a period of 24 hours or longer shall be deemed
abandoned, and shall be subject to all existing regulations of the city
pertaining to abandoned motor vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 72.06)
§ 72.07 PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall have the authority, whenever reasonably
necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street, or
other public thoroughfare, or part thereof constituting a part of the route of
a parade.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation
thereof.
   (C)   No person shall be liable for parking on a street, or other public
thoroughfare imposed in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 72.07) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 PARKING ON OFF-STREET FACILITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to park or
abandon the vehicle or drive on or otherwise trespass on another’s property, or
on an area developed as an off-street parking facility, without the consent of
the owner, lessee or person in charge of property or facility.
   (B)   If at any time a vehicle is parked, abandoned or otherwise trespass in
violation of division (A) above, the owner, lessee or person in charge of the
property or facility may have the unauthorized motor vehicle removed in
accordance herewith.
   (C)   Every property owner or operator of an off-street parking facility
shall post signs stating thereon that the property or parking lot or facility
is privately owned and that unauthorized vehicle will be removed at the owner’s
expense before exercising the authority granted in division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 72.08) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.09 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   If any vehicle is found illegally parked in violation of any provisions of
this subchapter regulating stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, and the
identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name
the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for the
violation.
(Prior Code, § 72.09)
§ 72.10 PARKING IN PARKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in or on any
section of any public park, playground, play lot or tot lot within the city not
designed as a parking area or designed and regularly maintained as a roadway.
However, nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting
the parking of a motor vehicle parallel to a designated and regularly
maintained roadway in any park or playground where at least two wheels of the
motor vehicle are resting on the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 72.10) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.11 PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON PUBLIC SQUARE; ON LONG VEHICLES.
   (A)   Motor vehicles not exceeding 18 feet in length may be parked at the
outer curb of the Public Square and not exceeding 18 feet therefrom between
lines drawn.
   (B)   Motor vehicles more than 18 feet in length may be parked on side
streets other than federal or state highways. For unloading only, trucks may be
parked between lines designated in division (A) above.
   (C)   On all other streets and public ways, except as prohibited or limited
by this section, any automobile, truck or other vehicle may be parked parallel
with the right curb and not extending more than eight feet therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 72.11) (Ord. passed 6-3-1946; Ord. passed 6-16-1980; Ord. passed
10-19-1981) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.12 FIRE LANES.
   (A)   Pursuant to the Kentucky Standards of Safety, adopted by the city
pursuant to KRS 227.320 and other applicable statutes, that the Fire Chief,
being a Deputy State Fire Marshal, is hereby authorized to establish and set up
“fire lanes” within the city. The Fire Chief shall designate the fire lanes by
an order signed by him or her, directed to the owner and/or occupant of any
fire lane and premises adjacent to the fire lane in the city. The Fire Chief
may erect appropriate signs designating the fire lanes at his or her
discretion.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall cause the fire lanes to be observed and kept
open, pursuant to the Kentucky Standards of Safety and any person, organization
or firm parking any motor or other vehicle or other obstruction in any fire
lane, so designated, as set out in division (A) above shall have the motor or
other vehicle or other obstruction subject to immediate removal by any member
of the Fire or Police Department or any other law enforcement officer of the
state. The violator will be responsible for any bill or expense incurred to
remove the obstruction from the fire lane.
(Prior Code, § 72.12) (Ord. passed 12-3-1973)
§ 72.13 CUL-DE-SACS.
   (A)   No on-street parking shall be allowed in the turnaround area of a cul-
de-sac street.
   (B)   All cul-de-sac streets currently maintained by the city shall remain
within the city street maintenance system for maintenance by the city upon the
passage, approval and publication of this section.
   (C)   The Mayor of the city and/or his or her designate is and he or she is
authorized and directed to take all steps necessary to perfect this section,
including but not limited to posting signs and maintaining cul-de-sac streets
through resources of the Public Works Department and enforcing this section
through the resources of the Police Department.
(Ord. 04-2021, passed 4-19-2021)
SNOW EMERGENCY
§ 72.25 ANNOUNCEMENT OF SNOW EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the Chief of Police or other authorized city official finds that
falling snow, sleet or freezing rain will create a condition which makes it
necessary that the parking of motor vehicles on snow emergency routes be
prohibited, or whenever he or she finds on the basis of a firm forecast of
snow, sleet or freezing rain that the weather conditions so forecasted may
create a condition making it necessary that such parking be prohibited, he or
she is authorized to announce such prohibition, to become effective at a time
specified by him or her. After the effective time of such prohibition, no
person shall park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to remain parked on a snow
emergency route. However, if a fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain occurs
after 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m., and the Chief of Police or other
authorized city official has not announced prior to 11:00 p.m. that parking on
snow emergency routes is to be prohibited after a specified time, a vehicle
parked on a snow emergency route may remain so parked until 7:00 a.m. following
such fall. The prohibition of parking announced by the Chief of Police or other
authorized city official under the authority of this section shall remain in
effect until he or she announces the termination of the snow emergency, in part
or in which the prohibition of parking authorized by this section shall no
longer be in effect.
(Prior Code, § 72.25)
§ 72.26 TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Whenever the Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall
find that some or all of the conditions which gave rise to the snow emergency
prohibition no longer exist, he or she is authorized to declare the termination
of the emergency, in part or in whole, effective immediately on announcement.
   (B)   If such announcement is made other than between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00
p.m., it shall be repeated between those hours.
(Prior Code, § 72.26)
§ 72.27 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.
   (A)   The term SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE shall mean any route designated by the
Chief of Police or other authorized city official.
   (B)   On such street or highway designated as a snow emergency route,
special signs shall be posted to this effect.
(Prior Code, § 72.27)
RESTRICTED PARKING
§ 72.40 RESTRICTED PARKING.
   For the convenience and welfare of the public and an economical and orderly
regulation of parking automobiles and other vehicles in the city, it is
determined and ordained by the city that parking will be restricted as set out
in
Ch. 75, Schd. VIII, of this code of ordinances installed and operated on
streets, public ways and parking lots of the city, which will be known as the
parking meter zone.
(Prior Code, § 72.50) (Ord. passed 12-2-1946; Ord. passed 2-20-1956; Ord.
passed 6-4-1956; Ord. 3, passed 1-3-1994; Ord. 13-2012, passed 7-16-2012)
§ 72.41 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Restricted parking for all regularly indicated parking spaces shall be
effective daily from 8:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m., city time, except Saturdays,
Sundays and federal legal holidays (New Year’s Day, Birthday of Martin Luther
King, Jr., Washington’s Birthday, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Columbus
Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day).
(Prior Code, § 72.53) (Ord. passed 3-6-1972; Ord. passed 10-1-1973; Ord. passed
6-16-1980; Ord 3, passed 1-3-1994; Ord. 13-2012, passed 7-16-2012)
§ 72.42 ENFORCEMENT; CITATION.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to make periodic inspections
of restricted parking and to give citations for each violation of parking
regulations. The date and hour of the violation, the make and state license
number of the vehicle and other facts necessary to an understanding of the
circumstances concerning the violation shall be on the citation. A copy of the
citation shall be attached to the vehicle instructing the owner or operator as
to the procedure for answering the citation.
(Prior Code, § 72.54) (Ord. passed 9-20-1954; Ord. passed 6-19-1967; Ord. 3,
passed 1-3-1994; Ord. 13-2012, passed 7-16-2012)
§ 72.43 PARKING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   From and after the passage, approval and publication of this chapter,
the city hereby elects to enforce vehicle parking ordinances and laws as civil
violations pursuant to the provisions of KRS 82.600 through 82.640.
   (B)   Parking spaces maintained by the city both off and on street shall not
be metered.
   (C)   There is imposed a one-hour time limitation for parking on the Public
Square and for designated parking on North Main Street, South Main Street. A
two-hour time limitation for parking is imposed for designated parking on East
Poplar Streets and West Poplar Street.
   (D)   In the event there is a violation of the parking time allotted, then
the following fines shall be levied for said violation.
      (1)   A fine shall be levied for overtime parking on the Public Square,
North Main Street and South Main Street spaces of $10 for the initial violation
and $1 per hour thereafter. For every repeat offender, the fine will be
increased by increment of $10 per violation.
      (2)   A fine shall be levied for overtime parking on East and West Poplar
Street spaces of $5 for the initial violation and $1 per hour thereafter. For
every repeat offender, the fine will be increased by increment of $5 per
violation.
      (3)   Any person, firm or corporation may appeal any fine hereinafter
levied to the city’s Code Enforcement Board by notification of the Code
Enforcement Official in writing of the appeal, not more than seven days after
the date of the violation. The provisions concerning the hearing process and
determination by the Code Enforcement Board shall be as set out in Ord. 09-2003
as adopted on 4-21-2003.
   (E)   This chapter shall mean an ordinance regulating vehicles parking,
standing or stopping upon public streets or ways within the city, including,
but not limited to, all city parking lots.
      (1)   The Parking Enforcement Hearing Board shall mean the Code
Enforcement Board as enacted by Ord. 09-2003.
      (2)   Vehicle shall mean motorized, horse-drawn or other means of
carrying or transporting something.
      (3)   All violations shall be classified as either a “minor violation” or
a “major violation”.
      (4)   Major violations shall include the blocking of any public street,
private lot or space, intersection, public or private entrance to a parking
space or driveway, parking within 25 feet of any corner or intersection and
parking in a fire lane or within ten feet of any fire hydrant and failure of
registered owner to pay a minor or major violation within 20 days after it is
issued. It shall include parking on a public sidewalk if the same results in a
hazardous condition. A minor violation shall include but not be limited to:
overtime parking on all restricted spaces, parking in a prohibited or
restricted zone, parking on a public sidewalk, parking on the left hand side of
a street on which two-way traffic is permitted, parking backed into a space,
not parking within designated lines at a parking space and parking within ten
feet of the U.S. mailbox during pick up and delivery hours.
      (5)   The registered owner shall be liable and responsible for paying all
violations for fees, fines, and charges.
      (6)   Any vehicle found in violation of major violation may be towed,
pursuant to KRS 82.625.
      (7)   Fines and punishment for violations under this chapter and fees for
towing, handling and storage charges shall be set out in §
72.99 of this chapter.
      (8)   The impoundment and towing provisions of KRS 82.625 are hereby
adopted. The city may in the enforcement use a wheel immobilizer instead of
actually towing the vehicle if available.
(Prior Code, § 72.56) (Ord. 34, passed 10-21-1991; Ord. 26, passed 11-1-1993;
Ord. 3, passed 1-3-1994; Ord. 23-2003, passed 8-18-2003; Ord. 13-2012, passed
7-16-2012) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.44 TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS; CITY ENGINEER DUTIES; SPECIAL EVENT
RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to from time-to-time check
the prohibited or restricted areas and to promulgate rules of a temporary
nature which shall cause restrictions and prohibitions of parking and stopping
on various streets and intersections not inconsistent with the terms of this
subchapter.
   (B)   The order shall be dated and signed by the City Engineer. He or she
shall cause traffic signs to be erected in all such places, if an emergency
exists requiring the rules and signs to be erected. The original of these rules
shall be kept in the Office of the City Clerk.
   (C)   These rules shall have the force and effect of law and violations
thereof shall be punished as hereinabove restricted and prohibited by the City
Council. Due considerations shall be given by the City Engineer at
intersections where prohibition or restrictions are appropriate for visibility
and safety purposes.
   (D)   The Police Department shall designate and cause to be properly signed
all restricted parking for special events. These special designated
restrictions shall have the force and effect of law and violations thereof
shall be punished as hereinabove restricted and prohibited by the City Council.
(Ord. 13-2012, passed 7-16-2012)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   There is hereby levied the following fines for the following
violations of the provisions of this chapter:
Type of Violation Penalty
Type of Violation                     Penalty
All first offense major violations    $10
All major violations may be impounded As set by EPD’s tow operator policy and
and towed or immobilized with the     contract
following towing fees
All other first offense minor         $5
violations
All subsequent violations within 1    $15
year of first violation
Double parking or blocking parking by $5
others
Overtime parking on East and West     $5
Poplar Streets
Overtime parking on Public Square,
North Main Street or South Main       $10
Street
Parking in a manner so that vehicle   $5
is backed into the designated space
Parking in a prohibited zone or
parking partially in more than 1      $5
parking space
Parking in parking space reserved and
marked for disabled parking by        $25
persons non-disabled
Parking within 10 feet of any fire
hydrant or in the area marked         $5
adjacent to the fire hydrant or fire
lane
Storage charges for each impounded    As set by EPD’s tow operator policy and
vehicle                               contract
Subsequent violations within 1 year   $10
of first violation
 
   (B)   Any person receiving a citation for any parking violation in the city
for which no other penalty is specifically provided shall be deemed guilty of a
violation and shall be fined in an amount not less than $20, nor more than
$100.
(KRS 189.990(1))
   (C)   The enforcing agency, department or individual may choose to seek
enforcement through the Code Enforcement Board enacted on 4-20-2003, by Ord.
09-2003.
   (D)   All appeals of any citations issued for parking violations under this
section shall be taken before the Code Enforcement Board.
   (E)   The Code Enforcement Board is designated as the hearing board required
to be established by the city pursuant to KRS 82.600. The Code Enforcement
Board is empowered to conduct hearings pursuant to KRS 82.605 through 82.640.
The procedure for the appeal shall be governed by KRS 82.620.
(Prior Code, § 72.99) (Ord. passed 6-16-1980; Ord. 19-2003, passed 6-23-2003;
Ord. 13-2012, passed 7-16-2012)
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles, Motorcycles and Toy Vehicles
   
73.01   Operation of bicycles, motorcycles and the like
   
73.02   Skating and coasting
   
73.03   Clinging to vehicles
BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES
§ 73.01 OPERATION OF BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a bicycle on any section of a public park,
playground, play lot or tot lot, except on a roadway or in a parking area.
   (B)   No operator of any motorcycle, motorscooter or power-driven bicycle
shall carry another person, except on a seat attached thereto or in a side car
attached to the vehicle.
   (C)   No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter or power-driven bicycle
shall operate the vehicle in any public park, except on a roadway or in a
parking area.
   (D)   No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter or power-driven bicycle
shall operate the vehicle in any play lot or tot lot.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle, motorcycle,
motorbike, motor scooter or motor car on the sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 73.02) (Ord. passed 8-17-1959) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.02 SKATING AND COASTING.
   Except on streets which may be declared from time to time as “play streets”
by the city and protected by barriers or official signs, it shall be unlawful
for any person on skates, blades, boards or riding on a coaster sled or toy
vehicle of any kind, to go on any roadway, except at a crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 73.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.03 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person while riding on a bicycle, coaster sled, roller skates,
blades or boards, or any toy vehicle shall cling to any moving vehicle on any
street, or fasten or attach the vehicle on which he or she is riding thereto.
   (B)   No person shall ride on the projection, running board or fenders of
any vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 73.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 74: TRUCKS
Section
   
74.01   Truck weight limit
   
74.02   Weighing of vehicle
   
74.03   Parking of trucks; time limit
§ 74.01 TRUCK WEIGHT LIMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to require or knowingly permit, the
operation upon the streets of any motor truck, semi-trailer truck or trailer
which exceeds 18,000 pounds gross weight per single axle, or 44,000 pounds for
vehicle and load, unless otherwise authorized by the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
(Prior Code, § 74.01) (Ord. passed 4-7-1952) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.02 WEIGHING OF VEHICLE.
   Any peace officer having reason to believe that the weight of any motor
truck, semi-trailer truck or trailer, is in excess of the maximum weight
prescribed herein, or permitted by any special permit issued under the
provisions of KRS 189.270, may weigh it either by portable or stationary scales
and may require it to be driven to the nearest scales.
(Prior Code, § 74.02) (Ord. passed 4-7-1952)
§ 74.03 PARKING OF TRUCKS; TIME LIMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to park trucks, which trucks are
longer than 20 feet, on the streets overnight, except in case of breakdown or
other emergency.
   (B)   No truck, other than a light commercial truck of three-quarters’ ton
capacity, or less, shall be parked more than two hours continuously on any
street in the city which is zoned residential according to the zoning map of
record in the Planning Department.
(Prior Code, § 74.03) (Ord. passed 7-21-1952; Ord. passed 8-20-1956) Penalty,
see §
10.99
CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC AND PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   One-way streets
      
II.   Speed limits
      
III.   Stop intersections
      
IV.   Turning restricted
      
V.   No through vehicular traffic
      
VI.   Truck traffic prohibited
      
VII.   Loading and unloading zones
      
VIII.   Prohibited or restricted parking
SCHEDULE I. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   One-way streets and alleys at all times. The following are streets and
alleys are designated one-way in the directions indicated:
Street Location Direction Ord. No. Date Passed
Street             Location             Direction     Ord. No. Date Passed
                   East right-of-way
Beech Street       line to Perry Avenue Northwesterly -
                   to its intersection
                   with Crutcher Lane
                   From intersection
Crutcher Lane      with Mallory Street  Southerly     -
                   to its intersection
                   with Beech Street
                   Traffic may enter
                   lot from U.S. 31 W
E. Dixie Parking   on south side and
Lot                exit from Quince
                   Alley on U.S. 31 W
                   northerly (right
                   turn only)
                   From U.S. Hwy. 31 W
                   into parking lot
                   entrance on south
E. Dixie Parking   side of lot. Turn                  10       5-18-1992
Lot                from parking lot
                   onto 31.W in
                   Northerly direction
                   (right turn only)
                   From its
                   intersection with so
                   a right-of-way line
Plum Alley         of Mulberry Street   Southerly     -        12-2-1968; 9-17-
                   to its intersection                         1973; 4-2-1979
                   with the north
                   right-of-way line of
                   Cherry Alley
Plum Alley         From Central Avenue  Northerly     -        12-2-1968; 9-17-
                   to Quince Alley                             1973; 4-2-1979
                   Traffic may enter
                   Quince Alley from
Quince Alley       Dixie Avenue, but                  -        11-6-1950
                   shall not enter
                   Dixie Avenue from
                   Quince Alley
Two unnamed alleys Between N. Miles and               -
                   Henry Street
 
   (B)   One-way streets during certain hours. The flow of traffic on the
streets hereinafter set out shall be one-way in the direction hereinafter
indicated from the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday of
each week:
 
Street  Location                                                  Direction Ord. Date
                                                                            No.  Passed
Beech   From Miles Street to Elizabethtown Independent School’s West      -    10-1-
Street  property                                                                 1956
Hardin  From Miles Street to Elizabethtown Independent School’s West      -    10-1-
Street  property                                                                 1956
Mallory From Miles Street to Elizabethtown Independent School’s East      -    10-1-
Street  property                                                                 1956
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 75, Schd. I) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Twenty-five mph streets. No motor or other vehicle of any nature may
travel at a speed greater than 25 mph on any city streets, except as provided
hereafter.
   (B)   Thirty-five mph streets. The speed limit shall be 35 mph on the
following streets. The speed limit of 35 mph is a reasonable and safe speed
under the conditions found to exist on any street listed in this division (B).
The speed limit is based upon an engineering and traffic investigation as to a
reasonable and safe speed:
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Street               Location                      Ord. No. Date Passed
Altec Drive                                       19-2002  9-16-2002
College Street Road                               -
                     From its terminus with North
French Street        Mulberry to its terminus at   -        5-5-1972
                     North Miles/Shepherdsville
                     Road
N. Black Branch Road From Ring Road westerly to    5        3-18-1996
                     the city limits
North Main Street                                 -
Pear Orchard Road    From its terminus with North  -
                     Miles to Edgewater Drive
Peterson Drive                                    -        6-15-1981
                     From U.S. 31 W to the
Pine Valley Drive    junction of Pine Valley Drive -
                     with St. Andrews Way
Pritchard Parkway                                 33-2018  12-3-2018
Springfield Road     From Kennedy Street to I-65   -
                     overpass
West Park Road                                    26-2014  12-15-2014
Westport Road        Between St. John Road and     -;       6-1-1981; 11-1-2010
                     Cardinal Drive                17-2010
Woodland Drive                                    -
 
   (C)   Forty-five mph streets. The speed limit shall be 45 mph on the
following streets. The speed limit of 45 mph is a reasonable and safe speed
under the conditions found to exist on any street listed in this division (C).
This speed limit is based upon an engineering and traffic investigation as to a
reasonable and safe speed:
 
Street       Location        Ord. No. Date Passed
Veterans Way The full length 13-2004  7-19-2004
 
   (D)   Fifteen mph streets. The speed limit on all alleys shall be 15 mph
unless otherwise posted.
   (E)   Penalty. Whoever violates any provision of this schedule shall be
subject to a fine in accordance with the schedule of fines established under
KRS 189.394.
(Prior Code, Ch. 75, Schd. II) (Ord. 19-2018, passed 5-21-2018; Ord. 10-2019,
passed 5-20-2019)
SCHEDULE III. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Four-way stop intersections. The following intersections are designed
four-way stop intersections. Any and all motor or other vehicles shall be
brought to a stop at the stop signs so erected at the intersection before
proceeding through the intersection. The motor or other vehicles shall then
proceed through the intersection after the other motor or other vehicles,
previously stopped, have cleared the intersection. When two vehicles approach
or enter the intersection from different roadways at the same time, the
operator of the vehicles on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the
vehicles on the right:
Intersection Ord. No. Date Passed
Intersection                                            Ord. No. Date Passed
Amanda Jo Drive and Ruby Drive-Ruby Court               15       8-5-1996
Charlemagne Boulevard and Hickory Lane                  25-1999  9-7-1999
Cherrywood Drive and Helmwood Drive                     12-2015  9-21-2015
Chestnut Street and Elm Road                            01-2005  2-7-2005
Churchill Court and W. Warfield Street                  -
                                                                 6-16-1969;
Clifford Drive with Greenwood Drive and El Dorado Drive -        6-16-1980;
                                                                 8-27-1993
                                                                 6-19-1969;
Diecks Drive and Village Drive                          -        6-16-1980;
                                                                 8-27-1993
Dolphin Drive and North Ridge Drive                     26-1999  9-7-1999
Dolphin Drive and Mary T. Meagher Drive                 28-2012  12-17-2012
East Poplar Street and Central Avenue                   -        8-27-1993
Hagan Avenue and Perry Avenue                           -
Hawkins Drive and Steel Drive                           40-2003  12-15-2003
Helm Street, Pennsylvania Avenue and South Maple        -        9-20-1993
                                                                 6-16-1969;
Henry Street and Hardin Street                          -        6-16-1980;
                                                                 8-27-1993
                                                                 6-16-1969;
Lee Road and Balmoral                                   -        6-16-1980;
                                                                 8-27-1993
                                                                 6-16-1969;
McCullum Avenue and Dogwood Drive                       -        6-16-1980;
                                                                 8-27-1993
                                                                 6-16-1969;
Meadow Lane and Mantle Avenue                           -        6-16-1980;
                                                                 8-27-1993
Morningside Drive and Meadow Lane                       -
North Black Branch Road and Ring Road                   14-2010  10-11-2010
                                                                 6-16-1969;
North Mantle Avenue and Springdale Street               -        6-16-1980;
                                                                 8-27-1993
Par Lane and Greenway Drive in Country Club Villa                6-16-1969;
Subdivision                                             -        6-16-1980;
                                                                 8-27-1993
                                                                 6-16-1969;
Park Avenue and College Avenue                          -        6-16-1980;
                                                                 8-27-1993
Park Avenue and Willow Creek Drive                      -
Peachtree and Pennsylvania Avenue                       -        10-1-1973
                                                                 6-16-1969;
Peachtree Street and Pennsylvania Avenue                -        6-16-1980;
                                                                 8-27-1993
                                                                 6-16-1969;
Pennsylvania Avenue and South Mantle Avenue             -        6-16-1980;
                                                                 8-27-1993
Plum Alley and Wall Street                              16-2010  10-11-2010
Quail Run Road and Oriole Drive                         5        1-21-1993;
                                                                 8-27-1993
Quail Run Road and Lakewood Drive                       -        8-27-1993
Silk Oak Drive and Lakewood Drive                       15       8-5-1996
Sunset Drive and West Poplar Street                     -        3-15-1971
Sycamore Street and W. Poplar Street                    -
Timber Lane and Briarwood Circle/Holly Hill Drive       12-2010  10-11-2010
Valley Creek Road and Hawkins Drive                     -
W. Poplar and N. Mantle Avenue                          -
Wall Street and Plum Alley                              -
West Poplar and Sunset Road                             -        8-27-1993
White Oak Drive and Elm Road                            4        3-4-1996
 
   (B)   Three-way stop intersections. Any and all motor vehicles shall be
brought to a complete stop at the stop sign so erected at the intersection
before proceeding through the intersection. The motor or other vehicle shall
then proceed through the intersection after the other motor or previously
stopped vehicles have cleared the intersection. When two or more vehicles
approach or enter the intersection from different roadways at the same time,
the operator of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the
vehicle on the right:
 
Intersection                          Ord. No. Date Passed
College Street and South Miles Street 9-1989   3-6-1989;
                                               8-27-1993
Concord Court and Fleming Drive       27-1999  9-7-1999
Timber Lane and Deerfield Hills Road  12-2010  10-11-2010
 
   (C)   Two-way stop streets. Any and all motor or other vehicles shall be
brought to a stop at the stop signs so erected at the intersection before
proceeding through the intersection. The motor or other vehicles shall then
proceed through the intersection after the other motor or other vehicles
previously stopped, have cleared the intersection. When two vehicles approach
or enter the intersection from different roadways at the same time, the
operator of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle
on the right:
 
Stop Street          Through Street                     Ord. No. Date Passed
                                                                 1-16-1956;
Cherry Alley         Vega Alley                         -        4-15-1974;
                                                                 5-19-1986
East Railroad Avenue East Crutcher Street               13-2010  10-11-2010
Nicholas Street      Railroad crossing near 31 W Bypass 13-2010  10-11-2010
                     overpass
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 75, Schd. III) (Ord. passed 4-7-1986; Ord. 24-2023, passed 11-
20-2023)
SCHEDULE IV. TURNING RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No-left-turn intersections. It shall be unlawful for any person or
persons, firm or corporation, to cause a motor vehicle to turn left onto U.S.
Highway 31 W from the following streets:
 
Street        Ord. No. Date Passed
North Maple   -        5-15-1972
South Maple   -        5-15-1972
Sunset Drive  -        5-15-1972
Sycamore      -        5-15-1972
Village Drive -        5-15-1972
 
   (B)   No-right-turn intersections for tractor-trailer trucks. No right turn
shall be attempted or completed by the operator of any tractor-trailer truck
from Mulberry Street onto the following streets:
 
Street        Ord. No. Date Passed
Dixie Avenue  -        9-15-1986
Poplar Street -        9-15-1986
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 75, Schd. IV) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE V. NO THROUGH VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.
 
Street          Location                                  Ord. No. Date Passed
Alley           Between 309 and 311 Helm Street           20-2013  10-14-2013
                Between Lots 79 and 80 in Foxborough
Chestnut Street Estates, Section 3 (from the intersection 09-2013  6-3-2013
                with Spruce Lane in a southerly direction
                approximately 200 feet)
Plum Alley      North Mulberry Street and Raspberry Alley 13-2009  9-8-2009
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 75, Schd. V)
SCHEDULE VI. TRUCK TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Truck route designations. Routes for all trucks traveling through or
traversing through the city on U.S. Highway 31 W and U.S. Highway 62 are
designated as follows:
      (1)   For all truck traffic going North on U.S. Highway 31 W, to proceed
from the intersection of U.S. Highway 31 W, Kentucky Highway 61, and the
Western Kentucky Parkway in a northerly direction, via the Western Kentucky
Parkway and the U.S. Highway 31 Bypass to U.S. Highway 31 W at the intersection
of U.S. 31 W and U.S. 31 W Bypass;
      (2)   For all truck traffic going south on U.S. Highway 31 W to proceed
from the intersection of U.S. Highway 31 W and U.S. Highway 31 W Bypass, by way
of U.S. Highway 31 W Bypass in a southerly direction to the Western Kentucky
Parkway and via the Western Kentucky Parkway in a southerly direction to the
intersection of the Western Kentucky Parkway, Kentucky Highway 61 and U.S.
Highway 31 W;
      (3)   For all truck traffic going west on U.S. Highway 62, all truck
traffic shall proceed from the intersection of 165 with U.S. Highway 62 and
Kentucky Highway 61, in a westerly direction, via 165, the Western Kentucky
Parkway, and the U.S. Highway 31 W Bypass to the interchange of U.S. 31 W
Bypass and U.S. 62; and
      (4)   For all truck traffic going east on U.S. Highway 62, it shall
proceed from the intersection of U.S. Highway 31 W Bypass and U.S. 62, in a
southerly or westerly direction onto U.S. Highway 31 W Bypass to the Western
Kentucky Parkway and continuing by way of Western Kentucky Parkway to its
intersection with 165 and continuing on 165 in a northerly direction to the
intersection of 165, Kentucky Highway 61 and U.S. Highway 62.
(Prior Code, § 74.04)
   (B)   Truck traffic prohibited. Through truck traffic of trucks over three-
quarters’ ton is prohibited on the following streets unless as specifically
permitted otherwise by the Police Department, local residential deliveries
excepted:
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Street                       Location                      Ord. No. Date Passed
Brown Lane                                                22-1977  6-6-1977
Charlemagne Boulevard                                     -        10-21-1974
Cherrywood Avenue                                         22-1977  9-6-1977
Childers Court                                            36-1981  8-17-1981
Clifford Drive                                            09-1977  3-21-1977
Deepwood Drive                                            22-1977  9-6-1977
Edgewood Avenue                                           22-1977  9-6-1977
El Dorado Drive                                           09-1977  3-21-1977
French Street                From Mulberry Street to Miles 22-1982  5-17-1982
                             Street
Greenwood Drive                                           09-1977  3-21-1977
Hill Street                                               22-1977  9-6-1977
Long Avenue                                               22-1977  9-6-1977
Mercer Street                                             22-1977  9-6-1977
Moon Street (40,000 pounds                                33-1990  11-19-1990
GVW)
Nalls Court                                               22-1977  9-6-1977
Nicholas Street (40,000      From Sunny Street to Pierce   33-1990  11-19-1990
pounds GVW)                  Street
North Black Branch Road      Between Ring Road and U.S. 62 24-2004  12-6-2004
North Main Street                                         23-1990  9-4-1990
Pawnee Drive                 Between French Street and     20-2016  11-7-2016
                             Navaho Drive
Pierce Street (40,000 pounds                              33-1990  11-19-1990
GVW)
State Street                                              22-1977  9-6-1977
Sunny Street (40,000 pounds                               33-1990  11-19-1990
GVM)
Valley Road                                               22-1977  9-6-1977
Willow Creek Drive (12,000                                15-1990  5-21-1990
pounds GVW)
 
(Prior Code, § 74.05)
(Ord. 4, passed 1-7-1991)
SCHEDULE VII. LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES.
   The following is designated as loading and unloading zones only; parking,
except for loading and unloading, is prohibited:
 
Street           Location                               Ord. No. Date Passed
Strawberry Alley From South Main Street to Quince Alley -        3-18-1974
 
(Prior Code, § 72.70) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE VIII. PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED PARKING.
   (A)   Restricted parking.
      (1)   For the convenience and welfare of the public and an economical and
orderly regulation of parking automobiles and other vehicles in the city, it is
determined and ordained by the city that parking will be restricted as follows:
         (a)   For one-hour parking:
            1.   Public Square;
            2.   North side of North Main Street from U.S. Highway 31 W to Plum
Alley; and
            3.   Both sides of South Main Street from U.S. Highway 31 W to Helm
Street and north side of South Main from Helm Street 150 feet west.
         (b)   For two-hour parking:   
            1.   South side of West Poplar Street from North Main Street to
Cherry Alley; and
            2.   South side of East Poplar Street from North Main Street to
Central Avenue.
      (2)   The Department of Public Works is authorized and directed to
install parking signs on the curb and medians of said streets and in parking
lots. Motor vehicles may be parked within the lines marking each marked space,
but not across any of said lines.
(Prior Code, § 72.50)
   (B)   Parking prohibited. All parking and stopping of any motor vehicle,
trailer or any kind of vehicle or structure shall be prohibited on the
following streets:
Street Side/Time Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Street          Side/Time     Location         Ord. No.         Date Passed
                              Full length
                              located in
Alcott Court    Both          Ashton Park      25-2020          12-14-2020
                              Subdivision
                              Section 04
                              Full length in
Adams Road      Both          the Glendale     03-2024          4-8-2024
                              Hill
                              Neighborhood
Alleys          Both          Any alley within 10-2019          5-20-2019
                              the city
Alley between                 S. Main Street
228 - 212 S.    West          to Hardin County 32               12-19-1994
Main                          Jail
Amandajo Drive  Both          Full length      05-2003          2-18-2003
                              Full length
                              located in
Arden Court     Both          Ashton Park      25-2020          12-14-2020
                              Subdivision
                              Section 04
                              Full length
Autumn Ridge                  located in
Court           Both          Nicolas Ridge    25-2020          12-14-2020
                              Subdivision
                              Section 03
Brighton Court  Both                          01-2016          1-4-2016
                              Full length
                              located in
Canton Lane     Both          Ashton Park      25-2020          12-14-2020
                              Subdivision
                              Section 04
Cedar Branch    Both                          05-2012          3-5-2012
Road
                              From U.S.
Central Avenue  North         Highway 31 W to  2                1-3-1994
                              Poplar Street
Charleston Way  Both                          01-2016          1-4-2016
                              From South
                              Mulberry to a
College Street  South         point            2                1-3-1994
Road                          perpendicular to
                              the centerline
                              of Terry Court
                              From South
College Street  North         Mulberry to      2                1-3-1994
Road                          South Miles
                              Street
                              From U.S.
                              Highway 31 W
                              Bypass to U.S.
College Street  Right-of-way  Highway 62 West  2                1-3-1994
Road                          for the entire
                              length of
                              College Street
                              Road
                              From North
Commerce Drive  Both          Mulberry Street  32               12-19-1994
                              to Executive
                              Drive
Cottrell Drive  South         Entire length    06-2013          4-15-2013
                              Full length
Cricket Lane    Both          located in       25-2020          12-14-2020
                              Tunnel Hill Park
                              Subdivision
Cumberland      Both          Cul-de-sac       22-2014          10-20-2014
Court
                                               36;              7-1-1985; 11-7-
Dixon Avenue    South         The full length  10;              1988; 3-6-1989;
                                               8;               3-5-1990; 1-3-
                                               2                1994
East Poplar                   Between North
Street (two     South         Main Street and  10-2005          4-18-2005
hours parking                 Central Avenue
limit)
Emerson Drive   Both                          01-2016          1-4-2016
Evergreen       Both                          05-2012          3-5-2012
Garden
Evergreen Trail Both                          36-2007; 05-2012 11-5-2007; 3-5-
                                                                2012
Executive Drive Both          The full length  32               12-19-1994
Flora Court                   The full length  22-2003          8-4-2003
                              Full length
Fraisur Reesor                located in
Avenue          Both          Juliana Estates  25-2020          12-14-2020
                              Subdivision
                              Section 01
                                               -;               7-1-1985; 11-7-
                                               36;              1988; 3-6-1989;
Franklin Avenue South         The full length  10;              3-5-1990; 1-3-
                                               8;               1994
                                               2
                                               -;               7-1-1985; 11-7-
                              From Peters      36;              1988; 3-6-1989;
Gates Road      Both          Drive west 455   10;              3-5-1990; 1-3-
                              feet             8;               1994
                                               2
Grapevine Court Both                          05-2012          3-5-2012
                              The public
                              right-of-way
                              approximately
Green Lane      Both          950 feet         04-2024          4-8-2024
                              terminating into
                              Old Glendale
                              Road
                              Full length in
Grissom Lane    Both          the Glendale     04-2024          4-8-2024
                              Hill
                              Neighborhood
                              From U.S.        -;               7-1-1985; 11-7-
Haycraft Street South         Highway 31 to    36;              1988; 3-6-1989;
                              Moon Street      10;              3-5-1990
                                               8
Heartland Drive Both          The full length  1                1-6-1997
                              From South Main
Helm Street     Both          Street to South  2                1-3-1994
                              Mulberry
                              From South
Helm Street     North         Mulberry 500     2                1-3-1994
                              feet
                              northwestwardly
                              From Poplar
Henry Street    North         Street           2                1-3-1994
                              eastwardly 300
                              feet
                              From West
Henry Street    North         Warfield Street  2                1-3-1994
                              to Beech Street
Hickory Lane    Both          From Gates Road  32               12-19-1994
                              to Charlamagne
Hopewell Court  Both                          01-2016          1-4-2016
Huckaberry      Both                          01-2016          1-4-2016
Street
Iqbal Drive     Both          Within the cul-  08-2017          6-19-2017
                              de-sac
                              Intersection of
Ivy Pointe      Both          Stoneybrook      05-2012          3-5-2012
Drive                         Drive to cul-de-
                              sac
Keystone Court  Both                          05-2012          3-5-2012
Lakeview Drive  Both          The full length  2                1-3-1994
Lincoln Avenue  Both                          01-2016          1-4-2016
Low Country     Both                          01-2016          1-4-2016
Court
Magnet Drive    Right-of-way  The full length  2                1-3-1994
                              300 feet from
Mercer Street   Both          the intersection 30               9-7-1999
                              with Woodland
                              Drive
                              Full length in
Miller Street   Both          the Glendale     03-2024          4-8-2024
                              Hill
                              Neighborhood
                              From 430 west of -;               7-1-1985; 11-7-
Morningside                   Springdale Drive 36;              1988; 3-6-1989;
Drive           North         to 340 feet east 10;              3-5-1990; 1-3-
                              of Springdale    8;               1994
                              Drive            2
                South (Mon. - From 430 feet
Morningside     Fri.) (6:00   west of          2                1-3-1994
Drive           a.m. - 4:00   Springdale Drive
                p.m.)         to Hagan Avenue
                              U.S. 62
Nicholas Street Both          intersection to  05-2012          3-5-2012
                              951 Nicholas
                              Street
                              Between
North Black     Right-of-way  Leitchfield Road 13-2007          4-2-2007
Branch Road                   (U.S. 62) and
                              Ring Road
North Main                    From U.S.
Street          Southeast     Highway 31 W to  2                1-3-1994
                              Williams Street
North Main      North         From Plum Alley  2                1-3-1994
Street                        to Poplar Street
Northcrest      Both                          05-2012          3-5-2012
Drive
                              Full length,
Oaklawn Drive   Both          approximately    11-2020          9-8-2020
                              1,700 feet
                              Full length in
Old Glendale    Both          the Glendale     03-2024          4-8-2024
Road                          Hill
                              Neighborhood
                              Full length
Parkway Drive   Both          located in       25-2020          12-14-2020
                              Parkway Business
                              Center
                                               -;               7-1-1985; 11-7-
                                               36;              1988; 3-6-1989;
Peterson Drive  Both          The full length  10;              3-5-1990; 1-3-
                                               8;               1994
                                               2
                              From U.S.
Poplar Drive    South         Highway 31 W     2                1-3-1994
                              eastwardly 130
                              feet
                              From U.S.
Poplar Drive    North         Highway 31 W to  2                1-3-1994
                              Poplar Street
                              From Central
Poplar Street   North         Avenue to North  2                1-3-1994
                              Mantle Avenue
                              From North
                              Mantle Avenue to
Poplar Street   Both          the Helmwood     2                1-3-1994
                              Shopping Center
                              property
                              From N. Miles
Poplar Street   West          Street to Poplar 05-2006          2-21-2006
                              Drive
                              Full length
Prosperity      Both          located in Days  25-2020          12-14-2020
Drive                         Inn Subdivision
                              Section 01
Radford Court   Both                          01-2016          1-4-2016
Richmond Court  Both                          01-2016          1-4-2016
Rippling Brook  Both                          05-2012          3-5-2012
Court
Riley Way       Both                          01-2016          1-4-2016
Robinbrook      Both                          05-2012          3-5-2012
Boulevard
Routt Drive     South         West of Candice  06-2013          4-15-2013
                              Lane
                              Full length
RR Thomas Court Both          located in RR    25-2020          12-14-2020
                              Thomas
                              Subdivision
Ruby Drive      Both          The full length  05-2003          2-18-2003
Sandy Circle    Both                          01-2016          1-4-2016
                              Full length in
Skyline Drive   Both          the Glendale     03-2024          4-8-2024
                              Hill
                              Neighborhood
                              Full length in
South Crestwood Both          the Glendale     03-2024          4-8-2024
Street                        Hill
                              Neighborhood
                              Pennsylvania
South Mantle    Northwest     West to its      25               9-18-1995
                              terminus
                              From U.S.
Sycamore Street Both          Highway 31 W to  2                1-3-1994
                              Poplar
Tallyho Way     Both                          05-2012          3-5-2012
Taylor Lane     Both          Cul-de-sac       08-2020          6-15-2020
University      Right-of-way  The full length  2                1-3-1994
Drive
Veterans Way    Both          The full length  13-2004          7-19-2004
                              From North
Warfield Street South         Mulberry to      2                1-3-1994
                              Churchill Court
Waterside Drive Both                          01-2016          1-4-2016
West Park Road  Both          The full length  2;               1-3-1994; 3-5-
                                               05-2012          2012
Winding Creek   Both                          01-2016          1-4-2016
Court
 
(Prior Code, § 72.71)
(Ord. passed 12-2-1946; Ord. passed 2-20-1956; Ord. passed 6-4-1956; Ord. 3,
passed 1-3-1994; Ord. 13-2012, passed 7-16-2012)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS AND ANIMAL CONTROL
      
91.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; PUBLIC PROPERTY
      
92.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
93.   FIRE PREVENTION; SMOKE DETECTORS
      
94.   LITTERING
      
95.   CEMETERIES
      
96.   FAIR HOUSING
      
97.   NOISE REGULATIONS
      
98.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
99.   YARD SALES
      
100.   CERTIFICATION OF RECOVERY RESIDENCES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS AND ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
Dogs
   
90.15   Alternate opinion
   
90.16   Control of dogs
   
90.17   Control of vicious dogs
   
90.18   Enforcement of restrictions on vicious dogs
   
90.19   Impoundment
   
90.20   Provision of necessities
   
90.21   Restraint by leash or chain; specifications
   
90.22   Abandonment
   
90.23   Cruelty to animals
   
90.24   Cruelty or exhibition fighting prohibited
   
90.25   Killing dogs, cats for food or fur prohibited
   
90.26   Mutilation of animals
   
90.27   Sexual acts with animals
   
90.28   Removal of animal in immediate danger
   
90.29   Confiscation of victimized animal
   
90.30   Sale of dogs and cats
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON. To forsake entirely, or to neglect or refuse to provide or perform
the legal obligations for care and support of an animal by its owner or agent.
Such ABANDONMENT shall constitute the relinquishment of all rights and claims
by the owner to such animal.
(KRS 257.100(4))
   AT-LARGE. Not restrained by leash, cord, chain or otherwise confined in an
enclosure.
   DOG. This term shall in be intended to mean both male and female.
   DOG WARDEN. This term shall be interchangeable with Animal Warden and Animal
Control Officer.
   ENCLOSURE. An uncovered fence or structure of at least seven feet in height
or a covered fence or structure of sufficient height to allow the dog to stand
erect without touching the top or cover, forming or causing an enclosure
suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a
vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner
or keeper, such as tethering of the vicious dog. Further, said fence or
structure shall be sufficiently embedded in the ground to prevent the dog from
digging under said fence or structure. Such ENCLOSURE shall be securely
enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be
designed to prevent the dog from escaping from the ENCLOSURE.
   KEEPER. Any person to whom a vicious dog is entrusted.
   OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping or harboring a dog. Every person having a right of property to an
animal and every person who keeps or harbors an animal, has it in his or her
care, or permits it to remain on or about the premises owned or occupied by him
or her.
   RESTRAINT. A vicious dog shall be deemed to be under RESTRAINT if on the
premises of the owner or keeper and confined in a secure enclosure as
previously defined or under the control of the owner or keeper and securely
muzzled and restrained with a chain or braided leather, nylon or manilla leash
or leash having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding
three feet in length.
   VICIOUS DOG.
      (1)   Includes the following:
         (a)   Any dog which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or
other domestic animals by virtue of a known propensity to endanger life by an
unprovoked assault or bite so as to cause serious bodily harm;
         (b)   Any dog which when unprovoked, in a vicious or terrorizing
manner approaches any person in an attitude of attack upon the streets,
sidewalks or any public grounds or places;
         (c)   Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack unprovoked, to cause injury to or otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or domestic animals;
         (d)   Any dog which bites (to the extent of puncturing or severely
bruising skin), inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a human being or
domestic animal without provocation on public or private property;
         (e)   Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose
of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting;
         (f)   Any dog which has previously attacked or bitten a human being
other than under the type of circumstances that would be justifiable hereunder;
         (g)   Any dog which has behaved in such a manner that the owner or
keeper thereof knows or should reasonably know that the dog is possessed of
tendencies to attach or to bite human beings other than the type which would be
justified hereunder;
         (h)   Any dog certified by a doctor of veterinary medicine, after
observation thereof, as posing a danger to human like or property if not kept
in the manner required by this chapter upon the basis of reasonable medical
probability;
         (i)   Any dog which has been classified as vicious by the county’s Dog
Warden or a peace officer; and/or
         (j)   Any dog which has been trained as an attack or guard dog, except
such dogs which are employed by any police department within the commonwealth.
      (2)   An animal shall not be deemed VICIOUS solely because:
         (a)   It bites, attacks or menaces:
            1.   Anyone assaulting its owner or keeper; or
            2.   Any person or other animal who has tormented or abused it.
         (b)   It is otherwise acting in the defense of any attack from a
person or other animal upon its owner or any other person;
         (c)   It is protecting or defending its young or the young of any
other animal; or
         (d)   Where a person has broken into or entered, without permission,
the enclosure of such dog.
(Prior Code, § 90.01)
DOGS
§ 90.15 ALTERNATE OPINION.
   Should the owner or keeper of any dog which has been classified as vicious
by the county’s Dog Warden, a peace officer or by a doctor of veterinary
medicine, and should the said owner desire to challenge this classification,
then said owner/keeper may engage the services of a licensed doctor of
veterinary medicine, all costs of which are to be borne by the owner/keeper of
the dog in question. Said alternate opinion must be acquired and completed
within 48 hours of the initial classification of the dog as being vicious.
(Prior Code, § 90.15) (Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-2000)
§ 90.16 CONTROL OF DOGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city
any dog that barks or yelps or otherwise makes such noise as to disturb the
peace and quiet of the people in the neighborhood or area where the dog is
kept. Verification of more than one person from at least two different
households shall be required, before this provision takes effect.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to entice a dog from a yard or enclosure of its
owner or keeper or to bring any dog into the city for the purpose of impounding
or disposing of the same or to remove a muzzle or license tag from any dog
without the consent of the owner, keeper or custodian thereof.
   (C)   No owner, custodian, possessor or harborer shall permit any dog to run
at large other than on its owners premises at any time unless under the direct
control of the owner, custodian, possessor or harborer.
   (D)   (1)   The owner, custodian, possessor or harborer of every dog shall,
at all times, keep such dog either:
         (a)   Confined on the owner’s premises within an enclosure which it
can not escape;
         (b)   Firmly secured by means of a collar or chain or other device so
that it can not escape and stray from the premises on which it is secured; or
         (c)   Under the immediate control of such person.
      (2)   The term UNDER IMMEDIATE CONTROL is defined as the power to manage
and direct said dog and is not limited to physical control of said dog.
(Prior Code, § 90.16) (Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-2000) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.17 CONTROL OF VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep
or harbor within the city, a vicious dog that shall bite or fiercely attach any
person or domestic animal while outside of its owner’s yard or enclosure or
real estate.
      (2)   The section shall not apply where a person shall break into or
enter without the permission the premises or enclosure of such dog and be
pursued therefrom and attacked or bitten by the dog.
   (B)   All vicious dogs shall be confined in an enclosure. It shall be
unlawful for any owner or keeper to maintain a vicious dog upon any premises
which does not have a locked enclosure.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to allow any vicious dog
to be outside of the dwelling of the owner or keeper or outside of the
enclosure unless the owner or keeper has the vicious dog under proper
restraint, and under the direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper
of the vicious dog.
   (D)   The owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall display a sign on his or
her premises warning that there is a vicious dog on the premises. Such sign
shall be visible and capable of being read from the public street. The sign
shall be a minimum of two square feet in area.
   (E)   The owner or keeper shall immediately notify the county’s Dog Warden
and the Police Department if a vicious dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has
attacked another animal or has attached a human being or has died.
   (F)   The county’s Dog Warden or peace officer is hereby empowered to make
whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions
hereof, subject to the right of such owner or keeper to contest the seizure or
impoundment, as provided in this chapter, in the county’s District Court.
   (G)   In the event that the owner or keeper of the dog refuses to surrender
the dog to the county’s Dog Warden, the county’s Dog Warden may obtain a search
warrant from a judge of the county’s District Court to seize the dog upon the
execution of the warrant.
   (H)   No person shall walk or exercise a vicious dog within 1,000 feet of a
school, day care, day nursery, playground, hospital or fairground.
   (I)   No more than two vicious dogs may be kept at a singular site or
residence. This section shall not apply to duly licensed kennels.
   (J)   No vicious dog may be kept on a chain tied to a fixed point outside an
enclosure.
(Prior Code, § 90.17) (Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-2000) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.18 ENFORCEMENT OF RESTRICTIONS ON VICIOUS DOGS.
   In the event that a public law enforcement officer or the county’s Dog
Warden has probable cause to believe that a vicious dog is being harbored in
the city in violation of this chapter, he or she may:
   (A)   Order the violation immediately corrected and cite the owner or keeper
to appear in court for the violation; or
   (B)   If the violation cannot be immediately corrected and the dog is posing
an imminent serious threat to human beings or other domestic animals, the dog
may be seized and impounded, in which case the owner or keeper will be cited to
appear in court for the violation.
      (1)   At the owner’s or keeper’s request and expense, such impoundment
may be at a veterinarian or licensed kennel of the owner’s or keeper’s
choosing.
      (2)   If the court rules that the dog is not vicious as defined, it will
be released to the owner or keeper upon payment to the county’s Dog Warden of
the expense of keeping such dog, pursuant to a schedule of such costs
maintained by the county’s Dog Warden. If the court rules that it is vicious as
defined, the dog will be released to the owner or keeper only after payment of
any fees and penalties, upon presentation of proof by the owner or keeper that
the dog will now be kept restrained or confined as specified in this chapter.
      (3)   If, within seven days following such order regarding a vicious dog,
the owner or keeper of a vicious dog rails to either provide proof that the dog
will be kept restrained or confined in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter or fails to reclaim it after impoundment and pay the fees and
penalties, the dog may be humanely euthanized.
(Prior Code, § 90.18) (Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-2000)
§ 90.19 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Any dog found running at large within the city limits, unless under
direct control of the owner, custodian, possessor or harborer shall be taken up
by the county’s Dog Warden and/or other proper authority, and impounded in the
shelter designated by the county’s animal shelter and there confined in a
humane manner for a period of not less than five days unless sooner claimed by
its owner, custodian or person entitled thereto.
   (B)   The county’s Dog Warden may humanely destroy or transfer title of all
animals held after the legal detention period in division (A) above has expired
and the animal has not been claimed by its owner, custodian or other person
entitled to the possession thereof; provided, the person to whom tide is being
transferred licenses said dog according to the laws of the commonwealth and
supplies proof of a rabies inoculation for said dog together with the boarding
charges levied by the animal shelter and, in addition thereto, the pick-up fee
payable to the city provided below.
   (C)   Any owner, custodian or other person entitled to the possession of a
dog impounded under division (A) above may be claimed by such owner, custodian
or person entitled to possession thereof upon: proof that said dog has been or
is licensed, according to the laws of the commonwealth; proof that said dog has
been inoculated against rabies; payment of boarding charges levied by the
county; and payment to the county of any fine due.
(Prior Code, § 90.19) (Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-2000)
§ 90.20 PROVISION OF NECESSITIES.
   (A)   No owner shall fail to provide his or her animal with good wholesome
food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care
when needed to prevent suffering and humane care and treatment.
   (B)   Any owner of animals shall maintain a clean and healthful shelter and
living area for any animal being kept, which area shall be free of accumulated
waste and debris so that the animal shall be free to walk or lie down without
coming in contact with any such waste or debris. All such shelters or living
areas must be cleaned and maintained regularly so as to promote proper health
for the animals being kept. All living areas shall be constructed and
maintained to promote proper drainage of rain water to prevent the accumulation
of mud and/or water. Shelters shall be constructed to protect the animal from
precipitation and of a material which provides insulation from temperature
extremes. In addition to the shelter, a shaded area shall also be provided by
means of other structures, tree(s) or awning(s). The shelter shall have a floor
augmented with resting boards. Insulating bedding materials shall be provided
during inclement weather extremes.
(Prior Code, § 90.20) (Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-2000) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.21 RESTRAINT BY LEASH OR CHAIN; SPECIFICATIONS.
   If any animal is restricted by a chain, leash or similar restraint, it shall
be designed and placed as defined under restraint in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 90.21) (Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-2000)
§ 90.22 ABANDONMENT.
   No person shall abandon any animal, abandonment consisting of: leaving an
animal for a period in excess of 24 hours, without providing for someone to
feed, water and check on the animal’s condition; or leaving an animal by the
roadside or other area; or leaving an animal on either public or private
property without the property owner’s consent. In the event that an animal is
found so abandoned, such animal may be taken by a County Dog Warden or peace
officer and impounded in a shelter, and there confined in a humane manner. Such
animal, if taken from private property, shall be kept for not less than the
prescribed period in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
90.19 of this chapter. In the event that an animal is so abandoned, the owner
or keeper, if any, whom he or she has charged with the animal’s care, shall be
subject to a citation for violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 90.22) (Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-2000) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see KRS 257.100(4)
§ 90.23 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   Cruelty to animals shall be controlled by KRS Ch. 525.
(Prior Code, § 90.23) (Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-2000) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see KRS 525.130
§ 90.24 CRUELTY OR EXHIBITION FIGHTING PROHIBITED.
   Cruelty or exhibition fighting shall be controlled by KRS Ch. 525.
(Prior Code, § 90.24) (Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-2000) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.25 KILLING DOGS, CATS FOR FOOD OR FUR PROHIBITED.
   No person shall raise or kill a dog or cat for food or the skin or fur.
(Prior Code, § 90.25) (Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-2000) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.26 MUTILATION OF ANIMALS.
   Mutilation of animals shall be controlled by KRS Ch. 525.
(Prior Code, § 90.26) (Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-2000) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.27 SEXUAL ACTS WITH ANIMALS.
   Sexual acts with animals shall be controlled by KRS Ch. 525.
(Prior Code, § 90.27) (Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-2000) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.28 REMOVAL OF ANIMAL IN IMMEDIATE DANGER.
   Any animal observed by a peace officer or County Dog Warden to be in
immediate danger may be removed from such situation by the quickest and most
reasonable means available.
(Prior Code, § 90.28) (Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-2000)
§ 90.29 CONFISCATION OF VICTIMIZED ANIMAL.
   (A)   Any animal found involved in a violation of any portion of this
chapter may be confiscated by any County Dog Warden or peace officer and held
in a humane manner. Upon conviction of this charge by a court of law, all
animals so confiscated shall become the property of the county, and the owner
of the animals shall pay to or reimburse the county all veterinary fees
associated with medical treatment provided the animals while it was in custody.
   (B)   A County Dog Warden or peace officer shall be allowed reasonable
access to inspect the property of anyone found guilty of violation of any of
the provisions under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 90.29) (Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-2000)
§ 90.30 SALE OF DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ADOPTION FEE. Remuneration to cover the cost of feeding, sheltering,
surgical sterilization and providing care for an animal without profit.
      ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION. A not-for-profit organization that has tax-
exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue
Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the
rescue and placement of dogs or cats into permanent homes and that does not
breed animals nor obtain animals in exchange for payment or compensation from
any person that breeds or brokers animals.
      ANIMAL SHELTER. Any facility used to house or contain animals, operated
or maintained by a governmental body, Incorporated Humane Society, Animal
Welfare Society, Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, Animal
Rescue Organization or other nonprofit organization.
      BREEDER. A person that maintains dogs or cats for the purpose of breeding
and selling their offspring.
      BROKER. A person that transfers dogs or cats for resale by another
person.
      CAT. Any member of the species Felis catus of any age.
      COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. A business which is open to the public, whether
by appointment or during reoccurring business hours, and that engages in a
retail sale.
      DOG.  Any member of the species Canis lupus familiaris, or any genetic
hybridization thereof of any age.
      PUBLIC COMMON AREA. An outdoor area open to the public such as parks or
recreation areas.
      PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE, PUBLIC COMMON AREA, AND FLEA MARKETS SALES. The sale
or transfer, offer for sale or transfer, auction, barter, display,
advertisement for sale or otherwise disposing of any live dog or cat on any
public thoroughfare, public common area, roadside area, in any parking lot or
in any flea markets, to any member of the public.
      RETAIL PET SHOP. A for-profit establishment open to the public that
sells, or offers for sale, food, supplies, or animals to be kept as household
pets.
      RETAIL SALE. The auction, order, display for sale, offer for sale, or
selling of any dog or cat.
   (B)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any retail pet shop or commercial
establishment to engage in the retail sale of a dog or cat of any age.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the retail sale of
the dog or cat of any age from a public thoroughfare, public common area, or
flea market.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any retail pet shop or commercial
establishment to collaborate to showcase dogs or cats of any age with any
entity which is affiliated with, or is housed on the premises of a breeder or
broker; obtain dogs or cats from a breeder or broker in exchange for payment or
compensation; or resell dogs or cats obtained from a breeder or broker and
provide payment or compensation to such breeder or broker.
   (C)   Adoptions allowed.
      (1)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a retail pet
shop or commercial establishment from collaborating with any animal shelter or
rescue to provide space to showcase dogs or cats for the purpose of adoption,
to include collection of an adoption fee. In such event signage shall reflect
the name of the animal shelter or rescue from which the animal was obtained.
Animal control officers may periodically require retail pet shops and
commercial establishments to provide access to these records.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any animal
shelter or rescue from holding adoption events in public thoroughfares, public
common areas or flea markets, retail pet shops, commercial establishments or
animal shelter or rescue premises.
(Ord. 23-2021, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The enforcing agency, department or individual may choose to seek
enforcement through the Code Enforcement Board enacted on 4-30-2003 by Ord. 09-
2003.
   (B)   Any person violating this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $50, nor more than $200, or be imprisonment in the county jail for
not less than ten, nor more than 60 days, or by both fine and imprisonment.
Every day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   (1)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this
chapter concerning owning a vicious dog, in addition to the penalties imposed,
may be required by a District Court Judge to have the dog humanely euthanized
if, in the opinion of that Judge, that the severity of the attack warrants such
action.
      (2)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter
concerning owning a potentially vicious dog or vicious dog shall be fined not
less than $250 and shall have the dog spayed or neutered within seven days of
that finding. Proof of the surgery must be provided to the citing agency within
24 hours of its performance.
      (3)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter
concerning owning a potentially vicious dog or a vicious dog, in addition to
any other penalties or stipulations imposed, shall within seven days of that
finding also have the dog implanted with a microchip identification. Within
seven days of that implantation, the owner shall present the animal to the
Division of scanning and verification of the microchip and identification
number.
      (4)   In addition to any penalties and/or stipulations imposed, anyone
convicted of violations of §§
90.17,
90.18,
90.23 and
90.24 of this chapter may also be required to relinquish ownership of the
animal(s) to the county’s Dog Warden immediately upon conviction, and said
animal may be humanely euthanized according to the standard of procedures
followed by the county’s Dog Warden.
   (D)   Any owner, custodian, possessor or harborer which violates this
chapter shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $500, for the first
offense and not less than $100, nor more than $500, for each subsequent
offense, plus applicable court costs.
   (E)   (1)   Any corporation who violates §
90.30 shall be subject to a Class B Misdemeanor criminal penalty of $5,000 or
double the amount of the corporation's gain from commission of the offense,
whichever is greater. Each animal offered for sale in violation of §
90.30 shall constitute a separate violation.
      (2)   Any person who violates §
90.30 shall be subject to a Class B Misdemeanor criminal penalty of $250 or a
term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both. Each animal offered for
sale in violation of § 90.30 shall constitute a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 90.20) (Ord. 28, passed 12-4-1995; Ord. 17-2000, passed 9-25-
2000; Ord. 29-2000, passed 12-18-2000; Ord. 19-2003, passed 6-23-2003; Ord. 23-
2021, passed 10-18-2021)
CHAPTER 91: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
91.001   Street names
   
91.002   Street maintenance
Excavations and Construction
   
91.015   Opening permit required
   
91.016   Application and cash deposit
   
91.017   Restoration of pavement
   
91.018   Barriers around excavations
   
91.019   Warning lights
Obstructions
   
91.030   Barbed wire fences
   
91.031   Removal of ice and snow
Entrance and Encroachments
   
91.045   Purpose
   
91.046   Authority; administrative agency
   
91.047   Area of jurisdiction
   
91.048   Compliance with other codes, statutes and regulations required
   
91.049   Variances
   
91.050   Disclaimer of liability
   
91.051   Complaints regarding violations
   
91.052   Entrance permits
   
91.053   Encroachment permits
   
91.054   General permit standards
   
91.055   Entrance construction standards
   
91.056   Encroachment permit construction standards
   
91.057   Special design standards
Street and House Numbering
   
91.070   Street numbering system
   
91.071   Department of Planning and Development to assign street numbers
   
91.072   Display of street address required
   
91.073   Specifications for numerals indicating street address
   
91.074   Street numbers to be obtained and displayed before issuance of
building permit or certificate of occupancy
   
91.075   Tampering with; defacing street numbers prohibited
   
91.076   Non-compliance
Trees on Public Property
   
91.090   Street tree species to be planted
   
91.091   Spacing
   
91.092   Distance from curb to sidewalk
   
91.093   Distance from street corners and fire hydrant
   
91.094   Utilities
   
91.095   Public tree care
   
91.096   Tree topping
   
91.097   Pruning, corner clearance
   
91.098   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property
   
91.099   Removal of stumps
   
91.100   Interference with city’s Engineering Department
   
91.101   Arborists license and bond
   
91.102   Review by City Council
Skateboards, Skates and Non-Motorized Transportation Devices
   
91.115   Definitions
   
91.116   Operation prohibited
   
91.117   Confiscation
 
   
91.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001 STREET NAMES.
   (A)   The current names indicated on the city’s Zoning Map are adopted as
the official street names for the streets and public ways shown thereon for the
city.
   (B)   Names for future streets should be chosen that are pleasant sounding,
appropriate, easy to read, not exceeding 14 characters and shall not be the
same, nor closely approximate, phonetically or in spelling the name of any
other street in the county.
   (C)   Names for future streets shall be deemed to be officially adopted by
the city after the subdivision plat creating the street right-of-way receives
approval by the city’s Planning Commission.
   (D)   The name of any street can only be changed by action of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 91.001) (Ord. 20, passed 5-20-1991)
§ 91.002 STREET MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Streets that meet minimum standards of the city according to the
city’s Subdivision Design and Improvement Standards shall be approved by the
city upon certification of inspection by the City Engineer to the City Council
with motion and action to approve the same.
   (B)   A list of those city streets on the city’s maintenance system shall be
maintained by the Department of Planning and Development at its office.
(Prior Code, § 91.002) (Ord. 23-1994, passed 9-6-1994)
EXCAVATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION
§ 91.015 OPENING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized city official,
to make any opening in any street, alley or public way of the city unless a
permit to make the opening has been obtained prior to commencement of the work.
(Prior Code, § 91.015) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.016 APPLICATION AND CASH DEPOSIT.
   (A)   Each permit for making an opening shall be confined to a single
project and shall be issued by the Engineering Department.
   (B)   Application shall be made on a form prescribed by the legislative
body, giving the exact location of the proposed opening, the kind of paving,
the area and depth to be excavated and such other facts as may be provided for.
   (C)   Unless waived, the permit shall be issued only after a cash deposit
sufficient to cover the cost of restoration has been posted with the authorized
city official, conditioned upon prompt and satisfactory refilling of
excavations and restoration of all surfaces disturbed.
(Prior Code, § 91.016)
§ 91.017 RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT.
   (A)   The opening and restoration of a pavement or other surface shall be
performed under the direction and to the satisfaction of the authorized city
official, and in accordance with rules, regulations and specifications approved
by the legislative body.
   (B)   (1)   Upon failure or refusal of the permittee satisfactorily to fill
the excavation, restore the surface and remove all excess materials within the
time specified in the permit or where not specified therein, within a
reasonable time after commencement of the work, the city may proceed without
notice to make such fill and restoration and the deposit referred to in §
91.016 of this chapter shall be forfeited.
      (2)   Thereupon, the deposit shall be paid into the appropriate city
fund, except such part demanded and paid to the permittee as the difference
between the deposit and the charges of the city for restoration services
performed by it.
      (3)   If the amount of such services performed by the city should exceed
the amount of the deposit, the City Clerk or other proper administrative
officer shall proceed to collect the remainder due from the permittee.
(Prior Code, § 91.017)
§ 91.018 BARRIERS AROUND EXCAVATIONS.
   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or opening any
street, sidewalk, alley or other public way shall have the excavation or
opening fully barricaded at all times to prevent injury to persons or animals.
(Prior Code, § 91.018) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.019 WARNING LIGHTS.
   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or otherwise in any
manner obstructing a portion or all of any street, sidewalk, alley or other
public way, at all times during the night shall install and maintain at least
two yellow flashing lamps and barricades which shall be securely and
conspicuously posted on, at or near each end of the obstruction or excavation
and, if the space involved exceeds 50 feet in extent, at least one additional
lamp for each added 50 feet or portion thereof excavated or obstructed.
(Prior Code, § 91.019) Penalty, see §
91.999
OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 91.030 BARBED WIRE FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct or cause to be
constructed or erected along a sidewalk and within 15 feet of the curbing of
the streets, a fence in whole or in part containing barbed wire or other
dangerous obstruction.
(Prior Code, § 91.046) (Ord. passed 9-4-1922) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.031 REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW.
   It shall be the duty of the owner or of the occupant of each and every
parcel of real estate in the city adjacent to any sidewalk to keep the sidewalk
adjacent to his or her premises free and clear of snow and ice to the extent
feasible under the prevailing weather conditions, and to remove therefrom all
snow and ice, to the extent feasible under the prevailing weather conditions, a
reasonable time which will ordinarily not exceed 12 hours after the abatement
of any storm during which the snow and ice may have accumulated.
(Prior Code, § 91.047) Penalty, see §
91.999
ENTRANCE AND ENCROACHMENTS
§ 91.045 PURPOSE.
   These standards are designed to encourage the development of sound,
healthful and economically stable residential, commercial, industrial and
public areas; to provide for safe, convenient and efficient traffic
circulation; to enhance the unique aesthetics of the community; and to provide
for the overall harmonious development of the community in accordance with the
adopted Comprehensive Plan for the city.
(Ord. 06-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 91.046 AUTHORITY; ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY.
   These standards are adopted by the city and shall be administered jointly by
the Director of the Department of Planning and Development and the City
Engineer, or their authorized designee.
(Ord. 06-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 91.047 AREA OF JURISDICTION.
   The city, through these standards, shall have jurisdiction and control over
local street rights-of-way within the corporate boundaries of the city and city
property.
(Ord. 06-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 91.048 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER CODES, STATUTES AND REGULATIONS.
   Nothing in these standards shall be construed to exempt an applicant for a
permit from compliance with all local, state and federal codes, statutes and
regulations.
(Ord. 06-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 91.049 VARIANCES.
   (A)   These standards are adopted only as minimum requirements, and all
applicants should consider developing at higher standards. The city may require
standards above the minimum standards contained herein whenever it finds that
public health, safety or welfare justify such higher standards.
   (B)   The city may also reduce or otherwise vary the requirements of these
standards. Such variances may be granted if the city finds such to be true
without detriment to the public good; without impairing the purposes and basic
objectives of these standards; and with impairing the desirable general
development of the neighborhood and the community as proposed by the
Comprehensive Plan. In granting such variances, the city may attach and require
whatever conditions it finds are necessary or reasonable to secure the basic
objectives of these standards. Any variance granted by the city shall be noted
on the required permit along with the findings which justify the granting of
the variance.
(Ord. 06-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 91.050 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, no approval of any entrance
or encroachment permit or portion thereof, by the Department of Planning and
Development, the Engineering Department or any other public agency or official
of the city, whether employed, elected or appointed, shall operate as warranty
or guarantee of the safety or reasonableness of any entrance or encroachment
activity or portion thereof, or act in any way to limit or alter any common-law
duties imposed on the developers or authors of such plans.
(Ord. 06-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 91.051 COMPLIANCE REGARDING VIOLATIONS.
   Any person may file a written complaint alleging violation of these
standards. Such complaint shall state fully the cause and base thereof and
shall be filed with the City Engineer. The City Engineer or his or her agent
shall properly record such complaint and investigate and take action thereon as
provided by these regulations to cite the violator.
(Ord. 06-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 91.052 ENTRANCE PERMITS.
   (A)   When required. Entrance permits shall be required as follows:
      (1)   For new construction of commercial or industrial development;
      (2)   For existing commercial or industrial development, when entrances
in use prior to the adoption of this subchapter are changed structurally (i.e.,
widened, shortened, radius changes);
      (3)   For all vehicular use areas;
      (4)   For residential development driveways;
      (5)   For private streets; and
      (6)   For new public streets.
   (B)   Entrance permit procedures. To formally request action on the required
entrance permit, the applicant shall file a completed application form to the
Engineering Department. The procedure for entrance permits differs based upon
the type of development.
      (1)   Entrance permits with development plans.
         (a)   Review. When a development plan is required by the city’s Zoning
Ordinance, the applicant may submit the required information for an entrance
permit, to the Engineering Department, concurrently with the development plan
application. The encroachment permit number shall be provided on the
development plan prior to signature of approval.
         (b)   Action. The city shall act within 30 days of submission in the
following manner:
            1.   Approval. The city may approve the entrance as submitted;
            2.   Conditional approval. The city may approve the entrance
conditionally and require amendment to the application before granting full
approval; or
            3.   Disapproval. The city may disapprove the entrance and shall
state in writing its reasons for disapproval.
      (2)   Entrance permits with building permits.
         (a)   Review. When an entrance permit is required as part of a
residential development, the applicant must submit the required information for
an entrance permit along with the building permit application to the
Engineering Department. The encroachment permit must be obtained prior to
applicant receiving construction permit approval.
         (b)   Action. The city shall act within 30 days of submission in the
following manner:
            1.   Approval. The city may approve the entrance as submitted;
            2.   Conditional approval. The city may approve the entrance
conditionally and require amendment to the application before granting full
approval; or
            3.   Disapproval. The city may disapprove the entrance plan and
shall state in writing its reasons for disapproval.
      (3)   All other entrance permits.
         (a)   Review. The city shall review entrance permit applications for
compliance with the guidelines and information as required by this subchapter.
All permit applications shall be submitted to the Engineering Department.
         (b)   Action. The city shall act within 30 days of submission in the
following manner:
            1.   Approval. The city may approve the entrance as submitted;
            2.   Conditional approval. The city may approve the entrance
conditionally and require amendment to the application before granting full
approval; or
            3.   Disapproval. The city may disapprove the entrance plan and
shall state in writing its reasons for disapproval.
   (C)   Contents of entrance permit site plan. Required plan information shall
be as follows (unless certain items are waived by the city):
      (1)   Title block showing plan name, owner, developer plan and
application preparer, firm or company, with written and graphic scale;
      (2)   Scale of plan should be one inch equals 20 feet or other approved
scale;
      (3)   North arrow;
      (4)   Location, width and grade of proposed driveway;
      (5)   Angles of proposed driveway with city right-of-way;
      (6)   Location and size of any existing or proposed cross drain or side
drain pipes or culverts and the direction of flow within such structures;
      (7)   Distance between driveway measured along edge of pavement or along
curb line, in both directions of travel;
      (8)   Proposed radii of all curves;
      (9)   The proposed use of the property;
      (10)   Any proposed divided highway access;
      (11)   Frontage roads with length, width, radii and corner clearance;
      (12)   Sight distance requirements/calculations;
      (13)   Traffic control device plans, both temporary and permanent;
      (14)   Anticipated traffic count by an applicant provided traffic study;
      (15)   Location of utilities (lines, poles, hydrants, manholes, pipes,
conduit, both above and below grade);
      (16)   Location of street trees;
      (17)   Sidewalks, including accessible connections and crosswalks; and
      (18)   Material of entrance.
   (D)   Amendments to entrance permits. Amendments to approved entrance
permits can be made only by the same procedure required for the original
submission.
(Ord. 06-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 91.053 ENCROACHMENT PERMITS.
   (A)   When required.
      (1)   Encroachment permits shall be required for any work performed upon
the city’s rights-of-way that disturbs any roadway, sidewalk or any other
portion of the right-of-way or requires a shut down of vehicular or pedestrian
travel way for a period lasting longer than 24 hours or shut down requiring two
or more consecutive days.
      (2)   Encroachment permits are not required for utility companies having
franchise agreements with the city when performing emergency or routine
maintenance; except that, notice of road closures and damage to the roadway and
right-of-way features shall be provided by the utility company.
   (B)   Encroachment permit procedures. To formally request action on the
required encroachment permit, the applicant shall file a completed application
form and a site plan.
      (1)   Encroachment permit with subdivision application.
         (a)   Review. When an encroachment permit is required as part of work
being performed as part of a subdivision development, the applicant may
indicate all the required information for the encroachment permit on the
improvement plan as required by the city’s Subdivision Regulations and shall
submit an encroachment permit application. The encroachment permit number shall
be provided on the improvement plans.
         (b)   Action. The city shall act within 30 days of submission in the
following manner:
            1.   Approval. The city may approve the encroachment as submitted;
            2.   Conditional approval. The city may approve the encroachment
conditionally and require amendment to the application before granting full
approval; or
            3.   Disapproval. The city may disapprove the improvement plan and
shall state in writing its reasons for disapproval.
      (2)   All other encroachment permits.
         (a)   Review. The city shall review encroachment permit applications
for compliance with the guidelines and information as required by this
subchapter.
         (b)   Action. The city shall act within 30 days of submission in the
following manner:
            1.   Approval. The city may approve the encroachment as submitted;
            2.   Conditional approval. The city may approve the encroachment
conditionally and require amendment to the application before granting full
approval; or
            3.   Disapproval. The city may disapprove the encroachment plan and
shall state in writing its reasons for disapproval.
   (C)   Contents of encroachment permit site plan. Required information shall
be as follows (unless certain items are waived by the city):
      (1)   Title block showing name, owner, developer, plan and application
preparer firm or company, with written and graphic scale generally describing
the scope of work;
      (2)   Scale of plan shall be one inch equals 20 feet or other approved
scale;
      (3)   North arrow;
      (4)   Numbers and/or names of all streets and highways which appear on
the plan;
      (5)   Details of adjacent roadways, including entrances, and all existing
median facilities, including cross-overs, openings, storage lanes, tapers
within 300 feet of work area in both directions;
      (6)   Width of existing roadway pavements and shoulders;
      (7)   Distance from the edge of the pavement to the side ditch and the
direction of flow of the ditch if ditched lined street;
      (8)   Distance from the centerline of the city street to the right-of-way
line;
      (9)   Location of property lines along the right-of-way;
      (10)   Location of all utilities above and below ground line;
      (11)   The location of all signs, signals or other traffic-control
devices existing along the right-of-way being disturbed;
      (12)   Traffic-control device plans, both temporary and permanent;
      (13)   Type of encroachment; and
      (14)   Limits of disturbance.
   (D)   Amendments to encroachment permits. Amendments to approved
encroachment permits can be made only by the same procedures required for the
original submission.
(Ord. 06-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 91.054 GENERAL PERMIT STANDARDS.
   All construction shall be protected from flooding and erosion damage (i.e.,
open pipes shall be protected from filling with mud or debris). Erosion and
flooding control shall be exercised during construction to prevent damage to
property adjacent to the development. An erosion prevention and sediment
control permit, per Ord. 01-2007, shall be obtained prior to work being
started.
   (A)   Drainage. Any proposal to alter or increase a drainage area or change
in any way a drainage structure must be accompanied by a complete drainage
survey (upstream and downstream) based on a 25-year and a 100-year storm with
hydraulic analysis of all affected drainage structures in the area. In the
event that any permittee’s development is to create sufficient additional
surface drainage runoff, so that the existing downstream drainage facilities
such as ditches, paved ditches, special channels or any other drainage facility
within city-maintained right-of-way becomes inadequate to accommodate the
increased flow, it is then the sole responsibility of the permittee to:
      (1)   Modify or replace the downstream drainage facility or facilities,
in order that the increased flow is adequately accommodated to the satisfaction
of the city; and
      (2)   Provide an on-site detention basin of appropriate capacity and
discharge design to enable the existing downstream drainage facilities to
continue to function adequately to the satisfaction of the city, as required by
this subchapter, the Zoning Ordinance, the Subdivision Regulations and Property
Maintenance Ordinance.
   (B)   Utilities.
      (1)   Utilities are not to be placed in or through existing drainage
conduits.
      (2)   Notification of utility companies before excavating (Occupational
Safety and Health Act requirements) - Kentucky Occupational Safety and Health
Standards for the construction industry which has the effect of law states in
part (1926.651 Specific Excavation Requirements): “Prior to opening an
excavation, effort shall be made to determine whether underground installation,
i.e., sewer, telephone, water, fuel, electrical lines or other utilities will
be encountered and, if so, where such underground installations are located.
When the excavation approaches the estimated location of such an installation,
the exact location shall be determined and when it is uncovered, proper
supports shall be provided for the existing installation. Utility companies
shall be contacted and advised of proposed work prior to the start of actual
excavation.” Known location of underground utilities shall be shown on
applicant’s plan. The applicant must contact the Kentucky Underground
Protection (811) to help locate underground utilities.
   (C)   Restoration. In areas where turf is present, restoration will consist
of dressing and reseeding all affected areas of the right-of-way. In all cases,
a good turf is to be guaranteed by the permittee.
   (D)   Maintenance. Permittees are responsible for the maintenance of all
encroachments and entrances. Pipelines or other utility crossings beneath the
pavement shall have sufficient connections so that repairs may be made without
disturbing the roadway surface. Manholes and other points of access to
underground utilities may be permitted within the right-of-way, if located so
as to not interfere with maintenance of the roadway facility or present safety
hazards to the road users.
   (E)   Grading. If grading is required on an established right-of-way, the
permittee shall provide a grading plan for review.
(Ord. 06-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 91.055 ENTRANCE CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Entrance width, as measured at the property line, shall be as follows:
      (1)   Residential, single-family: no minimum, 30 feet maximum;
      (2)   Residential, multi-family: 20 feet minimum, 30 feet maximum;
      (3)   Commercial: 20 feet minimum, 50 feet maximum; and
      (4)   Industrial: 24 feet minimum, 60 feet maximum.
   (B)   Necessary drainage structures for an entrance shall not be connected
to an existing drainage structure unless the necessary junction boxes, manholes
and catch basins are installed, as approved by the Engineering Department and
the Storm Water Department.
   (C)   Entrance pipe shall extend at least 24 inches beyond the edge of the
entrance. Entrance pipe size shall meet the approval of the City Engineer and
the Director of Storm Water Management in accordance with §
91.054(A) of this chapter, but in no case shall the diameter be less than 12
inches.
   (D)   All entrance pipe shall be concrete, bituminous coated corrugated
metal or HDPE and shall meet the approval of the City Engineer and the Director
of Storm Water Management.
   (E)   Valley gutters constructed of concrete or bituminous material may be
used in lieu of entrance pipe where such pipe cannot be placed. Prior approval
of the City Engineer and the Director of Storm Water Management for use of such
gutters is required.
   (F)   Where long lengths of pipe are used, catch basins or clean-out boxes
shall be installed at approximate intervals of 50 feet based on pipe diameter
of 12 inches. Special consideration may be given to placement of clean-out
boxes at longer intervals for pipe with larger diameters. Clean-out boxes shall
also be constructed at all angles in pipe alignment.
   (G)   When necessary, gratings and catch basins must be employed to
intercept and prevent water flowing from the driveway over the sidewalks or
roadway.
   (H)   The maximum grade for an entrance to a multi-family, commercial or
industrial use shall be no greater than 10%. When an entrance grade at its
intersection with the public street exceeds 3%, a leveling area shall be
provided with grades no greater than 3% for a distance of 50 feet from the
intersection with the street.
   (I)   When curbs are used along the roadway and sidewalks are used or
contemplated, the gradient of the driveway shall fit the plane of the sidewalk
and shall meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act, being
42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq. If the difference in elevation of the gutter and the
sidewalk is such that this is not practical, the sidewalk shall be lowered to
provide a suitable gradient for the driveway and the surface of the sidewalk
shall be sloped gently away from either side of the driveway. The flow line of
the curb shall not be filled with any material. The curb can be modified only
with permission from the City Engineer. All new or modified curb entrances
shall meet the current standards of the city.
(Ord. 06-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 91.056 ENCROACHMENT PERMIT CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Underground utilities.
      (1)   Underground utilities installed longitudinally within the right-of-
way limits of streets shall be buried to a minimum depth of 30 inches.
Exceptions may be made only where the terrain is such that this requirement
would prove impractical and where location of pipelines on the surface would
not interfere with roadway maintenance, safety or aesthetics.
      (2)   Underground utilities shall be constructed of materials which may
be expected to render long trouble-free life and in some cases, may be required
to be encased to allow removal and replacement without the necessity of cutting
the pavement.
   (B)   Existing longitudinal facilities. Existing longitudinal storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, telephone conduits, power conduits, water lines, oil lines,
gas lines or other type utility lines may be permitted to remain under pavement
and shoulder areas, when the facilities will be maintenance free insofar as the
necessity for cutting or disturbing the pavement and shoulder areas.
Distribution and service lines constructed of maintenance-free materials and in
good condition may remain under a proposed pavement provided full provision is
made for all future service requirements by stubbing out service lines on
either side of the new construction prior to placing the proposed pavement.
   (C)   New facilities.
      (1)   Generally, new facilities are not to be installed longitudinally
under proposed pavement and shoulder areas. Only when there is no other
practical location available may any new facility be placed under the pavement
or shoulder area. In the event such an installation is allowed, it must be
constructed of long life materials which are expected to be maintenance free
with all possible provisions made to minimize the likelihood of having to cut
the pavement or interfere with traffic in the future.
      (2)   Boring of entrances adjacent to the main line roadway which are
paved with concrete or bituminous surface may be required. The preferred
methods to be employed in underground installations are augering, jacking,
boring, pushing and tunneling.
      (3)   New or relocated utilities installed longitudinally shall be
located where feasible back of the ditch line and top of slope and as close to
the right-of-way as practical. Where curb and gutters are provided, underground
utilities should be located back of the curb when possible.
   (D)   Overhead utilities installed longitudinally.
      (1)   Utility poles or towers having crossarms. Utility poles or towers
having crossarms are to be located not more than five feet inside the right-of-
way line, except for offsets in the right-of-way line due to high fills, deep
cuts or other obstructions.
      (2)   Utility poles or towers having no crossarms. Utility poles or
towers having no crossarms are to be located not more than 18 inches inside the
right-of-way line, except for offsets in the right-of-way line due to high
fills, deep cuts or other obstructions.
      (3)   Overhead utility crossings. The vertical clearance of an overhead
utility crossing of a city street shall be a minimum of 18 feet, but in no case
shall the clearance be less than the requirements of the National Electrical
Safety Code. Minimum allowable clearances are as follows:
 
0 - 750 volts         18 feet
750 - 15,000 volts    20 feet
15,000 - 50,000 volts 22 feet
 
(Ord. 06-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 91.057 SPECIAL DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Turn storage lanes. When congestion is or may be created on the
traveled way by vehicles desiring to turn left into a development or
subdivision, the creation of a left turn storage lane may be required. Left
turn lanes shall be constructed as outlined in the Kentucky Transportation
Cabinet’s Auxiliary Turn Lane Policy, dated July 2009. The storage lane shall
be constructed without expense to the city. The applicant shall pay for a
traffic study if required by the city.
   (B)   Tapers and increased radii. At some locations, entrance capacity
deficiencies may result from restrictions in the alignment, profile or cross-
section of the entrance rather than from interior circulation and parking
problems or larger than anticipated entering traffic volumes. In these
instances, improved capacity may be required by the provision of longer
entrance radii or by the addition of a taper connecting the entrance radius and
the edge of the traveled way.
   (C)   Limited access streets.
      (1)   The use of limited access streets on private property can be
required where deemed applicable by the City Engineer, in order to minimize the
number of access points to the roadway from commercial and residential
developments. These limited access streets are to be indicated on the
applicant’s plans and, when applicable, indicated on the record plats for the
development.
      (2)   Limited access streets shall be constructed to meet city standards
based on the functional street classification.
      (3)   In the layout of limited access streets, the design of the
intersection of these roads with other streets is to receive particular
consideration, since special traffic problems occur if small turning radii are
created at these intersections. In order to minimize these turning movements
and traffic interference problems, radii of sufficient length are to be
approved by the city to accommodate right-turn movement from the street into
the limited access street, or vice versa, as measured along the inside edge of
the street and limited access street pavement.
   (D)   Divided highways.
      (1)   Median cuts. Median cuts shall be limited to 600 feet or more. The
need for median cuts shall be considered upon receipt of an application for an
entrance permit. Before authorizing new median cuts, consideration shall be
given to aligning access points with existing median cuts through the use of
redesigned parking facilities within the development or the construction of
limited access streets.
      (2)   Residential entrances. Residential access shall be limited to one
side of the divided highway unless aligned with an existing or proposed median
cut. Such access shall be located so as to conform to appropriate spacing for
the roadway, but entrances should not be any closer than two feet from a
property line unless the entrance serves as a joint access between adjoining
properties.
      (3)   Commercial and industrial entrances.
         (a)   Commercial and industrial entrances shall align with an existing
or proposed median cut unless the entrance is deemed minor in nature whereas
access may be permitted to one side of the divided highway.
         (b)   Such access shall be located so as to conform to appropriate
spacing for the roadway, but entrances should not be any closer than two feet
from a property line unless the entrance serves as a joint access between
adjoining properties.
      (4)   Field entrances. Field entrances for use by farm equipment may be
permitted by the city, but shall be limited in access to one side of the
highway unless aligned with an existing or proposed median cut. Field entrances
shall be considered temporary in nature and may be allowed at locations not
conforming to spacing standards.
   (E)   Sight distance restrictions. A driveway, entrance or new road
connection shall not be allowed at locations which will prevent a vehicle
approaching at legal control speed from having a six- second visibility time to
the stopping position of the driveway, entrance or new road both directions of
travel based on standards established by AASHTO.
(Ord. 06-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
STREET AND HOUSE NUMBERING
§ 91.070 STREET NUMBERING SYSTEM.
   (A)   Dixie Avenue, U.S. 31W, shall be made the baseline for all streets
running east and west and the streets shall be numbered from the baseline
consecutively to the corporate limits. The north side of the streets shall bear
odd numbers and the south side of the streets shall bear even numbers.
   (B)   Mulberry Street, U.S. 62, shall be made the baseline for all streets
running north and south and the streets shall be numbered from the baseline
consecutively to the corporate limits. The east side of the streets shall bear
odd numbers and the west side of the streets shall bear even numbers.
   (C)   The numbers from the respective baselines shall begin with 100 and
wherever possible, 100 numbers shall be allowed to each block so that the
number of each consecutive block shall commence with consecutive hundreds.
   (D)   One whole number shall be assigned for every 50 feet of ground,
whether improved property or vacant lot, on every street within the corporate
limits.
   (E)   The Public Square of the city shall be numbered according to the
buildings now erected thereon with the presently assigned numbers.
   (F)   Cul-de-sacs on dead-end streets shall be numbered from the
intersecting street consecutively to its terminus, without regard to the
baseline streets.
(Prior Code, § 91.085) (Ord. 20, passed 5-20-1991)
§ 91.071 DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT TO ASSIGN STREET NUMBERS.
   Street numbers for all lots, dwelling units and places of business shall be
assigned by the Department of Planning and Development. The Department shall
work with the U.S. Postal Service and other appropriate agencies in determining
the proper street number.
(Prior Code, § 91.086) (Ord. 20, passed 5-20-1991)
§ 91.072 DISPLAY OF STREET ADDRESS REQUIRED.
   Each principal building shall display the number assigned to the lot
frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case a principal building
is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate
front entrance may display a separate number.
(Prior Code, § 91.087) (Ord. 20, passed 5-20-1991)
§ 91.073 SPECIFICATIONS FOR NUMERALS INDICATING STREET ADDRESS.
   Numerals indicating the official number for each principal building shall be
posted in a manner to be visible, legible and distinguishable from the street
on which the property is located by adhering to the following standards.
   (A)   Numerals shall be plain block arabic numbers. No script or written
numbers are permitted.
   (B)   For residential buildings, numerals shall be a minimum of four inches
in height. For commercial or industrial buildings, numerals shall be a minimum
of six inches in height.
   (C)   Numbers shall be in contrast to the building wall they are mounted to
and shall be in the area of the main entrance to the building. If the building
is located more than 200 feet from the street and the number on the building is
not visible, street numbers should be displayed within 50 feet of the street.
   (D)   Additional street numbers may be displayed for the property on a
business sign, mailbox or other device.
(Prior Code, § 91.088) (Ord. 20, passed 5-20-1991)
§ 91.074 STREET NUMBERS TO BE OBTAINED AND DISPLAYED BEFORE ISSUANCE OF
BUILDING PERMIT OR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No building permit shall be issued for any principal building until the
owner or developer has procured from the Department of Planning and Development
the official number of the premises. Final approval for a certificate of
occupancy of any principal building erected or repaired after the effective
date of this subchapter (5-20-1991) shall be withheld until permanent and
proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the requirements of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 91.089) (Ord. 20, passed 5-20-1991)
§ 91.075 TAMPERING WITH; DEFACING STREET NUMBERS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, deface or take down any number
placed on any property in accordance with this subchapter, except for repair of
replacement of the number.
(Prior Code, § 91.090) (Ord. 20, passed 5-20-1991) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.076 NON-COMPLIANCE.
   In the event that the owner or occupant or person in charge of any house or
building refuses to comply with the terms of this subchapter within 60 days
after notification, or by failing within the period of 60 days to remove any
old numbers affixed to the house, or house entrance, or elsewhere which may be
confused with the number assigned thereto, they shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject a penalty as set out in §
91.999 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 91.091) (Ord. 20, passed 5-20-1991) Penalty, see §
91.999
TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 91.090 STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.
   The Engineering Department will formulate an official street tree species
list for the city. The list of allowable species shall be broken down into
categories of small, medium and large trees. No species other than those
included in this list may be planted as street trees without permission of the
city’s Engineering Department.
(Prior Code, § 91.105) (Ord. 24, passed 12-21-1992)
§ 91.091 SPACING.
   The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species
size classes listed in §
91.090 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer together than the
following; small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and, large trees, 50
feet, except in special plantings approved by the Engineering Department.
(Prior Code, § 91.106) (Ord. 24, passed 12-21-1992)
§ 91.092 DISTANCE FROM CURB TO SIDEWALK.
   The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will
be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in §
91.090 of this chapter and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or
sidewalk than the following; small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet;
and large trees, four feet.
(Prior Code, § 91.107) (Ord. 24, passed 12-21-1992)
§ 91.093 DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIRE HYDRANT.
   (A)   No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street
corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines.
   (B)   No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fire
hydrant.
(Prior Code, § 91.108) (Ord. 24, passed 12-21-1992) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.094 UTILITIES.
   All street trees shall be planted according to the current approved and
accepted guidelines for utility planting. No street trees shall be planted
within five feet of any underground utility.
(Prior Code, § 91.109) (Ord. 24, passed 12-21-1992; Ord. 1, passed 1-2-1996)
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.095 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees,
plants and shrubs within the right-of-way lines of all streets, alleys,
avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure
public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public
grounds. The city’s Engineering Department may remove or cause or order to be
removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition and could
cause injury or damage to persons or property, or which by reason of its nature
is damaging to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other
public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other
pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent
property owners providing that all selection and location of the trees is in
accordance with §§
91.090 through
91.094 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 91.110) (Ord. 24, passed 12-21-1992)
§ 91.096 TREE TOPPING.
   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property.
TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from
this chapter at the determination of the city’s Engineering Department.
(Prior Code, § 91.111) (Ord. 24, passed 12-21-1992) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.097 PRUNING; CORNER CLEARANCE.
   Every owner/occupant of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way
within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not
obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street
intersection or sidewalk so as to not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian
traffic. Said owners/occupants shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous
trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of
the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic-control device
or sign or interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 91.112) (Ord. 24, passed 12-21-1992; Ord. 1-96, passed 1-2-1996)
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.098 DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead diseased
trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard
to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential
threat to other trees within the city. The Engineering Department will notify
in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by the owners at
their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the
event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have
the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the
owners’ property tax bills.
(Prior Code, § 91.113) (Ord. 24, passed 12-21-1992; Ord. 1-96, passed 1-2-1996)
§ 91.099 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of
the ground.
(Prior Code, § 91.114) (Ord. 24, passed 12-21-1992) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.100 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY’S ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
city’s Engineering Department, or any of its agents, while engaging in and
about planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removal of any
street trees, park trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 91.115) (Ord. 24, passed 12-21-1992; Ord. 1-96, passed 1-2-1996)
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.101 ARBORISTS LICENSE AND BOND.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or
occupation or pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within the
city without first applying for and procuring a license pursuant to
Ch. 110 of this code of ordinances. The license fee shall be $25 annually in
advance; provided, however, that, no license shall be required of any public
service company or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public
service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall
first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts
of $500,000 for bodily injury and $1,000,000 property damage indemnifying the
city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such
endeavors as herein described.
(Prior Code, § 91.116) (Ord. 24, passed 12-21-1992; Ord. 1-96, passed 1-2-1996)
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.102 REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the city’s Engineering Department.
   (B)   Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the city’s
Engineering Department first to the City Council who may hear the matter and
make final decision.
(Prior Code, § 91.117) (Ord. 24, passed 12-21-1992; Ord. 1-96, passed 1-2-1996)
SKATEBOARDS, SKATES AND NON-MOTORIZED TRANSPORTATION DEVICES
§ 91.115 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. A device upon which any person my ride, propelled exclusively by
human power through a belt, chain or gears, and having one or more wheels.
   NON-MOTORIZED SCOOTER. Any personal transportation device not otherwise
regulated hereunder and the regulation of which has not been undertaken by the
commonwealth.
   ROLLER SKATES. Any footwear device including in-line skates known as roller
blades which may be attached to the foot or footwear to which wheels are
attached and such wheels may be used by the wearer in moving. The definition of
these terms shall include a single roller skate or parts thereon, used by
wearer in moving.
   SKATEBOARD. Any board or platform to which there are attached wheels for
movement thereof by either gravity or the muscular power of someone standing
upon the board or platform and which has no mechanism or other device with
which to steer or control the movement or direction of the board or platform.
(Prior Code, § 91.201) (Ord 35-2003, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 91.116 OPERATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Streets. No person shall roller skate or ride a skateboard, or any
other non-motorized transportation device on any street, except for the purpose
of crossing the street. The rules relating to pedestrians crossing streets
shall apply to persons crossing a street on roller skates or a skateboard, or
any other non-motorized transportation device. No person crossing a street on
roller skates or a skateboard, or any other non-motorized transportation device
shall travel too fast for safety under the conditions existing.
   (B)   Sidewalks. No person shall roller skate or ride a skateboard or any
other non-motorized transportation device in a reckless manner on any public
sidewalk. No person shall ride a skateboard or roller skate on a sidewalk
without exercising due care for the safety of other persons using the sidewalk.
   (C)   Public property. No person shall operate a skateboard, skates or other
non-motorized transportation device on any public property upon which a sign
has been posted prohibiting said activity.
   (D)   Private property. No person shall operate a skateboard, skates or
other non-motorized transportation device on any private property unless the
person has obtained the written consent of the owner or owners.
   (E)   City property. No person shall operate a skateboard, skates or other
non-motorized transportation device on or against any city-owned table, bench,
structure, tennis court, parking stop, retaining wall, fountain, statue or
other improvement which may suffer damage by such use. No person shall use or
place a ramp, jump or any other device used to force skateboard, skates or
other non- motorized transportation device off the pavement on the grounds of
any city-owned parking lot, park or sidewalk.
   (F)   Bicycles. This subchapter shall not apply to bicycles used for lawful
transportation upon streets and roadways as provided for and controlled by KRS
189.287 and the Department of Transportation regulations.
(Prior Code, § 91.202) (Ord 35-2003, passed 11-17-2003) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.117 CONFISCATION.
   (A)   Any peace officer who issues a citation for violation of this
subchapter shall confiscate the skateboard, skates or any other non-motorized
transportation devices used in the violation and place it in the police
property room.
   (B)   The skateboard, skates or any other non-motorized transportation
device may be returned to the violator or to a parent or guardian of the
violator, if the violator is a minor, after the following periods of time:
      (1)   After 30 days for a first violation of this subchapter; or
      (2)   If any person commits a subsequent violation of this subchapter the
skateboard, skates or any other non-motorized transportation device used by
such person in the violation shall be forfeited to the city and disposed of in
the manner prescribed by law for forfeited property.
(Prior Code, § 91.204) (Ord 35-2003, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of this chapter is subject to the penalty of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. The enforcing agency, department or
individual may choose to seek enforcement through the Code Enforcement Board
enacted on 4-30-2003 by Ord. 09-2003.
(Prior Code, § 91.999)
   (B)   (1)   Warning. For a first offense of §
91.116 of this chapter, a written warning shall be issued to the offender, and
no fine shall be imposed If the offender is under the age of 18 years, a parent
or guardian of the offender shall be notified and shall be handed or mailed a
copy of the written warning.
      (2)   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of §
91.116 of this chapter again after a written warning shall be fined not less
than $20, nor more than $250, for each offense.
      (3)   Code Enforcement Board. The city officer may choose, at his or her
discretion, to cite the offender to the Code Enforcement Board, per Ord. 09-
2003.
(Prior Code, § 91.203)
(Ord. 13-2003, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 35-2003, passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 06-2012,
passed 4-2-2012)
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
92.001   Definitions
Animals, Fowl and Reptiles
   
92.015   Declaration of nuisance
   
92.016   Keeping of animal, fowl or reptile which becomes a nuisance prohibited
   
92.017   Certain violations concerning animals, fowl and reptiles
   
92.018   Slaughtering prohibited
Garbage, Debris and Rubbish
   
92.030   Declaration of nuisance
   
92.031   Violations concerning garbage, debris and rubbish
Abandoned, Inoperable Vehicles and Machinery
   
92.045   Declaration of nuisance
   
92.046   Dismantling or overhauling vehicle on private property prohibited;
exceptions
   
92.047   Storing any appliance outside of any building or where accessible to
children prohibited
Grass and Weeds
   
92.060   Declaration of nuisance
   
92.061   Grass, weeds and vegetation to be trimmed regularly; maximum height
   
92.062   Exemption for woodlands and trees
Sewage Discharge
   
92.075   Declaration of nuisance
   
92.076   Discharge to city sewage system required
   
92.077   Discharge of runoff or ground water to sanitary public sewer
prohibited
Maintenance of Public Ways
   
92.090   Declaration of nuisance
   
92.091   Owner to maintain public way; keep compatible with adjacent pavement
   
92.092   Owner to keep property cleared to traveled portion of street
   
92.093   Obstructing fire hydrant prohibited
   
92.094   Obstructing view of motorists prohibited
   
92.095   Owners to maintain drainageway on private property; obstruction of
drainageway prohibited
   
92.096   Obstructing streets and sidewalks prohibited
   
92.097   Maintenance; repair of sidewalks
   
92.098   Inspection and notice
   
92.099   Failure to comply is a violation
   
92.100   Performance by city
Illicit Discharges and Illicit Connections to Storm Water System
   
92.115   Purpose and scope
   
92.116   Definitions
   
92.117   General provisions
   
92.118   Prohibitions; exceptions
   
92.119   Declaration of public nuisance
   
92.120   Rules and regulations
   
92.121   Inspection, monitoring and remediation
   
92.122   Supplemental to other regulations
Administration and Enforcement
   
92.135   Director of Planning and Development to investigate complaints; notify
owner of premises in violation; exception
   
92.136   Abatement procedure
   
92.137   Termination of utilities
   
92.138   Records of complaints, actions and violations to be available to the
public
   
92.139   Appeal to Code Enforcement Board
 
   
92.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLIANCE. Stoves, refrigerators, freezers, washing machines, dryers,
dishwashers or parts thereof.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of the Elizabethtown Department of Planning and
Development or his or her designee or the successor thereto.
   DEBRIS. Ruins from construction, including, but not limited to, barrels,
metals, metal furniture and appliances, wood, dirt in piles, rock, pieces of
concrete, glass, brick, building materials and mineral waste.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Planning and Development for the city.
   DISREPAIR. Dangerously rusted, wrecked or without all properly inflated
tires, windshields, window glass, major chassis components, brake lights or
without any other vehicle component required by law.
   GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   INCINERATOR. Any incinerator shall be constructed to comply with the
requirements of the commonwealth’s air pollution requirements and shall be
approved by the commonwealth’s Fire Marshal, or a Deputy of said Fire Marshal
or the city’s Fire Chief.
   MOTOR VEHICLES. Every device, including major parts thereof, in, on or by
which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn on a public
highway, except devices moved by human or animal power, devices used
exclusively on stationary rails or tracks and devices designed to be pulled,
drawn or towed by a motor vehicle.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership or other legal
designation, including associations, boards and other groups.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any and all entrances, streets or thoroughfares leading from a
public highway or street to a business where the public is generally invited,
is not prohibited from coming thereon and where vehicular or other traffic
customarily takes place.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and non-combustible waste materials, except garbage,
and the term, shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke
and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
(Prior Code, § 92.001) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991)
ANIMALS, FOWL AND REPTILES
§ 92.015 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   Violation of this subchapter shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 92.010) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991)
§ 92.016 KEEPING OF ANIMAL, FOWL OR REPTILE WHICH BECOMES A NUISANCE
PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or possess any
domestic or other animal of any nature, any fowl or reptile which becomes a
public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 92.011) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.017 CERTAIN VIOLATIONS CONCERNING ANIMALS, FOWL AND REPTILES.
   The following shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter:
   (A)   Any dog, cat or other animal, fowl or reptile, running at large,
without a license required by state law;
   (B)   Any dog, cat or other animal, fowl or reptile which has not received a
rabies or other inoculation sufficient to prevent the dog, cat or other animal,
fowl or reptile from contacting or spreading hydrophobia or other infectious
disease;
   (C)   Any dog, cat, animal, fowl or reptile which damages or destroys any
public or private, personal or real property; and
   (D)   Any dog, cat, animal, fowl or reptile which barks, howls, whines,
meows, screeches, hisses or makes any other unreasonable noise which becomes a
disturbance to neighbors of said person.
(Prior Code, § 92.012) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.018 SLAUGHTERING PROHIBITED.
   Conducting or maintaining any slaughter house or other premises or area for
the slaughtering of animals, fowl or reptiles, or to render the byproducts of
same shall be a violation.
(Prior Code, § 92.013) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991) Penalty, see §
92.999
GARBAGE, DEBRIS AND RUBBISH
§ 92.030 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   Violation of this subchapter shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 92.025) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991)
Cross-reference:
   Littering, see
Ch. 94
   Property Maintenance Code, see
Ch. 153
§ 92.031 VIOLATIONS CONCERNING GARBAGE, DEBRIS AND RUBBISH.
   The following shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter:
   (A)   The placing or permitting to remain anywhere in the city any garbage
or other material subject to decay for more than 96 consecutive hours, except
in a tightly-covered metal or plastic container or as part of a compost
operation;
   (B)   Causing or permitting to accumulate any trash, ashes or dust, or any
material that can be blown away by the wind or other climatic disturbances
other than in a covered container;
   (C)   Depositing or permitting to fall from any vehicle any garbage,
rubbish, debris on any public street or highway in the city;
   (D)   The hauling of garbage in any type vehicle other than a packer-type
garbage truck approved by the Code Official or the County Solid Waste Officer;
   (E)   The disposal of garbage, debris or rubbish, by the dumping of same on
any premises in the city, with or without the consent of the owner or possessor
of the premises, or the permitting by the owner or possessor of any premises in
the city to dump or permit the dumping of garbage, debris and rubbish on his or
her property. The provisions of this division (E) apply to all garbage, debris
or rubbish, except leaves or other appropriate material disposed of in
accordance with accepted practices for composting;
   (F)   Failure to dispose of all garbage, debris and rubbish at least one
time per week, except for materials in an acceptable compost operation as
stated elsewhere in this chapter;
   (G)   Failure to dispose of any dead animals, fowl and reptiles within six
hours after discovery of same by the owner or possessor of the premises;
   (H)   Failure to dispose of all garbage, debris and rubbish by any of the
following methods:
      (1)   Pickup and collection by sanitation companies, who possess a valid
business license;
      (2)   Dumping in an approved sanitary landfill;
      (3)   Collection by the city, this method shall apply only to the
collection of certain rubbish materials deemed to be offered as a public
service by the city;
      (4)   Composting; or
      (5)   Burning, as hereinafter set out.
   (I)   (1)   Burning.
         (a)   It shall be a nuisance to burn garbage anywhere in the city.
         (b)   It shall be a nuisance to burn debris or rubbish anywhere in the
city, except in an approved incinerator.
         (c)   The burning of wood, tree branches and yard trimmings shall be
permitted with the following conditions.
            1.   The location must be approved by the Fire Chief or his or her
appointee and a permit issued, if required.
            2.   The fire shall not be closer than 50 feet from any structure
and shall be monitored by an adult with adequate extinguishing agent at hand.
            3.   The burning materials shall be completely extinguished prior
to abandonment.
      (2)   Fires set for the purpose of bona fide instruction and training of
public and industrial employees in the methods of fighting fires will be
allowed; provided that, prior approval is given by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee in each instance.
      (3)   The Fire Chief or his or her designee may prohibit any and all
burning when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make fires hazardous
or which are or could be offensive or objectionable due to smoke or odor
emissions. The Fire Chief or his or her designee shall order the extinguishment
by the permit holder or the Fire Department of any fire which creates or adds
to a hazardous or objectionable situation.
(Prior Code, § 92.026) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991; Ord. 11-2019, passed 5-20-
2019)
Cross-reference:
   Fire Prevention, see §§
93.01 through
93.05
ABANDONED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES AND MACHINERY
§ 92.045 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   Violation of this subchapter shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 92.035) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991)
§ 92.046 DISMANTLING OR OVERHAULING VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be, at any time, in a state of major disassembly or
disrepair, nor shall it be in the process of being stripped or dismantled, nor
shall it undergo major overhaul, including body work, on any private property
within the city.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to a motor vehicle on the premises of
business enterprise involved solely in the repair, renovation, storage or
servicing of motor vehicles, a vehicle in an approved storage place or
depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city, or a motor
vehicle inside a fully enclosed structure or similarly enclosed area designed
and approved for such purposes.
(Prior Code, § 92.037) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.047 STOKING ANY APPLIANCE OUTSIDE OF ANY BUILDING OR WHERE ACCESSIBLE TO
CHILDREN PROHIBITED.
   The keeping, placing or storage outside of any building or dwelling of any
appliance or the keeping, placing or storage in any other place accessible to
children of any appliance shall be a violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 92.039) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991) Penalty, see §
92.999
GRASS AND WEEDS
§ 92.060 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   Violation of this subchapter shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 92.050) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991)
§ 92.061 GRASS, WEEDS AND VEGETATION TO BE TRIMMED REGULARLY; MAXIMUM HEIGHT.
   (A)   All grass, weeds and other vegetation shall be cut and trimmed on a
regular basis by the owner and/or occupant of all property to a height of not
more than ten inches at all times, so long as the property is less than two
acres in total area and so long as the property is not agricultural or
woodlands.
   (B)   (1)   For property of at least two acres in size and does not contain
a dwelling unit, or property that is primarily used for an agricultural use,
then the grass, weeds and vegetation thereon shall be mowed, cut or trimmed to
a height commensurate with the customary practice for agricultural use.
      (2)   At no time shall the height of any non-harvested crop exceed 36
inches.
(Prior Code, § 92.051) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.062 EXEMPTION FOR WOODLANDS AND TREES.
   In the event property is predominantly woodlands and trees and the same
dominates the land and no crop or agricultural use is made of same, then this
subchapter shall not apply.
(Prior Code, § 92.052) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991)
SEWAGE DISCHARGE
§ 92.075 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   Violation of this subchapter shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 92.075) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991)
§ 92.076 DISCHARGE TO CITY SEWAGE SYSTEM REQUIRED.
   Each owner of property in the city having installed any bath, lavatory,
toilet, kitchen or other sink, laundry device, washing machine or other water
discharge or storage shall provide for the discharge of the sewage or drainage
into the city sewage system where available and it shall be unlawful and a
public nuisance to permit or cause to be permitted or discharged, sewage or
drainage from any bath, lavatory, toilet, sink or other facility, device or
machine or in any other receptacle, or to any storm drain or in any manner not
provided for by law.
(Prior Code, § 92.076) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.077 DISCHARGE OF RUNOFF OR GROUND WATER TO SANITARY PUBLIC SEWER
PROHIBITED.
   No person shall make connection of roof drains, exterior fountain drains,
area-way drains, other sources of runoff or ground water to a building sewer or
building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a sanitary
public sewer.
(Prior Code, § 92.077) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991) Penalty, see §
92.999
MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC WAYS
§ 92.090 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   Violations of this subchapter shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 92.090) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991)
§ 92.091 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PUBLIC WAY; KEEP COMPATIBLE WITH ADJACENT PAVEMENT.
   (A)   The owner of any real estate used as a public way is hereby charged
with the responsibility of maintaining the public way by periodically renewing,
repaving or otherwise maintaining a smooth surface for motor vehicular and
other traffic in such a way as to be maintained compatible with and as
permanent as adjacent pavement and maintenance of public ways.
   (B)   The same shall be further maintained in a safe manner so as not to
damage motor or other vehicles generally crossing the public way.
(Prior Code, § 92.091) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.092 OWNER TO KEEP PROPERTY CLEARED TO TRAVELED PORTION OF STREET.
   All owners of any real estate shall be required:
   (A)   To keep that portion of property located between the traveled portion
of the city street and their property lines free of garbage and refuse; and
   (B)   To keep the grass or weeds thereon mowed consistent with §§
92.061 and
92.062 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 92.092) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.093 OBSTRUCTING FIRE HYDRANT PROHIBITED.
   It shall be a violation for any person to in any way cause to be placed,
planted or located any building, structure, shrubbery, tree, any other planted
material or any ornamental landscaping material, or to change the grade of the
land, adjacent to or in the vicinity of any fire hydrant, so that the fire
hydrant is obstructed from view or use or is rendered inoperable.
(Prior Code, § 92.093) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.094 OBSTRUCTING VIEW OF MOTORISTS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be a violation for any person to in any way cause to be placed,
planted or located any human-made material or shrubbery, tree or any other
planted material, or to change the grade of the land, within or adjacent to any
street right-of-way or on any private property that obstructs the view of any
motorist, at a street intersection, from being able to view oncoming traffic
and operate a motor vehicle in a safe manner.
(Prior Code, § 92.094) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.095 OWNERS TO MAINTAIN DRAINAGEWAY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; OBSTRUCTION OF
DRAINAGEWAY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be the responsibility of all persons owning property to maintain
any drainageway on their private property in a manner that allows for the
proper utilization of the drainageway. It shall be a violation for any person
to in any way cause to be placed in or across any drainageway any obstruction,
including grass clippings, tree limbs and debris of any land whatsoever that
alters, restricts or prohibits the drainageway from functioning in a proper
manner, unless prior approval is given by the city as provided for by
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 92.095) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.096 OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be a violation for any person to in any way cause to be
placed across any sidewalk, street, street crossing, alley, public highway or
railroad crossing any blockade or obstruction to remain thereon for a greater
length of time than five minutes, unless prior approval is granted by the
appropriate city department.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the blocking or obstructing of any
sidewalk, street, street crossing, alley, public highway or railroad crossing
done by any public utility or other authorized person in an emergency situation
or to repair a public utility service.
(Prior Code, § 92.096) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.097 MAINTENANCE; REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS.
   The owners of property abutting on sidewalks of the city are required, at
their own expense, to repair or replace that part of any sidewalk adjoining or
on their property, by filling and repairing any holes, uneven surfaces, and
other defects, by using materials as nearly similar as possible to that of
which the sidewalk is constructed.
(Prior Code, § 92.097) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.098 INSPECTION AND NOTICE.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of the Department of Planning and
Development, or any city employee designated by him or her, to ascertain the
extent of holes, uneven surfaces or other defects in the sidewalks in the city,
and to notify the owners of the property directly adjacent to that part of the
sidewalk which is found to be defective, to repair or replace the same at their
own expense within a period of 30 days after receiving the notice.
(Prior Code, § 92.098) (Ord. passed 12-16-2018)
§ 92.099 FAILURE TO COMPLY IS A VIOLATION.
   Any owner of property who shall fail to repair the sidewalk as set out above
within 30 days after receiving notice shall be guilty of a violation of this
code for each day that the sidewalk remains unrepaired after the period fixed
by the notice.
(Prior Code, § 92.099) (Ord. passed 12-16-2018)
§ 92.100 PERFORMANCE BY CITY.
   (A)   The city may, at its option, after notifying the property owners to
repair the sidewalk as set out above, enter upon the sidewalk and repair or
replace it in the same manner as set out above, and shall bill the respective
property owners for the cost of labor and materials for the repair of the
sidewalk, and the city shall have a lien against the property for the payment
of such costs.
   (B)   After expiration of 30 days after the work on the repairing of the
sidewalk is performed by the city, the property owners shall be liable for a
penalty of 3% per annum of the cost of the labor and materials, and the same
shall be a lien against the property and shall run with the land until paid.
(Prior Code, § 92.100) (Ord. passed 12-16-2018)
ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLICIT CONNECTIONS TO STORM WATER SYSTEM
§ 92.115 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   This subchapter is intended to protect the general health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city by declaring illicit discharges into the
storm sewer system to be nuisances, and more specifically:
   (A)   To protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water
bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act,
being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. (Pub. L. 92-500, 95-217) by prohibiting non-
storm water discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4),
collectively called “storm water conveyance system”;
   (B)   To prohibit illicit discharges and connections to the MS4; and
   (C)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspections,
surveillance and monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this section.
(Prior Code, § 92.150) (Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-2008)
§ 92.116 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT. The Enforcement Agency working through
the Director of Storm Water Management and duly authorized staff,
representatives or designees.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any materials, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical, biological or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water substance or
hazardous materials disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, seeped,
dumped, leaked or placed by any means, intentionally or unintentionally, into
the MS4 or any area that has been determined to drain directly or indirectly
into the MS4, except as exempted in §
92.118 of this chapter.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the MS4. Included are
conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process
wastewater and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections
to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether
said drain or connection has been previously allowed, permitted or approved.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance, or system of
conveyances including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels and storm drains designed
or used for collecting or conveying storm water to the waters of the United
States. Sanitary and combined sewers are not included in the definition of the
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM.
   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the MS4, that is not composed
solely of storm water, except as permitted by §
92.118 of this chapter.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; wastes
and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.
   PREMISES. The area of land, site, grounds or property on which the illegal
discharge emanates or the illicit connection exists.
(Prior Code, § 92.151) (Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-2008)
§ 92.117 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Except as herein provided or exempted by the Director of Storm Water
Management, this section shall apply to all non-storm water discharges and
connections to the MS4 owned and operated by the city.
   (B)   The Director of Storm Water Management shall administer, implement and
enforce the provisions of this section.
   (C)   This subchapter shall be construed to ensure consistency with
requirements of the Clean Water Act, the city’s KPDES Phase 2 Program, and acts
amendatory thereof or any other applicable regulations.
   (D)   The standards and requirements set forth herein and promulgated
pursuant to this subchapter are minimum standards. This subchapter does not
intend, nor imply, that compliance by any person, company, developer or any
other entity will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution or
unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the MS4.
(Prior Code, § 92.152) (Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-2008)
§ 92.118 PROHIBITIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person, company, developer or any other entity shall discharge or
cause to be discharged into the MS4 any pollutants including, but not limited
to, hazardous materials or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
storm water. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge
is prohibited.
   (B)   This subchapter does not apply to following categories of non-storm
water discharges or flows, unless the Director of Storm Water Management and/or
enforcement agency identifies them as significant contributors of pollutants to
it MS4: water line flushing; landscaping irrigation; diverted stream flows;
rising ground waters; uncontaminated ground water infiltration; uncontaminated
pumped ground water; discharge from potable water sources; foundation drains;
air conditioning condensation; irrigation water; springs; water from crawl
space pumps; footing drains; lawn watering; individual non-polluting
residential home and car washing; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; firefighters’ activities; and street
wash water from municipal cleaning operations.
   (C)   The prohibition of discharges or flows shall not apply to any non-
storm water discharges permitted under a NPDES permit, waiver or waste
discharges order issued to the discharger and administered by the state’s
Division of Water under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection
Agency; provided that, the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and
regulations; and, provided that, written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
   (D)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. This prohibition includes
without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether
the connection was permissible under law or practice applicable at the time of
connection.
(Prior Code, § 92.153) (Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-2008)
§ 92.119 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Illicit discharges and illicit connections are declared to be a public
nuisance, being a threat to the public health, safety and welfare. The city
shall take all necessary steps to abate the nuisance, including all measures
cited in §
92.999 of this chapter, and/or any other action permitted by state and federal
law.
(Prior Code, § 92.154) (Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-2008)
§ 92.120 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance by elimination of illicit discharge.
      (1)   The Director of Storm Water Management may require by written
notice of violation that the person, property owner, occupant, tenant, lessor,
lessee or entity (hereinafter referred to as “party”) responsible for an
illicit discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the
discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the
discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges.
      (2)   The elimination of an illicit discharge within seven days after
receipt of Notice of Violation from the Enforcement Agency shall be considered
compliance with the provisions of this section and no further action shall be
taken.
   (B)   Monitor and analyze. The Director of Storm Water Management may
require by written notice that any party engaged in any activity and/or owning
or operating any property or facility which has been determined to contribute
to storm water pollution, illicit discharges, and/or non-storm water discharges
to the MS4 to undertake at said party’s expense such monitoring and analyses
and furnish such reports to the Director of Storm Water Management and/or
Enforcement Agency as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this
section.
   (C)   Notification of spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of local,
state and federal law, as soon as any party responsible for a property,
facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a property,
facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of
pollutants or hazardous materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges to the MS4, said party shall take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a
release of hazardous materials, said party shall immediately notify emergency
response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In
the event of a release of non-hazardous materials to the MS4, said party shall
notify the Director of Storm Water Management and/or Enforcement Agency in
person, by phone, or facsimile immediately, but no later than 2:00 p.m. of the
next business day. Notification shall be confined by written notice addressed
and mailed to the Director of Storm Water Management within three business days
of the original notice.
(Prior Code, § 92.155) (Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-2008)
§ 92.121 INSPECTION, MONITORING AND REMEDIATION.
   (A)   Right of entry and inspection. Whenever the Director of Storm Water
Management has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, any
condition which constitutes a violation of this section, the Director of Storm
Water Management shall be permitted to enter the believed violating premises
served by the MS4 at all reasonable times to inspect the same. Refusal to allow
entrance to the premises for inspection or monitoring shall constitute a
violation for each day after the notice of violation that his refusal
continues. If the Director of Storm Water Management has been refused access to
any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
section, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this
section, or any order issued hereunder to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, the city may seek all appropriate remedies
from any court of competent jurisdiction, including the issuance of a search
warrant.
   (B)   Urgency abatement. The Director of Storm Water Management is
authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this section that
constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well being of the
public. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the
Director of Storm Water Management, the city is authorized to enter into
private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the
violation. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the city shall
be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible part.
   (C)   Sampling devices and testing. During any inspection as provided
herein, the Director of Storm Water Management may take any samples and perform
any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record
site activities. The costs of all testing may be passed on to the party, owner
or operator of the premises where the illicit discharge emanates.
(Prior Code, § 92.156) (Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-2008)
§ 92.122 SUPPLEMENTAL TO OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter are supplemental and in addition to
all other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore enacted by the
city, state or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed cumulative of the
provisions and regulations contained in the code of ordinances of the city,
save and except that, where the provisions of this subchapter and the sections
hereunder are in conflict with the provisions elsewhere in this code, then the
provisions contained herein shall prevail.
   (C)   Any party who violates any provision of this section or any provision
of any permit issued by the city may also be in violation of the Federal Clean
Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. (Pub. L. 92-500, 95-217) and may be
subject to the sanctions of that Act including civil and criminal penalties.
Any enforcement action authorized under this section may also include written
notice to the party of such potential liability.
(Prior Code, § 92.158) (Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-2008)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 92.135 DIRECTOR OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT TO INVESTIGATE COMPLAINTS; NOTIFY
OWNER OF PREMISES IN VIOLATION; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   The Director of the Department of Planning and Development and his or
her authorized designee shall administer and enforce this chapter.
   (B)   The Director shall investigate complaints of violation and report all
findings and action in the official records of the Department. If the Director
finds any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he or she shall
notify, in writing, the owner or possessor of the premises of the violation. If
the violation is not abated within the time prescribed by the notice, the
Director shall then cause a citation to be issued through the Code Enforcement
Board.
   (C)   Complaints of violation of the provisions of this chapter governing
animals, fowls and reptiles shall be investigated by the city’s Police
Department. The Police Department shall follow the same procedures for
investigation and notice as prescribed for other violations under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 92.110) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991)
§ 92.136 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   In the event that the Code Enforcement Board finds that a nuisance
does exist, then the same may be abated by causing the removal, eradication,
termination or possession, or other remedy to take place so the nuisance is
abated promptly.
   (B)   In the event the nuisance is not abated, as ordered by the Code
Enforcement Board, then the Code Enforcement Board may order the city or its
Code Official to take the steps necessary to abate the nuisance and assess the
cost of same against the violator, including any necessary attorney’s fees,
costs, or other penalties and the same may be then levied against the property
and a lien for the necessary amounts to abate said nuisance shall then bear
interest at the rate of 12% per annum and shall be filed in the office of the
Clerk of the County Court until the nuisance and fees, costs and other amounts
are fully paid.
(Prior Code, § 92.111) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991)
§ 92.137 TERMINATION OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   The provisions of termination of utilities set out in division (B)
below may be enforced by the District Court. The District Court may maintain
control over a continuing nuisance.
   (B)   In the event a nuisance is found to exist against the owner, possessor
or other violator, then the utilities of the owner or possessor of the property
may be terminated by court order.
(Prior Code, § 92.112) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991)
§ 92.138 RECORDS OF COMPLAINTS, ACTIONS AND VIOLATIONS TO BE AVAILABLE TO THE
PUBLIC.
   The Director of the Department of Planning and Development shall make
records of all official actions relating to the administration and enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter available to the public, including, but not
limited to, written records of all complaints and actions taken with regard
thereto, all violations discovered with actions taken thereto and the final
disposition of such matters.
(Prior Code, § 92.113) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991)
§ 92.139 APPEAL TO CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.
   Any decision of the Code Official of the city in the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter may be appealed to the city’s Code Enforcement
Appeals Board by filing a written notice in the proper form with the Code
Official at his or her office. The written appeal shall be filed within seven
days of the decision, action or determination made by the Code Official from
which the appeal is sought.
(Prior Code, § 92.114) (Ord. 37, passed 11-4-1991)
§ 92.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of this chapter is subject to the penalty of §
34.043 of this code of ordinances. The enforcing agency, department or
individual may choose to seek enforcement through the Code Enforcement Board,
enacted on 4-30-2003 by Ord. 09-2003.
(Prior Code, § 92.999)
   (B)   Any of the following enforcement remedies and penalties, to be applied
independently or in a sequence as deemed necessary, shall be available to the
city in response to violations of this section.
      (1)   Notice of violation.
         (a)   Enforcement proceedings for §§
92.115 through
92.122 of this chapter shall be initiated by the issuance of a notice of
violation (NOV) by the Director of Storm Water Management.
         (b)   Failure to remedy the violation within seven days of receipt of
the notice of violation shall result in a citation for a civil offense. Each
day such violation continues after receipt of a citation shall be considered a
separate offense. The civil administrative fine for each citation (violation)
of §§
92.115 through
92.122 of this chapter shall be not less than $100, and not more than $500. The
civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within
30 days from the date of notification, then the city may recover said fine in a
civil action in the court of proper jurisdiction. The party cited may appeal
the citation and request a hearing before the Code Enforcement Board prescribed
in
Ch. 34 of this code of ordinances.
         (c)   The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to
ensure compliance with §§
92.115 through
92.122 of this chapter or pursue administrative remedies.
      (2)   Legal proceedings; notification of state’s Division of Water. The
Director of Storm Water Management or designated agent may pursue appropriate
legal proceedings for the enforcement of §§
92.115 through
92.122 of this chapter, and the city shall be entitled to recover its costs
expended and reasonable attorney’s fees in such proceedings. If a person,
property or facility has or is required to have a storm water discharge permit
from KYDOW, the city shall notify the appropriate state authorities of the
violation.
      (3)   Revocation of permit, improvement or development plans. Permits,
improvement plans or development plan approvals may be revoked for any
substantial departure from the approved plans thereby resulting in an illicit
discharge, as defined herein.
      (4)   Stop work orders. For violations involving active construction
sites, the Director of Storm Water Management may issue a stop work order and
require that all activities cease, except those actions that are necessary to
eliminate the illicit discharge.
      (5)   Suspension of MS4 access due to illicit discharges in emergency
situations. The city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access
when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, to the health or welfare of persons, to the MS4 or to waters of
the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4, or waters of the United States or to
minimize danger to persons.
      (6)   Suspension of MS4 access due to the detection of illicit discharge.
Any entity discharging to the MS4 or any conveyance in violation of §§
92.115 through
92.122 of this chapter may have its MS4 access terminated in such termination
would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city shall require the violator
to disconnect access to the MS4 at his or her cost or take corrective action to
eliminate the source of the illicit discharge. Reinstatement of MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to §§
92.115 through
92.122 of this chapter without the prior approval of the city constitutes a
violation.
      (7)   Cost of abatement of a violation. Any person causing a violation of
§§
92.115 through
92.122 of this chapter which requires the city to expend public funds for the
response to the violation, its abatement or the cleanup or removal of any
prohibited discharges, pollutants or hazardous materials shall be liable to the
city for all recoverable fees and costs incurred by the city for such response,
cleanup and removal. This shall include, but not limited to, personnel costs of
any city departments, replacement costs of supplies and equipment contaminated
as a result of the discharge, proper disposal of contaminated materials,
cleanup, evacuation and administrative and other expenses, including legal
expenses, incurred in recovering such costs. Any such illegal discharges shall
be considered a public health hazard and the city shall have a lien against the
property for its recoverable costs if these costs are not paid within 90 days
of invoice.
(Prior Code, § 92.157)
(Ord. 13-2003, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-2008)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION; SMOKE DETECTORS
Section
Fire Prevention
   
93.01   National fire codes adopted by reference
   
93.02   Standards of Safety adopted by reference
   
93.03   Minimum fire protection requirements; water supply and fire hydrants
   
93.04   Minimum fire protection requirements to be completed prior to issuance
of building permits
   
93.05   Private fire protection systems
Smoke Detectors in Residential Property
   
93.20   Installation and maintenance
   
93.21   Definitions
   
93.22   Smoke detectors required; type and placement
   
93.23   Enforcement
 
   
93.99   Penalty
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 93.01 NATIONAL FIRE CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The City Council hereby adopts all volumes of the current edition of
the National Fire Codes, and supplements thereto, as published by the National
Fire Protection Association, and the same are hereby in full force and effect
as to all real and personal property in the city.
   (B)   The above codes are on file in the office of the City Clerk, Fire
Department and Department of Planning and Development. Any person violating any
provision of such codes shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 93.01) (Ord. passed 4-3-1972; Ord. passed 2-18-1974; Ord. passed
6-5-1978; Ord. passed 1-20-1986; Ord. 08-2002, passed 6-17-2002)
§ 93.02 STANDARDS OF SAFETY ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The Kentucky Fire Prevention Code (Standards of Safety) as promulgated
in 815 KAR 10:060 by the Commissioner of the Department of Housing, Buildings
and Construction on the advice and recommendation of the state’s Fire Marshal,
is hereby adopted in full as an ordinance of the city. Copies of the code book
are available through the Department of Housing, Buildings and Constructions,
1047 U.S. 127, South Frankfort, Kentucky 40601.
   (B)   The city’s Fire Chief shall be designated as the local enforcement
agent/agency for said Standards of Safety as appointed by the Fiscal Court or
city.
   (C)   All final decisions of the Fire Code Official of the city shall be
appealable to a local appeals board pursuant to the procedures adopted by the
Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 93.02) (Ord. passed 7-21-1997; Ord. 08-2002, passed 6-17-2002)
§ 93.03 MINIMUM FIRE PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS; WATER SUPPLY AND FIRE HYDRANTS.
   The following minimum fire protection requirements shall apply to all future
developments and additions in the city.
   (A)   Water supply.
      (1)   For residential subdivision and small commercial districts, water
main shall be not less than six inches in diameter, including fire hydrant
branch connections, and shall be arranged into a gridiron or “looped” system.
If intersecting mains are at a distance in excess of 800 feet, or if dead end
or poor circulation is likely to exist for a considerable period of time, or if
other physical characteristics indicate, the developer may be required to
install mains of a large diameter. Fire flows based on the following guidelines
shall be the determining factor:
 
Minor mercantile districts 1,500 g.p.m. at flow pressure
Residential subdivisions   1,000 g.p.m. at flow pressure
Scattered residential area 500 g.p.m at flow pressure
 
      (2)   For large commercial and industrial subdivisions, water mains shall
be “looped” or interconnected with existing mains and their diameter shall be
equal to or greater than the smallest diameter line to which they are being
connected. In addition to the previous conditions, a fire flow of at least
2,000 gallons per minute at flow pressure must be expected to be obtained. If a
minimum flow of 2,000 gallons per minute can be proven, the conditions for
“looping” and sizing may be waived.
      (3)   The Engineering Department in conjunction with the Fire Department
shall make the final determination of the minimum size pipe for all systems.
      (4)   The distribution system shall be equipped with a sufficient number
of valves located at all branches and placed so that no more than 800 feet of a
main is shut down at any time.
      (5)   All water mains shall be installed in conformity with the minimum
requirements of the city and the local water authorities. Fire protection
services shall be equipped with a detector check valve and backflow preventer.
Approval shall be obtained for all fire protection systems prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
   (B)   Fire hydrants.
      (1)   (a)   Fire hydrants shall be spaced not further than 500 feet apart
as measured over hard surfaced roads. The distance between a fire hydrant and
any portion of a building shall not exceed 400 feet as measured on a hard-
surface access road.
         (b)   Fire hydrants in single-family subdivisions shall be spaced not
further than 500 feet apart along city rights-of-way or the public travel way.
The builder or owner of a single-family structure located more than 1,200 feet
from a fire hydrant shall provide, at his or her expense, a fire hydrant within
1,200 feet of the structure. The fire hydrant shall be connected to a public
water main and provide adequate flow to meet the requirements of this section.
      (2)   Fire hydrants must be located at least 25 feet away from the
exterior wall of any masonry building, and at least 50 feet away from any
exterior wall of frame or equivalent construction, including brick and stone
veneer.
      (3)   Fire hydrants shall meet the minimum specifications and be
installed in conformity with the requirements of the city and the local water
authorities. The location of all hydrants must be approved by the Fire Chief
and the City Engineer.
      (4)   Fire hydrants shall be equipped with not less than two two and one-
half inch outlets and a four and one-half inch pumper outlet, and shall have
national standard threads. Each hydrant shall have an inlet gate valve
installed in conjunction with it.
(Prior Code, § 93.04) (Ord. passed 5-5-1986; Ord. 25-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 MINIMUM FIRE PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS TO BE COMPLETED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE
OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   It is essential that the foregoing minimum requirements be completed prior
to the issuance of building permits for any construction. The city department
responsible for issuing building permits shall not issue building permits until
such time as a certification of completion of fire hydrant installation is
received. This can be done at the same time there is a physical inspection of
the other development improvements.
(Prior Code, § 93.05) (Ord. passed 6-5-1986)
§ 93.05 PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Installation of private fire protection systems.
      (1)   Installation of private fire protection water supply systems shall
follow the guidelines found in the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
Standard 24 and §
93.03 of this chapter.
      (2)   Easements to allow access to and maintenance of a private fire
protection water supply system shall be provided by the property owner.
Easements may be required for approval of any subdivision or development plans.
The minimum easement width shall be ten feet; however, the City Engineer or
Fire Chief may determine that a greater width is required for proper access and
maintenance of the private fire protection water supply system as warranted by
specific site circumstances.
   (B)   Maintenance of fire protection systems required. The approved private
fire protection water supply system, as required by NFPA Standard 25,
Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire Protection Systems,
shall be maintained by each property owner when such system is not part of the
publically maintained fire protection system.
   (C)   Testing of fire protection systems required. Fire protection water
supply systems, including private fire hydrants, shall be subject to periodic
tests as required by the Fire Chief or his or her designee and shall be
operable at all times.
      (1)   Fire hydrants shall be inspected annually and after any operation
of the hydrant. Flow tests shall be conducted every three years by the property
owner.
      (2)   Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all
times, which shall include a three-foot clear space around the hydrant, unless
otherwise approved by the Fire Chief or his or her designee. Physical
protection to prevent damage to hydrants may be required.
   (D)   Repairs to fire protection systems required. Private fire protection
water supply systems shall be repaired upon notification by the Fire Chief or
his or her designee as prescribed in NFPA Standard 25.
      (1)   By order of the Fire Chief or his or her designee, the owner of a
private fire protection system including hydrants and appurtenances shall make
repairs for the proper operation of the system, which shall include the repair
of leaks, physical damage and corrosion.
      (2)   Should repairs not be made within the time prescribed by the order
of the Fire Chief or his or her designee, the city shall effect such repairs by
city personnel or contractor and shall bill the owner of the system for said
repairs.
      (3)   For emergency conditions where the issuance of an order by the Fire
Chief or his or her designee to make repairs is not feasible or timely, the
city personnel or contractor may make repairs and subsequently invoice the
property owner for all costs. The city shall make effort to provide notice to
the property owner before any such emergency work is undertaken.
(Ord. 20-2015, passed 11-16-2015) Penalty, see §
93.99
SMOKE DETECTORS IN RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
§ 93.20 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The owner of a dwelling shall be responsible for supplying and
installing an operable condition, the required detectors and for providing the
manufacturer’s maintenance and testing instructions to the tenant.
   (B)   The owner of a dwelling shall be responsible for maintenance,
inspection and testing of detectors, which are located in common areas and/or
detectors in rooming units where the tenant usually has periods of occupancy
less than 30 continuous days, (such as hotels, motels, tourist homes and
boarding houses, identified as use group R-1 in the International Building Code
with Kentucky amendments). This maintenance, inspection and testing shall be
performed in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions, and in accordance
with provisions of the most current edition of NFPA (101) Life Safety Code,
and/or NFPA (1), Uniform Fire Code.
   (C)   The tenant (in other than R-1 use group) shall be responsible for
maintaining and testing the detectors, in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions, which are within his or her exclusive control during the life of
the tenancy.
   (D)   (1)   At every change of tenancy, in all dwellings, it shall be the
duty of the owner to test and ascertain that those detectors contained in the
unit are in operable condition and, if not, the owner shall be responsible for
placing them in operable condition.
      (2)   An affidavit shall be prepared and signed by both tenant and owner
attesting that working smoke detectors are in place.
      (3)   A copy shall be retained by the owner of the property for the
length of time that the specific lease agreement is in effect and shall be made
available for review on request of Fire or Building Code officials.
   (E)   At every change of dwelling ownership, it shall be the duty of the
seller to test and ascertain that those detectors contained in the unit are in
code compliant locations and in operable condition. A signed affidavit of the
property owner shall be given to purchaser, seller and real estate closer
before property transfer.
(Prior Code, § 100.01) (Ord. 25-2009, passed 12-7-2009)
§ 93.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DWELLING. Any building which contains one or more dwelling units or any
rooming units, rooms or area designated or used for sleeping purposes either as
a primary use or use on casual occasions. This term shall include single-family
dwellings, duplexes, rooming houses, hotels, motels, tourist homes, school
dormitories, apartments and/or condominium buildings.
   DWELLING UNITS. Any group of rooms located within a building and forming a
single housekeeping unit with facilities, which are used or designed to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking or eating.
   NFPA. National Fire Protection Association
   OWNER. Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others:
      (1)   Shall have all or part of the legal title to any dwelling or
dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or shall
have all or part of the beneficial ownership of any dwelling or dwelling unit
and a right to present use and enjoyment thereof, including a mortgage in
possession; or
      (2)   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit
as owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee, guardian of the estate or
duly authorized agent of the owner. Any such person thus representing the
actual OWNER shall be bound to comply with the owner’s obligations under this
section.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any room, which is designed or used for sleeping purposes.
This term may include a room in a rooming house, a hotel, a motel, a tourist
home, a school dormitory or an apartment building, which may or may not have
some additional facilities for eating or cooking contained therein.
   TENANT. Occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit irrespective
of existence of written lease agreement, or lack thereof.
(Prior Code, § 100.02) (Ord. 25-2009, passed 12-7-2009)
§ 93.22 SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED; TYPE AND PLACEMENT.
   (A)   In order to comply with this subchapter, only ionization or
photoelectric type detectors listed by a nationally recognized testing
laboratory shall be installed.
   (B)   Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with applicable NFPA
standards and the manufacturer’s recommendations. Detectors may be ceiling- or
wall-mounted; provided that, they shall be mounted at a minimum of four inches
and a maximum of 12 inches from the ceiling, and not closer than four inches
from the point at which the ceiling and wall meet.
   (C)   Smoke detectors shall be installed as specified by the International
Building Code with Kentucky Amendments and NFPA 72 National Fire Alarm Code.
(Prior Code, § 100.03) (Ord. 25-2009, passed 12-7-2009) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.23 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department, Code Official or any of their
designated representatives are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all
provisions of this section and the final determination concerning compliance
herewith shall be the sole discretion of the Authority Having Jurisdiction
(AHJ), as described in 815 KAR 10:060, of the Fire Department or Code Official.
Upon the presentation of official credentials, an authorized inspector of the
Fire Department or Code Official, may enter with consent any premises covered
by these regulations to perform the duties imposed upon him or her by these
regulations.
   (B)   The source of authority to issue orders as described in division (A)
above shall include, but not be limited to, any authority granted under KRS Ch.
227 and 815 KAR 10:060.
(Prior Code, § 100.04) (Ord. 25-2009, passed 12-7-2009)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of §§
93.01,
93.02,
93.03 and
93.04 of this chapter is subject to the penalty of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. The enforcing agency, department or
individual may choose to seek enforcement through the Code Enforcement Board,
enacted on 4-30-2003 by Ord. 09-2003.
(Prior Code, § 93.99)
   (C)   Any person or private entity who fails to comply with the provisions
of §
93.05 of this chapter or any order issued pursuant to §
93.05 of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine. The
Fire Chief or his or her designee may issue a citation for any violation of §
93.05 of this chapter.
      (1)   Fines shall be $50 for the first offense; $100 for the second
offense; and $250 for the third offense and any additional offenses.
      (2)   Violations of §
93.05 of this chapter may be abated by the city. The city may recover the
reasonable costs of any abatement action.
      (3)   Any person or private entity cited under §
93.05 of this chapter may appeal said citation and request a hearing before the
city’s Code Enforcement Board pursuant to the process and procedures of Ord.
09-2003, adopted 4-30-2003, as amended.
   (D)   (1)   Any person violating §§
93.20 through
93.23 of this chapter may be cited for a civil offense pursuant to the Code
Enforcement Board ordinance and fine schedule. Each day of violation may be
considered a separate occurrence. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the
city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of notification,
then the city may recover said fine in a civil action in a court of proper
jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunction or abatement orders to ensure
compliance with this section.
      (2)   The citing officer may, at his or her discretion, cite the offender
to appear before the Code Enforcement Board (Ord. 9-2003).
(Prior Code, § 100.99)
(Ord. 13-2003, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 25-2009, passed 12-7-2009; Ord. 20-2015,
passed 11-16-2015)
CHAPTER 94: LITTERING
Section
   
94.01   Tracking foreign matter on streets
   
94.02   Hauling loose material
   
94.03   Sweeping litter into gutters
   
94.04   Litter on private property
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 TRACKING FOREIGN MATTER ON STREETS.
   No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the
wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit upon any street, alley or other
public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any
kind.
(Prior Code, § 94.01) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.02 HAULING LOOSE MATERIAL.
   Every person hauling or causing to be hauled dirt, sand, gravel, cement,
fill dirt or loose material of any kind in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk
or other public place shall haul it, or cause it to be hauled in vehicles
provided with tight boxes or beds so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of
the contents from falling or being thrown, blown or deposited upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place. Any materials which fall from, or which
are thrown, blown or deposited from any vehicle upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place, shall be removed immediately by the person in
charge of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 94.02) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS.
   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
(Prior Code, § 94.03) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private
property within the city, whether owned by that person or not; except that, the
owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon streets, sidewalks or other
public places or upon any private property.
   (B)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the city, whether owned by that person or not.
(Prior Code, § 94.04) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter is subject to the penalty of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. The enforcing agency, department or
individual may choose to seek enforcement through the Code Enforcement Board
enacted on 4-30-2003, by Ord. 09-2003.
(Prior Code, § 94.99) (Ord. 19-2003, passed 6-23-2003)
CHAPTER 95: CEMETERIES
Section
Perpetual Care Trust Fund
   
95.01   Establishment
   
95.02   Sources of money
   
95.03   Use of income only
   
95.04   Designation; appointment of Trustee
   
95.05   Powers of Trustee
   
95.06   Trustee’s compensation
   
95.07   Term of Trustee
   
95.08   Annual Trustee report and audit
   
95.09   Income payments to city
   
95.10   Use of funds for upkeep and maintenance expenditures
   
95.11   Deficiency in operation of cemetery to be met by emergency account
   
95.12   City to annually report and account with Trustee
   
95.13   Scope and effect of provisions; amendments
PERPETUAL CARE TRUST FUND
§ 95.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A perpetual trust fund to be used solely for the maintenance and care of the
city cemetery is hereby created to be known as the “Elizabethtown City Cemetery
Perpetual Care Trust Fund”.
(Prior Code, § 95.01) (Ord. passed 3-21-1960)
§ 95.02 SOURCES OF MONEY.
   The City Cemetery Perpetual Care Trust Fund shall be created from funds
donated, given or bequeathed to the fund and such other funds from former
bequests, gifts or otherwise as are available.
(Prior Code, § 95.02) (Ord. passed 3-21-1960)
§ 95.03 USE OF INCOME ONLY.
   Only the income from the Perpetual Care Trust Fund hereby established shall
be used.
(Prior Code, § 95.03) (Ord. passed 3-21-1960)
§ 95.04 DESIGNATION; APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEE.
   A financial institution authorized by law to administer trust funds shall be
appointed trustee for the City Cemetery Perpetual Care Trust Fund hereby
created and, upon acceptance by the bank, the appointment shall be irrevocable,
except as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 95.04) (Ord. passed 3-21-1960)
§ 95.05 POWERS OF TRUSTEE.
   The Trustee of the Fund is hereby given sole power to manage and control the
fund and to direct the investment of the assets of same.
(Prior Code, § 95.05) (Ord. passed 3-21-1960)
§ 95.06 TRUSTEE’S COMPENSATION.
   The Trustee shall receive compensation as is provided by law for the
handling and management of the Trust Fund.
(Prior Code, § 95.06) (Ord. passed 3-21-1960)
§ 95.07 TERM OF TRUSTEE.
   The Trustee shall serve for the duration of the Trust which is perpetual, or
until the Trustee shall resign or be removed for cause by a court of competent
jurisdiction after due hearing and adjudication. The Trustee shall not be
removable by the governing body of the city.
(Prior Code, § 95.07) (Ord. passed 3-21-1960)
§ 95.08 ANNUAL TRUSTEE REPORT AND AUDIT.
   The Trustee shall file an annual report and audit with the governing body of
the city, setting forth the assets of the fund, where and how invested and the
income from same, and same shall constitute a public record.
(Prior Code, § 95.08) (Ord. passed 3-21-1960)
§ 95.09 INCOME PAYMENTS TO CITY.
   The Trustee shall, after deducting all costs of maintaining, handling and
inventing the fund, pay to the city all income from the fund, the payments to
be made quarterly on March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each
year.
(Prior Code, § 95.09) (Ord. passed 3-21-1960)
§ 95.10 USE OF FUNDS FOR UPKEEP AND MAINTENANCE EXPENDITURES.
   The city shall keep the funds so paid to it by the Trustee, together with
funds from any other source for maintenance purposes, separate and apart from
all other funds and shall expend same solely for the upkeep and maintenance of
the cemetery. If, at the end of any calendar year, there should exist any
surplus over and above that required for the upkeep and maintenance, same shall
be repaid to the Trustee who shall reinvest same or place same in an emergency
account as is deemed best by the Trustee.
(Prior Code, § 95.10) (Ord. passed 3-21-1960)
§ 95.11 DEFICIENCY IN OPERATION OF CEMETERY TO BE MET BY EMERGENCY ACCOUNT.
   In the event the surplus mentioned in §
95.10 of this chapter exists and the emergency account is created, the Trustee
is empowered to pay from same such amounts as may be necessary to the city to
meet any deficiency in the operation of the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 95.11) (Ord. passed 3-21-1960)
§ 95.12 CITY TO ANNUALLY REPORT AND ACCOUNT WITH TRUSTEE.
   The city shall annually report and account with the Trustee as to the
expenditure of all funds received from the Trustee and same shall constitute a
public record.
(Prior Code, § 95.12) (Ord. passed 3-21-1960)
§ 95.13 SCOPE AND EFFECT OF PROVISIONS; AMENDMENTS.
   This subchapter enacted for the protection and assurance of all donors to
the fund and constitutes a contract with the donors, the city and the Trustee,
and the terms of this subchapter may be amended only as authorized and directed
by a court of competent jurisdiction after joint application thereof by the
city and the Trustee and proper notice, hearing and adjudication.
(Prior Code, § 95.13) (Ord. passed 3-21-1960)
CHAPTER 96: FAIR HOUSING
Section
General Provisions
   
96.01   City policy
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Unlawful housing practices
   
96.04   Unlawful financial practices
   
96.05   Exemptions
Administration and Enforcement
   
96.20   Enforcement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 CITY POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to safeguard all individuals within the city
from discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, ethnic group,
familial status, disability or national origin. This policy is in conformance
with Federal and State Constitutional rights.
(Prior Code, § 96.01) (Ord. passed 7-17-1972)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. Includes improved and unimproved property and means a
building, structure, lot or part thereof which is used or occupied, or is
intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as the home or residence
of one or more individuals.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER or REAL ESTATE SALESPERSON. An individual, whether
licensed or not, who, for a fee, commission, salary or other valuable
consideration, or who with the intention or expectation of receiving or
collecting the same, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents or leases real
estate, or the improvements thereon, including options, or who negotiates or
attempts to negotiate such an activity; or who advertises or holds himself or
herself out as engaged in such activities; or who negotiates or attempts to
negotiate a loan secured by mortgage or other encumbrances, upon a transfer of
real estate; or who is engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or
contracting for collection of a fee in connection with a contract whereby he or
she undertakes to promote the sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of real
estate through its listing in a publication issued primarily for such purpose;
or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these.
   REAL ESTATE OPERATOR. Any individual or combination of individuals, labor
unions, joint apprenticeship committees, partnership, associations,
corporations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies,
trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees in bankruptcy, receives or other
legal or commercial entity, the county or any of its agencies, that is engaged
in the business of selling, purchasing, exchanging, renting or leasing real
estate, or the improvement thereon, including options, or that derives income,
in whole or in part, from the sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of real
estate; or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands,
tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives, condominiums and hereditaments, corporeal
and incorporeal, or any interest in the above.
(Prior Code, § 96.02) (Ord. passed 7-17-1972)
§ 96.03 UNLAWFUL HOUSING PRACTICES.
   It is an unlawful practice for a person having the right to sell, exchange,
rent or lease any property, or for a real estate broker, real estate
salesperson or an individual employed by or on behalf of any of these to:
   (A)   Refuse to sell, exchange, rent or lease or otherwise deny to or
withhold real property from an individual because of race, color, religion,
sex, ethnic background, familial status, disability or national origin;
   (B)   Discriminate against an individual because of race, color, religion,
sex, ethnic background, familial status, disability or national origin in the
terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, exchange, rental or lease of real
property or in the furnishings of facilities or services in connection
therewith;
   (C)   Refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to purchase, rent or
lease real property from an individual because of race, color, religion, sex,
ethnic background, familial status, disability or national origin;
   (D)   Refuse to negotiate for the sale, rental or lease of real property to
an individual because of race, color, religion or national origin;
   (E)   Represent to an individual that real property is not available for
inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or to refuse
to permit an individual to inspect real property because of race, color,
religion or national origin;
   (F)   Print, circulate, post or mail or cause to be printed, circulated,
posted or mailed an advertisement or sign, or to use a form of application for
the purchase, rental or lease of real property, or to make a record or inquiry
in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of real property,
which indicates directly or indirectly a limitation, specification or
discrimination as to race, color, religion, familial status, disability or
national origin or an intent to make such a limitation, specification or
discrimination;
   (G)   Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real property for
sale, rental or lease with the understanding that an individual may be
discriminated against in the sale, rental or lease of that real property or in
the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith because of
race, color, religion, familial status, disability or national origin; or
   (H)   Otherwise to deny or withhold real property from an individual because
of race, color, religion, sex, ethnic background, familial status, disability
or national origin.
(Prior Code, § 96.03) (Ord. passed 7-17-1972) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.04 UNLAWFUL FINANCIAL PRACTICES.
   It is an unlawful practice for a person, bank, banking organization,
mortgage company, insurance company or other financial institution or lender to
whom application is made for financial assistance for the purchase, lease,
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, maintenance or improvement
of real property or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of
these to:
   (A)   Discriminate against an individual because of the race, color,
religion, sex, ethnic background, familial status, disability or national
origin of the individual or the present or prospective owner, tenant or
occupant of that real property or of a member, stockholder, director, officer,
employee or representative of any of these, in the granting, withholding,
extending, modifying or renewing, the rates, terms, conditions, privileges or
other provisions of financial assistance or in the extension of services in
connection therewith; or
   (B)   Use a form of application for financial assistance or to make or keep
a record or inquiry in connection with applications for financial assistance
which indicate directly or indirectly, a limitation, specification or
discrimination as to race, color, religion, sex, ethnic background, familial
status, disability or national origin or an intent to make such a limitation,
specification or discrimination.
(Prior Code, § 96.04) (Ord. passed 7-17-1972) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to:
   (A)   The rental of a housing accommodation in a building which contains
housing accommodations for not more than two families living independently of
each other, if the owner or a member of his or her family resides in one of the
housing accommodations;
   (B)   The rental of a portion of a housing accommodation by the occupant of
the housing accommodation, or by the owner of the housing accommodation if he
or she or a member of his or her family resides therein; or
   (C)   A religious institution or to an organization operated for charitable
or educational purposes, which is operated, supervised or controlled by a
religious corporation, association or society, to the extent that the religious
corporation, association or society, limits or gives preferences in the sale,
lease, rental, assignment or sublease of real property to individuals of the
same religion, or makes a selection of buyers, tenants, lessees, assignees or
sublessees that is calculated by the religious corporation, association or
society to promote the religious principles for which it is established or
maintained.
(Prior Code, § 96.05) (Ord. passed 7-17-1972)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 96.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   Enforcement of this chapter shall be through the Kentucky Commission on
Human Rights as provided in KRS Ch. 344 and any other applicable federal or
commonwealth law.
CHAPTER 97: NOISE REGULATIONS
Section
   
97.01   Unreasonably loud noise; noise pollution
 
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 UNREASONABLY LOUD NOISE; NOISE POLLUTION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EXCESSIVE LOUD AND/OR HARSH NOISE. Any noise which is plainly audible by
a person with normal hearing at a distance of 50 feet from its point of origin
or emanation.
      PERSON. Any person, firm, association, partnership, joint venture,
corporation or any private entity of any nature.
(Prior Code, § 97.01)
   (B)   Prohibited activity.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to make,
continue or cause to be made or continued, any unreasonably loud, harsh,
excessive or unnecessary or unusual noise which either annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others
unless the making and continuing of the noise is necessary for the protection
or preservation of property or the life, health or safety of a person or
persons.
      (2)   Said offensive noise activity may include, but is not limited to,
sounds from horns, radios, stereos, any amplification system, musical
instrument or any other device which causes noise of any kind.
      (3)   Further prohibited is the use or operation of any vehicle on any
public or private property in such a manner as to produce any unreasonably
loud, harsh or excessive noise, or to discharge into the open air the exhaust
of any vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
      (4)   A person may be cited as violating this section for the production
of any noise that is excessively loud or harsh.
(Prior Code, § 97.02)
   (C)   Exempted noise. Specifically exempted from violation of this section
are the following noises:
      (1)   Amplified noise for which a permit has been issued by the city’s
Police Department;
      (2)   Noise from safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure
relief valves;
      (3)   Noise resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle or law
enforcement activity or framing facilities;
      (4)   Noises resulting from construction or demolition activity;
      (5)   Noises from the use of farm machinery, lawn mowers or other
machinery properly muffled utilized for agricultural or landscaping purposes;
      (6)   Noises originating or emanating from religious activities, public
recreational facilities such as, but not limited to, fairgrounds, sport arenas,
sports stadiums, amusement parks and other public amusement establishments; and
      (7)   The operation of any aircraft in conformity with, or pursuant to,
federal law, federal air regulations and/or air traffic control instructions.
(Prior Code, § 97.03)
(Ord. 34-2003, passed 11-17-2003) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating §
97.01 of this chapter shall be fined in an amount not less than $20, nor more
than $250; each day the violation is continued shall constitute a separate
offense. Any person violating §
97.01 of this chapter may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil
fine shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be
paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date
of notification, then the city may recover said fine in a civil action in a
court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement
orders to ensure compliance with §
97.01 of this chapter or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate,
including injunctions and abatement proceedings.
   (B)   The citing officer may, at his or discretion, cite the offender to
appear before the Code Enforcement Board.
(Prior Code, § 97.99) (Ord. 34-2003, passed 11-17-2003)
CHAPTER 98: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
98.01   Closing hours at Freeman Lake Park; American Legion Park
   
98.02   Motor vehicle use in recreational areas
   
98.03   Fishing on Freeman Lake
   
98.04   Swimming in city-owned or occupied reservoirs
   
98.05   Use of impoundment or reservoir without permission prohibited
   
98.06   Fishing in city impoundments and lakes
   
98.07   Maintenance of certain city-owned property in natural state
   
98.08   Fees for recreational facility
 
   
98.99   Penalty
§ 98.01 CLOSING HOURS AT FREEMAN LAKE PARK; AMERICAN LEGION PARK.
   Freeman Lake Park, Nature Park and American Legion Park shall be open at 7:
00 a.m. unless otherwise posted and shall be closed at sunset and all persons
shall leave these parks before sunset each day unless prior approval is granted
by the city.
(Prior Code, § 98.01) (Ord. passed 6-6-1977; Ord. 04-2002, passed 2-19-2002)
Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.02 MOTOR VEHICLE USE IN RECREATIONAL AREAS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor-powered
vehicle in any city recreational area, including, but not limited to, Freeman
Lake Park, University Drive Recreation Park, American Legion Park on N. Miles
Street, Gates Park on College Street Road, Nicholas Street Soccer Fields, Ring
Road Softball Fields, Carroll Soccer Complex on Peterson Drive, Ring Road
Softball Fields, Haycraft Park, the Elizabethtown Nature Park and the
Elizabethtown Sports Park, except on roads specifically intended for motor
vehicles and the same used as a public road in said areas.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the term MOTOR POWERED VEHICLES shall
include, but is not limited to, cars, trucks, buses, motorcycles, motor bikes,
mini bikes, golf carts, ATVs or any other similar motor vehicles with the
following exceptions:
      (1)   A power driven wheelchair or other motorized device that is
designed specifically to assist individuals with disabilities;
      (2)   Golf carts are allowed to be used at Freeman Lake Park on roads
specifically intended for motor vehicles and in the grass and shore areas for
individuals with handicap permits; and
      (3)   Golf carts are allowed to be used at the Elizabethtown Sports Park
with prior approval by the Sports Park Director for special events only.
   (C)   No motor or other vehicle of any nature may travel at a speed greater
than ten mph on any of the public ways, streets or easements of any city
recreational area.
   (D)   No motor or other vehicle of any nature may travel in a direction at
any city recreational area other than that direction so marked and designated
by appropriate signs.
   (E)   No person shall operate any of the above-named or other motor vehicles
on any path set aside for pedestrians at any city recreational area.
   (F)   Other than the exception mentioned in division (B)(2) above, no person
shall operate any of the above-mentioned or other motor vehicles on any grass
areas, dams or spillways or pans thereof, or shore areas adjacent to any city
lake or impoundment.
   (G)   All unmotorized bicycles shall be confined and restricted to vehicular
rights-of-way, streets and designated trails.
(Prior Code, § 98.02) (Ord. passed 6-21-1971; Ord. passed 6-6-1977; Ord. 14-
2012, passed 7-16-2012) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.03 FISHING ON FREEMAN LAKE.
   (A)   Fishing permits.
      (1)   A daily or annual city and state permit shall be required to fish
in any city-owned parks, lakes and waterways.
      (2)   Fees shall be set by the City Council in the annual budget for each
fiscal year.
   (B)   Daily fish limit and size. Daily fish limits, including number,
species and size, will be set and enforced by the commonwealth’s Department of
Fish and Wildlife Resources.
   (C)   Boat rentals. An hourly or rental fee for boats shall be established
by the City Council in the annual budget for each fiscal year.
   (D)   Enforcement. The commonwealth’s Department of Fish and Wildlife
officers and all other peace officers have the authority to enforce this
section in regards to permits and daily fish limit and size.
(Prior Code, § 98.03) (Ord. passed 3-2-1970; Ord. passed 2-1-1971; Ord. passed
12-17-1984; Ord. 04-2002, passed 2-19-2002; Ord. 06-2019, passed 4-15-2019)
Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.04 SWIMMING IN CITY-OWNED OR OCCUPIED RESERVOIRS.
   No person or persons may swim or go into the water at Freeman Lake
Reservoir, Valley Creek Reservoir or at any other city-owned or occupied
reservoir at any time.
(Prior Code, § 98.04) (Ord. passed 1-6-1969; Ord. passed 6-6-1977) Penalty, see
§
98.99
§ 98.05 USE OF IMPOUNDMENT OR RESERVOIR WITHOUT PERMISSION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall fish in or place or ride in a motorboat in any impoundment
or reservoir on any property owned or leased by the city without the express
permission of the city.
(Prior Code, § 98.05) (Ord. passed 5-1-1967; Ord. passed 6-6-1977) Penalty, see
§
98.99
§ 98.06 FISHING IN CITY IMPOUNDMENTS AND LAKES.
   (A)   Limitations on the size and number of fish and the method of fishing
shall be as exists under applicable state law.
   (B)   All fishing permitted in any lake belonging to the city shall be
confined to either “hook and line in hand” or “rod in hand”. Any other types of
fishing, including, but not limited to, trot lining, set lining, throw lining
and jugging are not permitted in these lakes. Any person fishing in the lakes
of the city by any means other than hook and line in hand and rod in hand in
violation of this division (B).
   (C)   This section shall be enforced by all Fish and Wildlife Conservation
officers of the state and all other peace officers.
(Prior Code, § 98.06) (Ord. passed 12-22-1980; Ord. passed 9-2-1986) Penalty,
see §
98.99
§ 98.07 MAINTENANCE OF CERTAIN CITY-OWNED PROPERTY IN NATURAL STATE.
   (A)   The property owned by the city along the east side of Freeman Lake
from the dam at Freeman Lake to the intersection of Freeman Lake extended to
Ring Road and running from the water’s edge to include the land owned by the
city shall be maintained in a “natural state” and the land shall be allowed to
maintain its natural undergrowth.
   (B)   The surface of the above described land owned by the city shall not be
disturbed in any way by any person, firm or corporation, without prior approval
of the Mayor, in writing, at least seven days before any disturbance of said
land is to take place.
   (C)   It is understood that trails may be maintained through the city land
by a group approved by the Mayor.
   (D)   In the event the terms of this section are violated by any person,
firm or corporation, then the city may immediately request and receive an
injunction preventing any further disturbance of the land as set out above.
(Prior Code, § 98.07) (Ord. 24-1988, passed 6-6-1988) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.08 FEES FOR RECREATIONAL FACILITY.
   Fees for the use of any recreational facility in the city shall be as posted
at each facility after approval by the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 98.08)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates §
98.03 of this chapter is subject to any penalty established for the
commonwealth’s Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources. Further, violation of
§
98.03 of this chapter may also be subject to penalty established under §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 06-2019, passed 4-15-2019)
CHAPTER 99: YARD SALES
Section
   
99.01   Definition
   
99.02   Restrictions on yard sales
   
99.03   Placement of merchandise
   
99.04   Enforcement
§ 99.01 DEFINITION.
   A YARD SALE is the sale or presentation for sale from a residence or
residential property. This includes the use of the residence, yard, the
driveway, garage or other attached buildings, or tangible personal property.
Incidental sales of one or two items of personal property shall not be included
when such sale is not a part of the general sale of a number of items of
personal property. Tag sale, special sale or other designations shall be
covered no matter what words are used.
(Prior Code, § 99.01) (Ord. 7-1995, passed 5-1-1995)
§ 99.02 RESTRICTIONS ON SALES.
   (A)   A single yard sale shall not last longer than four consecutive days.
   (B)   Yard sales may be conducted no more than three times per calendar year
from a residence.
   (C)   The sale may be conducted only during daylight hours.
   (D)   The sale shall be conducted only by the owner or occupant of the
premises.
(Prior Code, § 99.02) (Ord. 7-1995, passed 5-1-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 99.03 PLACEMENT OF MERCHANDISE.
   (A)   No person conducting the sale shall place the merchandise offered
beyond the edge of the sidewalk nearest to the home or garage, nor shall any
merchandise be placed on the property of another party without first obtaining
the permission of the adjoining property owner or occupant.
   (B)   In the event that no sidewalks exist at the residence, then the
merchandise offered for sale shall not be placed closer than ten feet from the
abutting street.
   (C)   No sale shall be conducted in any way so as to impede pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on any sidewalk, street or public way in the city. All
traffic regulations shall apply and will be strictly enforced.
(Prior Code, § 99.03) (Ord. 21-1994, passed 7-18-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 99.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The enforcement of this chapter shall be with the Planning Department.
Any complaints shall be made to that office during regular working hours. The
Planning Office shall verify the existence of a yard sale. In the event the
sale is held on a weekend or holiday, then the complaining party shall call the
Police Department, who shall verify the complaint.
   (B)   When complaints of more than three yard sales have been received
against a property owner or resident and verified, the city will then notify
the owner and occupant that any more attempted yard sales will result in court
action. Thereafter, this chapter shall be enforced as a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 99.04) (Ord. 21-1994, passed 7-18-1994)
CHAPTER 100: CERTIFICATION OF RECOVERY RESIDENCES
Section
   
100.01   Definitions
   
100.02   Certifications required
   
100.03   Powers and duties of the city
   
100.04   Requirements for recovery residences
   
100.05   Administration, enforcement and violations
 
   
100.99   Penalty
§ 100.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
   CABINET. The Kentucky Cabinet for Health and Family Services.
   CERTIFYING ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   The Kentucky Recovery Housing Network;
      (2)   The National Alliance for Recovery Residences;
      (3)   Oxford House, Inc.; and
      (4)   Any other organization that develops and administers professional
certification programs requiring minimum standards for the operation of
recovery residences that has been recognized and approved by the Cabinet for
Health and Family Services.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A city, county, urban-county government, consolidated
local government, charter county government, or unified local government.
   MEDICATION FOR ADDICTION TREATMENT. The use of pharmacological agents
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of
substance use disorders in combination with counseling and other behavioral
health therapies to provide a whole-patient approach to the treatment of
substance use disorders.
   RECOVERY RESIDENCE. Any premises, place, or building that:
      (1)   Holds itself out as a recovery residence, recovery home, sober
living residence, alcohol, illicit drug, and other intoxicating substance-free
home for unrelated individuals, or any other similarly named or identified
residence that promotes substance use disorder recovery through abstinence from
intoxicating substances;
      (2)   Provides a housing arrangement for a group of unrelated individuals
who are recovering from substance use disorders or to a group of parents who
are recovering from a substance use disorder and their children, including
peer-to-peer supervision models; and
      (3)   Is not licensed or otherwise approved by the Cabinet or any other
agency of state government to provide any medical, clinical, behavioral health,
or substance use treatment service for which a license or other approval is
required under state law.
   RECOVERY SUPPORT SERVICES.
      (1)   Activities that are directed primarily toward recovery from
substance use disorders and includes but is not limited to mutual aid self-help
meetings, recovery coaching, spiritual coaching, group support, and assistance
in achieving and retaining gainful employment; and
      (2)   Does not include any medical, clinical, behavioral health, or other
substance use treatment service for which a license or other approval is
required under state law.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 1-16-2024)
§ 100.02 CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Effective March 15, 2024, no individual or entity shall, except
as provided in division (B) of this section, establish, operate, or maintain a
recovery residence, recovery home, sober living residence, alcohol, illicit
drug, and other intoxicating substance-free home for unrelated individuals, or
any other similarly named or identified residence that promotes substance use
disorder recovery through abstinence from intoxicating substances or represent,
promote, advertise, or otherwise claim to operate a recovery residence,
recovery home, sober living residence, alcohol, illicit drug, and other
intoxicating substance-free home for unrelated individuals, or any other
similarly named or identified residence that promotes substance use disorder
recovery through abstinence from intoxicating substances unless that individual
or entity has:
         (a)   Been certified by a certifying organization; and
         (b)   Provided proof of certification by a certifying organization to
the city in a form and manner prescribed by the city.
      (2)   The provisions of this division (A) shall not apply to:
         (a)   A recovery residence that is recognized as a part of the
Recovery Kentucky Program administered by the Kentucky Housing Corporation; or
         (b)   A recovery residence that is:
            1.   Owned or operated by an entity that is exempt, in part or in
whole, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. sec. 3607 or 12187 from compliance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act, Pub. L. No. 101-336, or the Fair Housing Act,
Pub. L. No. 100-430; and
            2.   Affiliated with a religious institution that is organized
under 26 U.S.C. sec. 501(c) for charitable religious purposes; unless the
recovery residence accepts Medicare or Medicaid funds.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section:
      (1)   A recovery residence operating without certification from a
certifying organization on March 15, 2024, shall be permitted to continue to
operate until June 30, 2024, if the recovery residence provides the city with
proof that it initiated a certification process with a certifying organization
prior to March 15, 2024; and
      (2)   A recovery residence that seeks to begin operating after March 15,
2024, may be permitted by the city to operate for a period of not more than six
months if the recovery residence provides the city with proof that it has
initiated a certification process with a certifying organization.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 1-16-2024)
§ 100.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY.
   (A)   The city shall:
      (1)   Require certified recovery residences to provide proof of
certification at least annually;
      (2)   Require certified recovery residences to notify the city of any
change in their certification status, including but not limited to a suspension
or revocation of certification by a certifying organization;
      (3)   Require separate proof of certification for each recovery residence
owned or operated by an individual or entity in the city;
      (4)   Post on its website the name, telephone number, and location by
local jurisdiction of each certified recovery residence and shall update the
list at least quarterly;
      (5)   Post on its website the name of each certifying organization
approved by the city; and
      (6)   Notify the Cabinet of receipt of proof of certification from a
recovery residence within 30 days of receipt of proof of certification; and
      (7)   Require certified recovery residences to obtain and maintain a City
Business License.
   (B)   The city may:
      (1)   In lieu of posting the information required by division (A)(4) of
this section to its website, post a link to another website that aggregates
information on certified recovery residences or other information providers;
and
      (2)   Promulgate administrative regulations or policies to carry out the
provisions of this chapter by Executive Order approved by the City Attorney to
carry out the provisions of this chapter.
   (C) The Recovery Residence Compliance Official or the City Code Enforcement
Board are hereby granted the authority and legal standing necessary to initiate
appropriate legal action to compel a recovery residence that is operating in
violation of this chapter to cease operating.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 1-16-2024)
§ 100.04 REQUIREMENTS FOR RECOVERY RESIDENCES.
   (A)   A recovery residence shall:
      (1)   Clearly disclose the following by inclusion in any advertising and
by posting such a notice in a conspicuous location inside the residence:
         (a)   Notice that the recovery residence is not a treatment facility;
         (b)   A list of services offered by the recovery residence; and
         (c)   If the recovery residence is exempt from certification pursuant
to §
100.02(A)(2) of this chapter, notice that the recovery residence is exempt from
certification requirements.
      (2)   Require residents to abstain from the use of alcohol, illicit
drugs, and other intoxicating substances;
      (3)   Require residents to participate in recovery support services
including through a peer-to-peer supervision model; and
      (4)   Allow individuals who are receiving medication for addiction
treatment to continue to receive such treatment while residing in the recovery
residence as directed by a licensed prescriber.
   (B)   A recovery residence shall not, except as permitted under division (C)
(2) below of this section, directly provide any medical or clinical services
including on-site medication administration.
   (C)   (1)   The requirement that residents abstain from the use of
intoxicating substances established in division (A)(2) of this section shall
not apply to any legally prescribed medication when used by a resident as
directed by a licensed prescriber.
      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section shall not apply to any recovery
residence owned or operated by an entity that is exempted, in part or in whole,
pursuant to 42 U.S.C. sec. 3607 or 12187 from compliance with the Americans
with Disabilities Act, Pub. L. No. 101-336, or the Fair Housing Act, Pub. L.
No. 100-430.
      (3)   The prohibition on the provision of medical and clinical services
established in division (B) of this section shall not apply to:
         (a)   The self-administration of prescribed medications by a resident
as directed by a licensed prescriber within his or her scope of practice;
         (b)   Verification of abstinence from the use of alcohol, illicit
drugs, and other intoxicating substances; or
         (c)   The provision of medical and clinical services, including
telehealth services and other in-residence services, to an individual residing
in a recovery residence by a licensed medical or behavioral health provider
provided that:
            1.   The licensed provider is not employed or contracted by the
recovery residence;
            2.   The recovery residence has not required or otherwise induced a
resident to receive services from a specific provider; and
            3.   The licensed provider and the recovery residence shall each,
as applicable, comply with 18 U.S.C. sec. 220, 42 U.S.C. sec. 1320a-7b(b), and
42 U.S.C. sec. 1395nn and any amendments thereto.
   (D)   A recovery residence shall allow entry by the Recovery Residence
Compliance Officer or any designee at all reasonable times to conduct
inspections and duties under this Ordinance.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 1-16-2024)
§ 100.05 ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   General. The Recovery Residence Compliance Officer (Compliance
Officer) shall be appointed by the Mayor and is hereby authorized to exercise
peace officer powers. The Compliance Officer is hereby authorized and directed
to enforce the provisions of this chapter. In accordance with the prescribed
procedures of the city and with the concurrence of the Mayor, the Compliance
Officer shall have the authority to designate staff members of other city
departments. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the Compliance
Officer with the concurrence of the Mayor. The Compliance Officer, member of
the Code Enforcement Board or employee charged with the enforcement of this
chapter, while acting for the city, in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of the duties required by this chapter or other pertinent law or
ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or
property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the
discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or
employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful
discharge of duties and under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended
by the legal representative of the city until final termination of the
proceedings. The Compliance Officer or his or her designee shall not be liable
for cost in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Interpretations. The Compliance Officer shall have the authority to
render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt policies and procedures in
order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations,
policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of
this chapter and KRS 222.500 to 222.510 as may be amended. Any such
interpretation of this chapter by the Compliance Officer shall be subject to
review/appeal to the Code Enforcement Board.
   (C)   Right of entry. The Compliance Officer or his or her designee shall
make all of the required inspections or shall accept reports of inspections by
approved agencies or individuals to ensure compliance with this chapter and all
other applicable city ordinances, to include property maintenance codes,
building codes, or fire codes. The Compliance Officer or his or her designee
shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the
performance of duties under this chapter. If entry is refused, the Compliance
Officer or his or her designee shall have recourse to the remedies provided by
law to secure entry.
   (D)   Notices, citations and orders. The Compliance Officer or his or her
designee shall issue all necessary notices, citations, or orders to ensure
compliance with this chapter. All notices shall be sent by regular mail to the
property owner and posted on the recovery residence. The records of the Hardin
County Property Valuation Administrator or City Business License shall be proof
of ownership.
   (E)   Records. The Compliance Officer or his or her designee shall keep
official records of all business and activities specified in the provisions of
this chapter. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the
period required for retention of public records.
   (F)   Violations.
      (1)   Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation or other legal entity who is the owner(s) of real property in the
City as of the date of any notice, citation or order to be in conflict with or
in violation of any provision of this Ordinance or KRS 222.500 to 222.510 as
may be amended. It is the intention of the City to exercise all legal authority
and standing to initiate appropriate compliance activity to compel a recovery
residence that is operating in violation of this Ordinance or KRS 222.500 to
222.510 as may be amended, to cease operating as provided in KRS 222.504.
      (2)   Notice of violation. The Compliance Officer or his or her designee
shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with this chapter.
      (3)   Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a
notice of violation or order served in accordance this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor or civil infraction or violation as determined by the
city or the Code Enforcement Board consistent with state law, and the violation
shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not
complied with, the Compliance Officer or his or her designee shall institute
the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity, including, but not limited to,
the issuance of a citation, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to
require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure
in violation of the provisions of this chapter or of the order or direction
made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the city on such premises shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall
be a lien upon such real estate.
      (4)   Violation penalties. Any person, who shall violate a provision of
this chapter, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements
thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws.
Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.
      (5)   Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the City Attorney from instituting appropriate
action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal
occupancy of a building, structure, or premises, or to stop an illegal act,
conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises.
      (6)   Notice to person responsible. Whenever the Compliance Officer or
his or her designee determines that there has been a violation of this chapter
or KRS 222.500 to 222.510 as may be amended or has grounds to believe that a
violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in
divisions (F)(7) and (F)(8) below to the owner(s) or person responsible for the
violation as specified in this chapter or KRS 222.500 to 222.510 as may be
amended. Records by the Hardin County Property Valuation Administrator may be
relied upon to determine the identity and address of said owner.
      (7)   Form. Such notice prescribed in division (F)(6) above shall be in
accordance with all of the following:
         (a)   Be in writing;
         (b)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification (address);
         (c)   Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the
notice is being issued;
         (d)   May include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to
make the required compliance activity to bring the premises into compliance
with the provisions of this chapter; and
         (e)   Include a statement of the city's right to issue a citation and/
or to file a lien in accordance with of this chapter and applicable law.
      (8)   Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served if a copy thereof is:
         (a)   Delivered personally;
         (b)   Sent by electronic email;
         (c)   Sent by regular, first-class mail addressed to the owner of
record at the last known address as noted in division (F)(6) above; or
         (d)   Posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure or
premises affected by such notice and then mailing a copy by regular, first-
class mail to the owner of record at the last known address as noted in
division (F)(6) above.
      (9)   Unauthorized tampering. Notices, signs, tags or seals posted or
affixed by the Compliance Officer or his or her designee shall not be
mutilated, destroyed or tampered with, or removed without authorization from
the Compliance Officer or his or her designee.
      (10)   Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
recovery residence or structure or premises who has received a compliance order
or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage,
lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure or premises to
another owner until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of
violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the
grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or
notice of violation issued by the Enforcement Official or his or her designee
or the Code Enforcement Board and shall furnish to the Enforcement Official or
his or her designee a signed and notarized statement from the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance
order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without
condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance
order or notice of violation.
      (11)   Appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the
Compliance Officer or his or her designee or a notice or order or citation
issued under this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Code
Enforcement Board, after the issuance of a citation. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this chapter or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this chapter do not fully apply, or the requirements of this chapter are
adequately satisfied by other means. All decisions of the Code Enforcement
Board shall become final unless appealed to the Hardin District Court within 30
days of issuance.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 1-16-2024)
§ 100.99 PENALTY.
   Any owner(s) operating a recovery residence who fails to furnish any such
data, statistics, schedules, or information as required herein, or who files
fraudulent returns thereof shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 per
day for each day of such non-compliance. Whoever knowingly owns, establishes or
maintains a recovery residence without a valid license granted pursuant to this
chapter or KRS 222.500 to 222.510 as may be amended shall, for the first
offense, be subject to a fine of not more than $500 for each day of non-
compliance and for each subsequent offense by a property owner(s) at the same
or different property location by a fine of not more than $1,000 per day for
each day of non-compliance. The penalty herein is in addition to any other
penalty imposed by Federal, Kentucky or city law. It shall be unlawful for any
person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter and when
no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be deemed a civil violation and shall be punishable by a fine not more
than $500 per day for each day of violation; provided that, the fine for an
violation under this chapter shall not be less than or greater than, the fine
imposed by any state statute for the same violation.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 1-16-2024)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   OCCUPATIONAL TAXES
      
111.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
      
112.   PAWNBROKERS AND SCRAP DEALERS
      
113.   INSURANCE COMPANIES
      
114.   COMMERCIAL BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
      
115.   DETECTIVE AND SECURITY AGENCIES
      
116.   VEHICLES FOR SALE OR HIRE
      
117.   CABLE TELEVISION
      
118.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
119.   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
      
120.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
121.   RESTAURANTS
CHAPTER 110: OCCUPATIONAL TAXES
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Occupational license application required
   
110.03   Occupational license tax payment required
   
110.04   Apportionment
   
110.05   Employers to withhold
   
110.06   Return required
   
110.07   Extensions
   
110.08   Refunds
   
110.09   Federal audit provisions
   
110.10   Administrative provisions
   
110.11   Information to remain confidential
   
110.12   Penalties and failures
   
110.13   Duties of Finance Director
   
110.14   Minimum and maximum liability
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Any enterprise, activity, trade, occupation, profession or
undertaking of any nature conducted for gain or profit. BUSINESS shall not
include a board of trade, chambers of commerce, trade associations or unions,
or other associations performing services usually performed by trade
associations or unions as recognized by the Internal Revenue Service. BUSINESS
shall not include funds, foundations, corporation or associations organized and
operated for the exclusive and sole purpose of religious, charitable,
scientific, literary, educational, civic or fraternal purposes, where no part
of the earnings, incomes or receipts of such unit, group or association, inures
to the benefit of any private shareholders or other person.
   BUSINESS ENTITY. Each separate corporation, limited liability company,
business development corporation, partnership, limited partnership, registered
limited liability partnership, sole proprietorship, association, joint stock
company, receivership, trust, professional service organization or other legal
entity through which business is conducted.
   CITY. The City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
   COMPENSATION. Wages, salaries, commissions or any other form of remuneration
paid or payable by an employer for services performed by an employee, which are
required to be reported for federal income tax purposes and adjusted as
follows:
      (1)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any retirement,
profit sharing or deferred compensation plan, which are deferred for federal
income tax purposes under a salary reduction agreement or similar arrangement,
including, but not limited to, salary reduction arrangements under I.R.C. §§
401(a), 401(k), 402(e), 403(a), 403(b), 408, 414(h) or 457; and
      (2)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any welfare
benefit, fringe benefit or other benefit plan made by salary reduction or other
payment method which permits employees to elect to reduce federal taxable
compensation under the Internal Revenue Code, including, but not limited to,
I.R.C. §§ 125 and 132.
   CONCLUSION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT. The date that the adjustments made by the
Internal Revenue Service to net income as reported on the business entity’s
federal income tax return become final and unappealable.
   FINAL DETERMINATION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT. The revenue agent’s report or
other documents reflecting the final and unappealable adjustments made by the
Internal Revenue Service.
   FISCAL YEAR. As defined in I.R.C. § 7701(a)(24).
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who renders services to another person or any business
entity for compensation, including an officer of a corporation and any officer,
employee or elected official of the United States, a state or any political
subdivision of a state, or any agency of instrumentality of any one or more of
the above. A person classified as an independent contractor under the Internal
Revenue Code shall not be considered an EMPLOYEE.
   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code, as defined in KRS 67.750
(7) and also being Title 26 of the U.S. Code.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. Any individual or entity that only operates a food
establishment which is on wheels and mobile in which both prepared and pre-
packaged food is sold (examples are food truck, trailer or cart). A mobile food
unit that is associated with a restaurant, as defined in this chapter, is not
considered a MOBILE FOOD VENDOR under the definition of this chapter and all
food sales from such units shall be reported with the overall sales of the
restaurant and pay all applicable taxes as required by KRS 91A.400.
   NET PROFIT. Gross income as defined in I.R.C. § 61, minus all the deductions
from gross income allowed by I.R.C. Ch. 1, and adjusted as follows:
      (1)   Include any amount claimed as a deduction for state tax or local
tax which is computed, in whole or in part, by reference to gross or net income
and which is paid or accrued to any state of the United States, local taxing
authority in a state, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico, any territory or possession of the United States, or any foreign country
or political subdivision thereof;
      (2)   Include any amount claimed as a deduction that directly or
indirectly is allocable to income which is either exempt from taxation or
otherwise not taxed;
      (3)   Include any amount claimed as a net operating loss carryback or
carryforward allowed under I.R.C. § 172;
      (4)   Include any amount of income and expenses passed through separately
as required by the Internal Revenue Code to an owner of a business entity that
is a pass-through entity for federal tax purposes; and
      (5)   Exclude any amount of income that is exempt from state taxation by
the Kentucky Constitution or the Constitution and statutory laws of the United
States.
   PERSON. Every natural person, whether a resident or non-resident of the
city. Whenever the word PERSON is used in a clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty in the nature of a fine or imprisonment, the word, as applied to a
partnership or other form of unincorporated enterprise, shall mean the partners
or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, shall mean the officers and
directors thereof.
   RESTAURANT. Any fixed commercial establishment with a permanent physical
location that engages in the preparation and serving of ready-to-eat foods in
portions to the consumer, including, but not limited to: restaurants; coffee
shops; cafeterias; short-order cafés; luncheonettes; grilles; tea rooms;
sandwich shops; soda fountains; roadside stands; catering kitchens;
delicatessen; or similar places in which food is prepared for sale for
consumption on the premises or elsewhere. Not included in the definition of a
RESTAURANT for purposes of this chapter are school cafeterias which are
operated by the school system, food vending machines, hospital cafeterias owned
by a governmental entity and cafeterias that are located inside industrial
factories in which services are limited to employees only.
   RETURN or REPORT. Any properly completed and, if required, signed form,
statement, certification, declaration or any other document permitted or
required to be submitted or filed with the city.
   SALES REVENUE. Receipts from the sale, lease or rental of goods services or
property.
   TAX DISTRICT. Any county or city with the authority to levy net profits or
occupational license taxes.
   TAXABLE NET PROFIT. In case of a business entity having payroll or sales
revenue only with the city means net profit, as defined herein.
   TAXABLE NET PROFIT. In case of a business entity having payroll or sales
revenue both within and without the city means net profit, as defined herein,
and as apportioned under §
110.04 of this chapter.
   TAXABLE YEAR. The calendar year or fiscal year ending during the calendar
year, upon the basis of which net income is computed.
(Prior Code, § 110.01) (Ord. 09-2006, passed 5-8-2006; Ord. 25-2019, passed 11-
4-2019)
§ 110.02 OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every person or business entity engaged in any trader, occupation or
profession, or other activity for profit or anyone required to file a return
under this chapter in the city shall be required to complete and execute the
application prescribed by the Occupational Tax Office. Each person shall be
required to complete a separate application for each separate business before
the commencement of business or in the event of a status change, other than
change of address. Licensees are required to notify the Occupational Tax Office
of changes of address, or the cessation of business activity, and of other
changes which render inaccurate the information supplied in the completed
application.
   (B)   (1)   Effective 1-1-2020, all mobile food vendors are required to pay
on a calendar year basis, an annual business license fee of $250. The mobile
food vendor will not be required to file a monthly restaurant tax return as
required by Ord. 22-2007. All licenses expire December 31 each year. Mobile
food vendors are exempt from filing a return as required by §
110.06 of this chapter.
      (2)   This license fee does not apply to any restaurant business that has
a permanent physical location inside the city limits and also operates a mobile
food unit. Any such business shall be required to file monthly restaurant tax
returns, obtain an annual business license, remit any occupational withholdings
due, and file an annual net profits license fee return as required by this
chapter and Ord. 22-2007.
(Prior Code, § 110.02) (Ord. 09-2006, passed 5-8-2006; Ord. 25-2019, passed 11-
4-2019)
§ 110.03 OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX PAYMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B) and (E) below, every person or
business entity engaged in any business for profit and any person or business
entity that is required to make a filing with the Internal Revenue Service or
the Kentucky Revenue Cabinet shall be required to file and pay to the city an
occupational license tax for the privilege of engaging in such activities with
the city. The occupational license tax shall be measured by 1.95% of:
      (1)   All wages and compensation paid or payable in the city for work
done or services performed or rendered in the city by every resident and
nonresident who is an employee; and
      (2)   The net profit from business conducted in the city by a resident or
non-resident business entity.
   (B)   All partnerships, S corporations and all other entities where income
is “passed through” to the owners are subject to this chapter. The occupational
license tax imposed in this chapter is assessed against income before it is
“passed through” these entities to the owners.
   (C)   If any business entity dissolves, ceases to operate or withdraws from
the city during any taxable year, or if any business entity in any manner
surrenders or loses its charter during any taxable year, the dissolution,
cessation of business, withdrawal or loss or surrender of charter shall not
defeat the filing of returns and the assessment and collection of any
occupational license tax for the period of that taxable year during which the
business entity had business activity in the city.
   (D)   If a business entity makes, or required to make, a federal income tax
return, the occupational license tax shall be computed for the purposes of this
chapter on the bases of the same calendar or fiscal year required by the
federal government, and shall employ the same methods of accounting required
for federal income tax purposes.
   (E)   The occupational license tax imposed in this section shall not apply
to the following persons or business entities:
      (1)   Any bank, trust company, combined bank and trust company, combined
trust, banking and title business organized and doing business in this state,
any savings and loan association whether state or federally chartered pursuant
to the provisions of KRS 92.300;
      (2)   Any compensation received by members of the Kentucky National Guard
for active duty training, unit training assemblies and annual field training
pursuant to the provisions of KRS 92.300;
      (3)   Any compensation received by precinct workers for election training
or work at election booths in state, city or local primary, regular or special
elections pursuant to the provisions of KRS 92.300;
      (4)   Public service corporations that pay an ad valorem tax on property
valued and assessed by the commonwealth’s Department of Revenue pursuant to the
provisions of KRS 136.120. Licensees whose businesses are predominately non-
public service who are also engaged in public service activity are required to
pay a license fee on their net profit derived from the non-public service
activities apportioned to the city;
      (5)   Persons or business entities that have been issued a license under
KRS Ch. 243 to engage in manufacturing or trafficking in alcoholic beverages.
Persons engaged in the business of manufacturing or trafficking in alcoholic
beverages are required to file a return, but may exclude the portion of their
net profits derived from the manufacturing or trafficking in alcoholic
beverages;
      (6)   Insurance companies incorporated under the laws of and doing
business in the Commonwealth of Kentucky except as provided in KRS 91A.080;
      (7)   Any profits, earnings, distributions of an investment fund which
would qualify under KRS 154.20-250 to 154.20-284 to the extent any profit,
earnings or distributions would not be taxable to an individual investor;
      (8)   All rental income of any type or source is fully taxable for all
forms of ownership, except for an individual or single-member LLC who owns four
or less residential rental housing units; they are exempt from the requirements
of this chapter. A housing unit is defined as a single living quarters (duplex
= two, apartment unit = one). With ownership of five or more residential rental
units inside the city limits, an individual or single-member LLC is presumed to
be operating a business and is subject to this chapter and all net profits are
fully taxable.
      (9)   The sale of agricultural products by the owner of locally homegrown
agriculture products. This does not include the resale of produce from a
distributor;
      (10)   Private domestic labor is excepted, net included are commercially
marketed services provided for the home;
      (11)   Vendors who only participate in festivals or fairs sponsored by
non-profit organizations where said events do not exceed three days may be
exempt; and
      (12)   Any mobile food vendor that only participates in city sponsored
events or festivals shall be exempted from obtaining a city occupational
license, however, they shall be required to pay the applicable vendor set-up
fee associated with each city event or festival.
(Prior Code, § 110.03) (Ord. 09-2006, passed 5-8-2006; Ord. 10-2012, passed 8-
20-2012; Ord. 25- 2019, passed 11-4-2019; Ord. 13-2023, passed 6-26-2023)
§ 110.04 APPORTIONMENT.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (D) below, net profit shall be
apportioned as follows:
      (1)   For business entities with both payroll and sales revenues in more
than one tax district, by multiplying the net profit by a fraction, the
numerator of which is the payroll factor, described in division (B) below, plus
the sales factor, described in division (C) below, and the denominator of which
is two;
      (2)   For business entities with sales revenue in more than one tax
district, by multiplying the net profit by the sales factor as set forth in
division (C) below; and
      (3)   For the purposes of divisions (A) through (D) below, the business
entity shall file an apportionment form provided by the Occupational Tax
Office.
   (B)   The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total
amount paid or payable in the city during the tax period by the business entity
for compensation, and the denominator of which is the total compensation paid
or payable by the business entity everywhere during the tax period.
Compensation is paid or payable in the city based on the time the individual’s
service is performed within the city.
   (C)   The sales factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total
sales revenue of the business entity in the city during the tax period, and the
denominator of which is the total sales revenue of the business entity
everywhere during the tax period:
      (1)   The sales, lease or rental of tangible personal property is in the
city if:
         (a)   The property is delivered or shipped to a purchaser, other than
the United States government, or to the designee of the purchaser within the
city regardless of the f.o.b. point or other conditions of the sale; or
         (b)   The property is shipped from an office, store, warehouse,
factory or other place of storage in the city and the purchaser is the United
States Government.
      (2)   Sales revenues, other than revenue from the sale, lease or rental
of tangible personal property or the lease or rental of real property, are
apportioned to the city based upon a fraction, the numerator of which is the
time spent in performing such income-producing activity within the city and the
denominator of which is the total time spent performing that income-producing
activity; and
      (3)   Sales revenue from the sale, lease or rental of real property is
allocated to the tax district where the property is located.
   (D)   If the apportionment provisions of this section do not fairly
represent the extent of the business entity’s activity in the city, the
business entity may petition the city or the city may require, in respect to
all or any part of the business entity’s business activity, if reasonable:
      (1)   Separate accounting;
      (2)   The exclusion of any one or more of the factors;
      (3)   The inclusion of one or more additional factors which will fairly
represent the business entity’s business activity in the city; or
      (4)   The employment of any other method to effectuate an equitable
allocation and apportionment of net profits.
   (E)   When compensation is paid or payable for work done or services
performed or rendered by an employee, both within and without the city, the
license tax shall be measured by that part of the compensation paid or payable
as a result of work done or service performed or rendered with the city. The
license tax shall be computed by obtaining the percentage which the
compensation for work performed or services rendered within the city bears to
the total wages and compensation paid or payable. In order for the city to
verify the accuracy of the taxpayer’s reported percentage under this section,
the taxpayer shall maintain adequate records.
(Prior Code, § 110.04) (Ord. 09-2006, passed 5-8-2006)
§ 110.05 EMPLOYERS TO WITHHOLD.
   (A)   Every employer making payment of compensation to an employee shall
deduct and withhold upon the payment of the compensation any tax imposed
against the compensation by the city. Amounts withheld shall be paid to the
city in accordance with §
110.03 of this chapter.
   (B)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this section
shall, for the quarter ending after January 1 and for each quarter ending
thereafter, on or before the end of the month following the close of each
quarter, make a return to the city and pay to the city, the tax required to be
withheld under this section, unless the employer is permitted or required to
report within a reasonable time after some other period as determined by the
city.
   (C)   Every employer who fails to withhold or pay to the city any sums
required by this ordinance to be withheld and paid shall be personally and
individually liable to the city for any sum or sums withheld or required to be
withheld in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (D)   The city shall have a lien upon all the property of any employer who
fails to withhold or pay over to the city sums required to be withheld under
this section. If the employer withholds, but fails to pay the amounts withheld
to the city, the lien shall commence as of the date the amounts withheld were
required to be paid to the city. If the employer fails to withhold, the lien
shall commence at the time the liability of the employer is assessed by the
city.
   (E)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this section
shall annually on or before February 28 of each year complete and file on a
form furnished or approved by the city a reconciliation of the occupational
license tax withheld where compensation is paid or payable to employees. Either
copies of federal forms W-2 and W-3, transmittal of wage and tax statements, or
a detailed employee listing with the required equivalent information, as
determined by the city, shall be submitted.
   (F)   Every employer shall furnish each employee a statement on or before
January 31 of each year showing the amount of compensation and occupational
license tax deducted by the employer from the compensation paid to the employee
for payment to the city during the preceding calendar year.
   (G)   An employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax required to be
deducted and withheld under this section.
   (H)   The president, vice president, secretary, treasurer or any other
person holding an equivalent corporate office of any business entity subject to
this chapter shall be personally and individually liable, both jointly and
severally, for any tax required to be withheld from compensation paid to one or
more employees of any business entity, and neither the corporate dissolution or
withdrawal of the business entity from the city, nor the cessation of holding
any corporate office, shall discharge that liability of any person; provided
that, the personal and individual liability shall apply to each or every person
holding the corporate office at the time the tax becomes or became obligated.
No person shall be personally and individually liable under this division (H)
who had no authority to collect, truthfully account for or pay over any tax
imposed by this chapter at the time that the taxes imposed by this chapter
become or became due.
   (I)   Every employee receiving compensation in the city subject to the tax
imposed under §
110.03 of this chapter shall be personally liable for the tax notwithstanding
the provision of divisions (G) and (H) above. In all cases where the employer
does not withhold the tax levied under this chapter from the employee, such
employee or employees shall be responsible for filing with the city each
quarter in the same manner as if they were the employer. If an employer fails
to or is not required to withhold, report or pay the license fee, it shall
become the duty of the employee to file with the city. The only employer that
is not required to withhold, report and pay the occupational license tax is the
Federal Government, including the United States Postal Service. The payment
required to be made by an employee, can be made quarterly, for the periods
ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year, or at any
time the employee wishes to make an estimated payment for the year in which
wages are earned. All license fees must be received by February 28 for the
preceding calendar year, together with a copy of the employee’s W-2 form.
Employers not required to withhold, report, or pay the license fee must
annually during the month of January of each year, make a return to the
Occupational Tax Administrator, in which is set forth the name and Social
Security number of each employee of the employer during the preceding calendar
year, giving the amount of salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation
earned during such preceding year by each such employee. This list shall
include all current full-time employees, part-time employees, temporary
employees and terminated employees whether it be voluntary or involuntary.
(Prior Code, § 110.05) (Ord. 09-2006, passed 5-8-2006)
§ 110.06 RETURNS REQUIRED.
   (A)   All business entity returns for the preceding taxable year shall be
made by April 15 of each year, except returns made on the basis of a fiscal
year, which shall be made by the fifteenth day of the fourth month following
the close of the fiscal year. Blank forms for returns shall be supplied by the
city.
   (B)   Every business entity shall submit a copy of its federal income tax
return and all supporting statements and schedules at the time of filing its
occupational license tax return with the city. Whenever, in the opinion of the
city, it is necessary to examine the federal income tax return of any business
entity in order to audit the return, the city may compel the business entity to
produce for inspection a copy of any statements and schedules in support
thereof that have not been previously filed. The city may also require copies
of reports of adjustments made by the Federal Government.
   (C)   Every business entity subject to a occupational license tax governed
by the provisions of this chapter shall keep records, render under oath
statements, make returns and comply with rules as the city from time to time
may prescribe. Whenever the city deems it necessary, the city may require a
business entity, by notice served to the business entity, to make a return,
render statements under oath, or keep records, as the city deems sufficient to
determine the tax liability the business entity.
   (D)   The city may require, for the purpose of ascertaining the correctness
of any return or for the purpose of making an estimate of the taxable income of
any business entity, the attendance of a representative of the business entity
or of any other person having knowledge in the premises.
   (E)   The full amount of the unpaid tax payable by any business entity, as
appears from the face of the return, shall be paid to the city at the time
prescribed for filing the occupational license tax return, determined without
regard to any extension of time for filing the return.
(Prior Code, § 110.06) (Ord. 09-2006, passed 5-8-2006)
§ 110.07 EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   The city may grant any business entity an extension of not more than
six months, unless a longer extension has been granted by the Internal Revenue
Service or is agreed to by the city and the business entity, for filing its
return, if the business entity, on or before the date prescribed for payment of
the occupational license tax, requests the extension and pays the amount
properly estimated as its tax.
   (B)   If the time for filing a return is extended, the business entity shall
pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal to 12% per annum simple interest on
the tax shown due on the return, but not been previously paid, from the time
the tax was due until the return is actually filed and the tax paid to the
city. A fraction of a month is counted as an entire month.
(Prior Code, § 110.07) (Ord. 09-2006, passed 5-8-2006)
§ 110.08 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Where there has been an overpayment of tax under §
110.05 of this chapter, a refund or credit shall be made to the employer only
to the extent that the amount of the overpayment was not deducted and withheld
under §
110.05 of this chapter by the employer.
   (B)   Unless written application for refund or credit is received by the
city from the employer within two years from the date the overpayment was made,
no refund or credit shall be allowed.
   (C)   (1)   An employee who has compensation attributable to activities
performed outside the city, based on time spent outside the city, whose
employer has withheld and remitted to the city, the occupational license tax on
the compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city, may
file for a refund within two years of the date prescribed by law for the filing
of a return.
      (2)   The employee shall provide a schedule and computation sufficient to
verify the refund claim and the city may confirm with the employer the
percentage of time spent outside the city and the amount of compensation
attributable to activities performed outside the city prior to approval of the
refund.
(Prior Code, § 110.08) (Ord. 09-2006, passed 5-8-2006)
§ 110.09 FEDERAL AUDIT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   (1)   As soon as practicable after each return is received, the city
may examine and audit the return. If the amount of tax computed by the city is
greater than the amount returned by the business entity, the additional tax
shall be assessed and a notice of assessment mailed to the business entity by
the city within five years from the date the return was filed, except as
otherwise provided in this section.
         (a)   In the case of a failure to file a return or of a fraudulent
return, the additional tax may be assessed at any time.
         (b)   In the case of a return where a business entity understates net
profit, or omits an amount properly includable in net profits, or both, which
understatement or omission, or both, is in excess of 25% of the amount of net
profit stated in the return, the additional tax may be assessed at any time
within six years after the return was filed.
         (c)   In the case of an assessment of additional tax relating directly
to adjustments resulting from a final determination of a federal audit, the
additional tax may be assessed before the expiration of the times provided in
this division (A)(1), or six months from the date the city receives the final
determination of the federal audit form the business entity, whichever is
later.
      (2)   The times provided in this division (A) may be extended by
agreement between the business entity and the city. For the purposes of this
division (A), a return filed before the last day prescribed by law for filing
the return shall be considered as filed on the last day. Any extensions granted
for filing the return shall also be considered as extending the last day
prescribed by law for filing the return.
   (B)   Every business entity shall submit a copy of the final determination
of the federal audit within 30 days of the conclusion of the federal audit.
   (C)   The city may initiate a civil action for the collection of any
additional tax within the times prescribed in division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 110.09) (Ord. 09-2006, passed 5-8-2006)
§ 110.10 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   No suit shall be maintained in any court to restrain or delay the
collection or payment of the tax levied by this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Any tax collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may
be refunded or credited within two years of the date prescribed by law for
filing of a return or the date the money was paid to the city, whichever is the
later; except that:
         (a)   In any case where the assessment period contained in §
110.09 of this chapter has been extended by an agreement between the business
entity and the city, the limitation contained in this division (B) shall be
extended accordingly; or
         (b)   If the claim for refund or credit relates directly to
adjustments resulting from a federal audit, the business entity shall file a
claim for refund or credit within the time provided for in this division (B) or
six months from the conclusion of the federal audit, whichever is later.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (B) and division (C) below, a
return filed before the last day prescribed by law for filing the return shall
be considered as filed on the last day.
   (C)   The authority to refund or credit overpayments of taxes collected
pursuant to this chapter is vested exclusively in the city.
(Prior Code, § 110.10) (Ord. 09-2006, passed 5-8-2006)
§ 110.11 INFORMATION TO REMAIN CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   (1)   No present or former employee of the city shall intentionally
and without authorization inspect or divulge any information acquired by him or
her of the affairs of any person, or information regarding the tax schedules,
returns or reports required to be filed with the city or other proper officer,
or any information produced by a hearing or investigation, insofar as the
information may have to with the affairs of the person’s business.
      (2)   This prohibition does not extend to information required in
prosecutions for making false reports or returns for taxation, or any other
infraction of the tax laws, or in any way made a matter of public record, nor
does it preclude furnishing any taxpayer or the taxpayer’s properly authorized
agent with information respecting his or her own return. Further, this
prohibition does not preclude any employee of the city from testifying in any
court, or from introducing as evidence returns or reports filed with the city,
in an action for violation of the city tax laws or in any action challenging
the city laws.
   (B)   The city reserves the right to disclose to the Commissioner of Revenue
of the commonwealth or his or her duly authorized agent all such information
and rights to inspect any of the books and records of the city if the
Commissioner of Revenue of the commonwealth grants to the city the reciprocal
right to obtain information from the files and records of the state’s
Department of Revenue and maintains the privileged character of the information
so furnished; provided, further, that, the city may publish statistics based on
such information in such a manner as not to reveal data respecting net profits
or compensation of any person or business entity.
   (C)   In addition, the city is empowered to execute similar reciprocity
agreements as described in division (B) above with any other taxing entity,
should there be a need for exchange of information in order to effect diligent
enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 110.11) (Ord. 09-2006, passed 5-8-2006)
§ 110.12 PENALTIES AND FAILURES.
   (A)   A business entity subject to tax on net profits may be subject to a
penalty equal to 5% of the tax due for each calendar month or fraction thereof
if the business entity:
      (1)   Fails to file any return or report on or before the due date
prescribed for filing or as extended by the city; or
      (2)   Fails to pay the tax computed on the return or report on or before
the due date prescribed for payment.
   (B)   Every employer who fails to file a return or pay the tax on or before
the date prescribed under §
110.05 of this chapter may be subject to a penalty in an amount equal to 5% of
the tax due for each calendar month or fraction thereof.
   (C)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any business
entity or employer shall pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal to 12% per
annum simple interest on the tax shown due, but not previously paid, from the
time the tax was due until the tax is paid to the city. A fraction of a month
is counted as an entire month.
   (D)   Every tax imposed by this chapter, and all increases, interest and
penalties thereon, shall become, from the time the tax is due and payable, a
personal debt of the taxpayer to the city.
   (E)   (1)   The city may enforce the collection of the occupational tax due
under §
110.03 of this chapter and any fees, penalties and interest as provided in
divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) above by civil action in a court of appropriate
jurisdiction.
      (2)   To the extent authorized by law, the city shall be entitled to
recover all court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by it in
enforcing any provision of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 110.12) (Ord. 09-2006, passed 5-8-2006) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.13 DUTIES OF FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Director of Finance is required:
      (1)   To collect the license fee imposed under this chapter;
      (2)   To adopt and promulgate and to enforce rules and regulations
relating to any matter of filings pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter including provisions for the
reexamination and correction of returns and payments, but not limited thereto.
The rules and regulations as promulgated by him shall be binding upon the
licensee and employers;
      (3)   To receive the license fee imposed under this chapter; and
      (4)   To keep an accurate record showing the amount received by him or
her from each licensee and withholding employer and the date of such receipts.
   (B)   (1)   When the Director of Finance questions the accuracy of any
return made, he or she is authorized and empowered to request from any licensee
a certified audit prepared by the licensee’s accountants for the purpose of
verifying the accuracy of any return made, and said licensee shall file said
audit with the Director of Finance within 30 days after such request.
      (2)   Upon the failure of the licensee to file an audit with the Director
of Finance when requested, the Director of Finance personally, or his or her
agents or employees, is authorized and empowered to examine the books, papers
and records of any employer, or supposed employer, or of any licensee, or
supposed licensee, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or in
the event no return was made, to a certain the license fee imposed by this
chapter. The Director may enforce this right by application to the appropriate
court having jurisdiction over these matters.
      (3)   Every employer or supposed employer, and every licensee or supposed
licensee is required to furnish to the Director of Finance, or his or her duly
authorized agent or employees, the means, facilities and opportunity for such
examinations, investigations and audits as are authorized in and by this
chapter.
      (4)   The Director of Finance is further authorized to examine under oath
any person concerning any income which was or should have been reported for
license fee and to this end the Director of Finance has the right and power to
compel the production of books, papers and records, and the attendance of all
persons before him or her, whether as parties or witnesses, whom he or she
believes to have knowledge of such income.
      (5)   Refusal of any such examination of any employer or person subject
to the license fee or presumed to be such employer or person so subject,
constitutes a misdemeanor punishable by fine.
      (6)   Agents and employees charged with duty of inspection or auditing of
records of employers and licensees will carry proper identification, which
shall be subject to examination by any person whose records are sought to be
examined.
      (7)   The above powers in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(7) above shall not
be exercised unless the Director of Finance is notified by the commonwealth’s
Department of Revenue or the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, that the particular
taxpayer’s figures should be audited.
   (C)   The Director of Finance and/or any of his or her deputies may choose
to enforce the provisions of this chapter through the Elizabethtown Code
Enforcement Board after proper notice to any business entity of any violation.
   (D)   If the Finance Department pursues enforcement through the code
enforcement citation procedures against a mobile food vendor and the vendor is
located at the same property location for more than two violation occurrences,
then a citation may also be issued against the property owner.
(Prior Code, § 110.13) (Ord. 09-2006, passed 5-8-2006; Ord. 25-2019, passed 11-
4-2019)
§ 110.14 MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM LIABILITY.
   Pursuant to KRS 67.773, a minimum tax of $25 is assessed on all net profits
per year and is due annually with the application.
(Prior Code, § 110.15) (Ord. 09-2006, passed 5-8-2006)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in §
110.12 of this chapter, any person, business entity or employer who willfully
fails to make a return, willfully makes a false return or who willingly fails
to pay taxes owing or collected, with the intent to evade payment of the tax or
amount collected, or any part thereof, shall be guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person who willfully aids or assists in, or procures, counsels or
advises the preparation or presentation under, or in connection with, any
matter arising under this chapter of a return, affidavit, claim or other
document, which is fraudulent or is false as to any material matter, whether or
not the falsity of fraud is with the knowledge or consent of the person
authorized or required to present the return, affidavit, claim or document
shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
   (C)   A RETURN, for the purpose of this section, shall mean and include any
return, declaration or form prescribed by the city and required to be filed
with the city by the provisions of this chapter, or by the rules of the city or
by written request for information to the business entity by the city.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of §
110.11 of this chapter by intentionally inspecting confidential taxpayer
information without authorization, shall be fined no more than $500 or
imprisoned for not longer than six months, or both.
   (E)   Any person violating the provision of §
110.11 of this chapter by divulging confidential taxpayer information shall be
fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.
(Prior Code, § 110.12) (Ord. 09-2006, passed 5-8-2006)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
Section
Itinerant Entrepreneurs
   
111.01   Compliance required
   
111.02   Solicitor to fill out questionnaire
   
111.03   List of articles sold to be filed with Director of Finance
   
111.04   Bond to be posted
   
111.05   Refund of bond; use to finance unpaid taxes; forfeiture
   
111.06   Levy of fee; placement in General Fund
   
111.07   Exemptions
Cross-reference:
   Solicitation on crosswalks, streets and the like, see §
70.06
ITINERANT ENTREPRENEURS
§ 111.01 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation itinerant in nature
to sell, solicit or canvass, or offer for sale, or distribute any goods, wares
or merchandise or subscriptions for the sale of magazines, periodicals, books
or subscriptions thereto, photographs, coupons, donations or other articles, or
any merchandise not delivered when sold, by telephone or otherwise, within the
city without first complying with the provisions of §§
111.02 through
111.07 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.01) (Ord. passed 5-18-1959; Ord. passed 12-5-1983)
§ 111.02 SOLICITOR TO FILL OUT QUESTIONNAIRE.
   Each person, firm and corporation itinerant in nature shall first fill out a
questionnaire with the Director of Finance or his or her designee at the City
Hall. The questionnaire shall give the solicitor’s or sales representative’s
full name, home address, age, height weight, race, color of hair and eyes, sex,
identifying marks (if any), the company he or she is representing and its home
address, and the make and license number of any automobile used (if any), a
sample of the order sheets to be used, the length of time expected to be in the
city, his or her local address while here and each solicitor and sales
representative shall allow a complete set of fingerprints and photographs of
him or her to be made.
(Prior Code, § 111.02) (Ord. passed 5-18-1959; Ord. passed 12-5-1983)
§ 111.03 LIST OF ARTICLES SOLD TO BE FILED WITH DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
   In addition to the provisions of §
111.02 of this chapter, each person, firm or corporation, solicitor and sales
representative shall, after completing work in the city, report to the Director
of Finance and file with the Director a complete list of merchandise and
magazines, books, periodicals, subscriptions, photographs, coupons, donations
or other articles sold, the name and addresses of the individuals to whom sold,
the amount paid for same and to whom payment was made.
(Prior Code, § 111.03) (Ord. passed 5-18-1959; Ord. passed 12-5-1983)
§ 111.04 BOND TO BE POSTED.
   After complying with §
111.02 of this chapter, each person, firm and corporation, sales representative
and solicitor shall post bond in the sum of $75 cash and the bond shall
increase $25 per year for the next five years, beginning annually,
automatically on the anniversary date of the passage of this subchapter, the
person, firm, corporation, sales representative and/or solicitor before leaving
the city, after completing the work, shall report back to the Director of
Finance and comply with provisions of §
111.03 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.04) (Ord. passed 5-18-1959; Ord. passed 12-5-1983)
§ 111.05 REFUND OF BOND; USE TO FINANCE UNPAID TAXES; FORFEITURE.
   (A)   Upon compliance with §§
111.02 through
111.04 of this section, the Director of Finance and/or his or her designee
shall then refund the bond to the person executing it, so long as the
applicable taxes are paid by the person, firm, corporation, sales
representative and solicitor, including, but not limited to, the business
license tax and/or occupational tax. In the event any applicable tax is not
paid, then the sums may be used through the Director of Finance for the payment
of the applicable taxes.
   (B)   Should the person, firm, corporation, solicitor or sales
representative tail to report back to the Director of Finance and/or his or her
designee within ten days after the expiration of the time stated in the
questionnaire that he or she expects to be in the city, the bond shall be
forfeited and the proceeds of the same shall be placed in the General Fund of
the city after payment of necessary and applicable taxes.
   (C)   In the event of forfeit of bond, then said person, firm, corporation,
solicitor or sales representative shall be prohibited from doing like or
similar work within the city for a period of five years.
(Prior Code, § 111.05) (Ord. passed 5-18-1959; Ord. passed 12-5-1983)
§ 111.06 LEVY OF FEE; PLACEMENT IN GENERAL FUND.
   A fee of $2 to defray the costs of the questionnaire and the enforcement of
this subchapter for each person, firm, corporation, solicitor and sales
representative is hereby levied. The fee shall be placed in the General Fund of
the city upon collection before the questionnaire is filled out.
(Prior Code, § 111.06) (Ord. passed 5-18-1959; Ord. passed 12-5-1983)
§ 111.07 EXEMPTIONS.
   All persons, firms and corporations, not itinerant in nature and who
otherwise pay taxes and honor business obligations to the public, are
specifically excluded from the terms of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.07) (Ord. passed 5-18-1959; Ord. passed 12-5-1983)
CHAPTER 112: PAWNBROKERS AND SCRAP DEALERS
Section
Pawnbrokers
   
112.01   Definition
   
112.02   Electronic inventory tracking system required
   
112.03   Entity designated
   
112.04   Information required
Junk, Secondhand and Scrap Dealers
   
112.15   Definitions
   
112.16   Compliance required
   
112.17   Transaction record of purchases
   
112.18   Transacting businesses with minors
   
112.19   Examination of books
   
112.20   Regulated property sale limitations
 
   
112.99   Penalty
PAWNBROKERS
§ 112.01 DEFINITION.
   A PAWNBROKER shall be considered as any person who loans money on deposit of
personal property; deals in the purchase of personal property on condition of
selling the property back again at a stipulated price; makes a public display
at his or her place of business of the sign generally used by pawnbrokers to
denote their business; or who publicly exhibits a sign advertising money to
loan on personal property or deposit (KRS 226.010). In addition to complying
with state law including KRS 226.010 to 226.990, PAWNBROKERS shall keep a
record of all purchases including other than pawned items. Said records shall
be transmitted electronically to the city’s Police Department within 24 hours
of receipt of any goods purchased.
(Prior Code, § 112.01) (Ord. 10-2009, passed 7-20-2009)
§ 112.02 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   Each and every owner or operator of a pawn shop or pawnbroker doing business
in the city shall, within 30 days of 7-20-2009, maintain an electronic
inventory tracking system which is capable of delivery and transmission of all
statutorily-required information via computer to the entity designated by the
city’s Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 112.02) (Ord. 10-2009, passed 7-20-2009)
§ 112.03 ENTITY DESIGNATED.
   The Police Department shall enter into an agreement with Leads on Line which
operates an electronic database for law enforcement agencies for the purpose of
identifying stolen merchandise and person suspected of the thefts.
(Prior Code, § 112.03) (Ord. 10-2009, passed 7-20-2009)
§ 112.04 INFORMATION REQUIREMENT.
   The owner or operator of a pawn shop or pawnbroker will be required to
upload the information to the entity designated by the city’s Police Department
within 24 hours of receipt of the goods purchased (pawned).
(Prior Code, § 112.04) (Ord. 10-2009, passed 7-20-2009)
JUNK, SECONDHAND AND SCRAP DEALERS
§ 112.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMODITY METALS. Any metal containing primarily brass, copper, copper
alloy, aluminum, stainless steel or magnesium, or any other metal trading on
the commodity markets that trades in pounds, rather than ounces, except
aluminum single serving beverage cans shall not be considered COMMODITY METALS.
   ELIZABETHTOWN. The corporate limits of the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
   FERROUS METALS. Any metal consisting primarily of iron or steel.
   INVESTMENT PURPOSES. The purchase of regulated property by persons and the
retention of that property in the same form as purchased, for resale to persons
who are purchasing the property primarily as an investment.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
   MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERS. Any person who exclusively deals in new or used cars.
   PERSON. Any individual, owner, agent, partnership, corporation or other
business entity.
   PRECIOUS METALS. Any metal that is valued for its character, rarity, beauty,
quality or worth, including, but not limited to, gold, silver, platinum or any
other such metals, whether as separate items or in combination as a piece of
jewelry.
   PURCHASE. To obtain regulated property by paying money or giving other
valuable consideration in a voluntary transaction. However, PURCHASES, under
this subchapter, do not include transactions in which regulated property is
obtained by the loan of money or on condition of selling regulated property
back to the individual from whom it came at a stipulated price.
   REGULATED PROPERTY. The following property, which is used or secondhand:
      (1)   Commodity and precious metals;
      (2)   Gems, including, but not limited to, any gem that is valued for its
character, rarity, beauty or quality, including diamonds, rubies, emeralds,
sapphires or pearls, or any other such gems or stones, whether as a separate
item or in combination as a piece of jewelry;
      (3)   Jewelry containing metals or gems, including, but not limited to,
rings, necklaces, pendants, earrings, brooches, bracelets or chains;
      (4)   Watches, including, but not limited to, pocket watches, wrist
watches or stop watches;
      (5)   Sterling silver, including, but not limited to, flatware, candle
holders, coffee and tea sets, ornamental objects, champagne flutes, wineglasses
or serving pieces such as platters, bowls, trays, water pitchers, open bakers,
ice buckets, shell dishes or salt and pepper shakers;
      (6)   Audio equipment and accessories, including, but not limited to,
tape players, tape decks or players, compact/digital disc players and compact
discs, sound metering devices, tuners, amplifiers, speakers, transceivers,
equalizers, receivers, phonographs, turntables, stereos, radios, clock radios,
satellite radios, car stereos, car speakers, radar detectors, broadcasting
equipment or citizen band radios/transceivers;
      (7)   Video and digital equipment and accessories, including, but not
limited to, televisions, videotape or digital videodisc recorders, videotape or
digital videodisc players, video cameras, video monitors, video games, digital
video discs or video game consoles;
      (8)   Photographic and optical equipment and any accompanying bags,
including, but not limited to, cameras, camera lenses, camera filters, camera
motor drives, light meters, flash equipment, movie projectors, slide
projectors, photography processing equipment, photography enlarging equipment,
binoculars, telescopes, opera glasses, microscopes, surveying equipment, rifle
scopes, spotting scopes or electronic sighting equipment;
      (9)   Electrical office equipment, including, but not limited to, telefax
machines, laser printers, copiers, duplicators, typewriters, calculators, cash
registers, transcribers, dictaphones, computers, modems, monitors or any
computer equipment or accessories having uniquely identifiable parts;
      (10)   Power yard and garden tools, including but not limited to, garden
tractors, lawnmowers, rototillers, lawn sweepers, weed or brush cutters,
edgers, trimmers, blowers, chippers, shredders or ladders;
      (11)   Power equipment and tools, including, but not limited to, air
hammers, air tools, nail guns, power staplers, power saws, power sanders,
chainsaws, power planers, power drills, routers, lathes, joiners, shop vacuums,
paint sprayers and accessory equipment, generators, air compressors, pressure
washers or logging equipment;
      (12)   Automotive and hand tools, including, but not limited to, wrench
sets, sockets sets, screw driver sets, pliers, vise grips, tool boxes, auto
body hammers, jacks or timing lights;
      (13)   Telephones or telephone equipment, including, but not limited to,
office telephones, portable home telephones, mobile telephones, cellular
telephones or answering machines;
      (14)   Sporting equipment, including, but not limited to, bicycles, golf
clubs and bags, pool cues or cases, skis, ski boots, snowboards, fishing rods
or reels or skates;
      (15)   Outboard motors and boating accessories, including, but not
limited to, outdrives, props, inboard engines, boat covers, tops or unlicensed
boat trailers;
      (16)   Microwave ovens;
      (17)   Motor vehicles, other than as set forth in division (18)(a) below;
and
      (18)   REGULATED PROPERTY does not include any of the following property:
         (a)   Motor vehicles dealt in by motor vehicle dealers;
         (b)   Boats;
         (c)   Books, magazines, Betamax and VHS video tapes and comic books;
         (d)   Glassware, objects d’art or sports cards and sports memorabilia;
         (e)   Furniture;
         (f)   Refrigerators, stoves, washers, dryers and other similar major
household appliances;
         (g)   Property purchased at an auction;
         (h)   Property purchased from another person, who is in a business, as
described in §
112.16 of this chapter;
         (i)   Postage stamps, stamp collections and philatelic items;
         (j)   Clothing;
         (k)   Ferrous metals, including items listed in divisions (6) through
(16) above, when purchased by a scrap processor and which items are in such
condition that their highest and primary value is either in sale or transfer as
scrap metal;
         (l)   Commodity or ferrous metals purchased by a scrap processor from
a manufacturing, industrial or other commercial vendor that generates such
metals in the ordinary course of business; and
         (m)   A total of four or less compact discs, digital video discs and/
or video games purchased in any combination from a single seller in a 24-hour
period.
   SCRAP PROCESSORS. Any person who utilizes torches, sheers, balers, presses
or shredders to manufacture scrap metal for remelting purposes only.
(Ord. 03-2011, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 112.16 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Every person engaged in, conducting or carrying on any business in the city
wherein he or she regularly purchases, in the course of his or her business,
regulated property from another person shall comply with all the provisions of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 03-2011, passed 2-22-2011) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.17 TRANSACTION RECORD OF PURCHASES.
   (A)   Every person carrying on any business as set forth in §
112.16 of this chapter shall keep a transaction record for each purchase, which
shall contain the name of the person on behalf of the business, as set forth in
§
112.16 of this chapter, who actually made the purchase, the name of the person
or persons and his or her signature from whom any regulated property is
purchased, an electronically retained copy of a government-issued photo
identification, including the information obtained from scanning the bar code
on the back of a government-issued photo identification of the person or
persons from whom any regulated property is purchased, the date when the
property was received and bought, the residence or place of business of such
person or persons from whom the regulated property is purchased, the license
plate number of the motor vehicle in which the regulated property was
transported to the business and a description which accurately depicts the
regulated property purchased. The transaction record shall be in plain, legible
English text. Except for scrap metal processors purchasing commodity and
precious metals, if any item of regulated property purchased has engraved
thereon any numbers, words or initials, other than the name of the manufacturer
or maker of the item, or contains any setting of any kind, the description
recorded on the transaction record shall show the numbers, initials or other
unique identifying marks. In the case of a motor vehicle, the vehicle
identification number shall be recorded on the transaction record including
license plate number and make, model and description of the motor vehicle.
   (B)   All transactions which qualify under this subchapter shall be
registered with Leads on Line within 24 hours of the receipt of the property.
If so registered, a hard copy retention shall not be required.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of any such person to allow any police officer
designated by the city’s Chief of Police during regular business hours to
examine and inspect transaction records and, if sufficient information cannot
be gained from an inspection of transaction records, it shall be the duty of
any person to permit and allow the officer to examine any and all regulated
property mentioned herein belonging to or purchased by such person. A
transaction record and digital photograph, in accordance with §
112.20 of this chapter, if applicable, for a purchase shall be maintained
together on the premises for at least one year after the date of such purchase.
   (D)   Every person carrying on business as set forth in §
112.16 of this chapter shall give a plain written or printed receipt of the
regulated property purchased.
   (E)   All described records shall be retained for a minimum of three years.
(Ord. 03-2011, passed 2-22-2011; Ord. 13-2011, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.18 TRANSACTING BUSINESS WITH MINORS.
   No person carrying on any business as set forth in this subchapter shall at
any time or under any circumstances purchase from a minor any regulated
property as defined in §
112.15 of this chapter, unless having been presented a certificate of trade as
signed by a parent or legal guardian; provided, such parent or legal guardian
has been physically present at a prior transaction.
(Ord. 03-2011, passed 2-22-2011) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.19 EXAMINATION OF BOOKS.
   Any sworn law enforcement officer may examine during regular business hours
the books of any person doing business as set forth in this subchapter, or his
or her clerk, if he or she deems it necessary when in search of stolen
property. Any person who has in his or her possession a receipt from selling
regulated property to a person carrying on a business as described in this
subchapter shall, when accompanied by a sworn law enforcement officer, be
permitted to examine regulated property purporting to be sold by that receipt.
No property shall be removed from the possession of any person doing business
as set forth in §
112.16 of this chapter, without due process of law as required by the existing
laws of the commonwealth or the laws and ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 03-2011, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 112.20 REGULATED PROPERTY SALE LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   No regulated property purchased by a person carrying on a business as
described in §
112.16 of this chapter shall be sold, altered or destroyed for a period of five
full days after the date of purchase or five days after registration of the
property with Leads On Line, whichever occurs later. The regulated property
must be kept uncommingled, along with a copy of the transaction record, as set
forth in §
112.17 of this chapter, on the premises of the business location during the
holding period for purposes of inspection, if necessary, as provided by this
subchapter.
   (B)   This section shall not apply if a digital recording or photograph,
which accurately depicts the regulated property items of the transaction, is
taken and retained together with the transaction record, as provided by §
112.17 of this chapter, for at least one year from the date of purchase.
(Ord. 03-2011, passed 2-22-2011; Ord. 13-2011, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (B)   The failure on the part of any owner or operator of a pawn shop or
pawnbroker to comply with the provisions of §§
112.01 through
112.04 of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the
offender shall be punished by a fine of not more than $25 for each separate
offense. Each day of non-compliance with this section shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 112.05)
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Any person who shall neglect or refuse to comply with or
violates the provisions of §
112.17 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $500,
for each offense or incarcerated up to 90 days or both. Each day such person,
firm or corporation shall neglect or refuse to comply with or violate any of
the provisions of §
112.17 of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
         (b)   Any person convicted of a second or subsequent offense under §
112.17 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $500, or more than $1,000,
or incarcerated up to 180 days or both.
      (2)   Any person who shall violate §
112.18 of this chapter shall be fined $100, imprisoned not more than 50 days or
both. For a second offense, any person shall be fined $500, up to $1,000, or
incarcerated up to 180 days or subsequent.
      (3)   Any person who shall violate §
112.19 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $500.
      (4)   Any person who shall violate §
112.20 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $500.
      (5)   Any person so convicted shall be subject to any and all other
administrative penalties, including and not limited to, revocation of the
business license.
(Ord. 10-2009, passed 7-20-2009; Ord. 03-2011, passed 2-22-2011)
CHAPTER 113: INSURANCE COMPANIES
Section
   
113.01   Imposition of license fee
   
113.02   Fee for companies issuing policies other than life insurance
   
113.03   Collection fee
   
113.04   Due date; interest
   
113.05   Written breakdown of collections
   
113.06   Disposition of funds
§ 113.01 IMPOSITION OF LICENSE FEE.
   There is hereby imposed on each insurance company a license fee for the
privilege of engaging in the business of insurance within the corporate limits
of the city, on a calendar-year basis.
(Prior Code, § 113.01) (Ord. passed 4-15-1985)
§ 113.02 FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING POLICIES OTHER THAN LIFE INSURANCE.
   The license fee imposed upon each insurance company which issues any
insurance policy which is not a life and health insurance policy shall be 8% of
the premiums actually collected within each calendar quarter by reason of the
issuance of such policies on risks located within the corporate limits of the
city on those classes of business which such company is authorized to transact,
less all premiums returned to policyholders; however, any license fee or tax
imposed upon premium receipts shall not include premiums received for insuring
employers against liability for personal injuries to their employees, or death
caused thereby, under the provisions of the Worker’s Compensation Act, being
KRS Ch. 342, and shall not include premiums received on policies of group
health insurance provided for state employees under KRS 18A.225(2) and 18A.228
or premiums received by any state employee benefit fund created pursuant to KRS
Ch. 18A for the purpose of providing health benefits to state employees.
(Prior Code, § 113.02) (Ord. passed 4-15-1985)
§ 113.03 COLLECTION FEE.
   The Department of Insurance shall, by regulation, provide for a reasonable
collection fee to be retained by the insurance companies or its agent as
compensation for collection of the license fee. This collection fee shall be in
addition to the license fee mentioned above and shall not be more than 15% of
the license fee collected and remitted to the city, or 2% of the premiums
subject to the tax, whichever is less.
(Prior Code, § 113.03) (Ord. passed 4-15-1985)
§ 113.04 DUE DATE; INTEREST.
   All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be due no later than 30 days
after the end of each calendar quarter. License fees which are not paid on or
before the due date shall bear interest at the tax interest rate as defined in
KRS 131.010(6).
(Prior Code, § 113.04) (Ord. passed 4-15-1985)
§ 113.05 WRITTEN BREAKDOWN OF COLLECTIONS.
   Every insurance company subject to the license fees imposed by this chapter
shall annually, by March 31, furnish the city a written breakdown of all
collections in the preceding calendar year for the following categories of
insurance:
   (A)   Casualty;
   (B)   Automobile;
   (C)   Inland marine; and
   (D)   Fire and allied perils.
(Prior Code, § 113.05) (Ord. passed 4-15-1985)
§ 113.06 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   The Finance Director shall deposit all fees or taxes in a sinking fund to be
designated “Elizabethtown Fire Protection Sinking Fund”. All fees or taxes and
any interest earned thereon shall be used by the city for fire protection
equipment, maintenance, Fire Department salaries or incidental expenses for
maintaining and equipping the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 113.06) (Ord. passed 4-15-1985)
CHAPTER 114: COMMERCIAL BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
Motor Vehicle Noise
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Causing loud noise prohibited
   
114.03   Leaving vehicles unoccupied; towing
   
114.04   Operator of business establishment to post notice of prohibitions
   
114.05   Cruising through lot prohibited
   
114.06   Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages
MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. Any place held out to the general public
as offering goods and/or services for sale to the public and/or for use by the
public within the limits of the city.
   MOTOR VEHICLE(S). Any and all agencies for the transportation of person(s)
or property over or upon a public or private streets within the city which are
propelled otherwise than by muscular power.
(Prior Code, § 114.01) (Ord. passed 10-8-1979)
§ 114.02 CAUSING LOUD NOISE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, while on or adjacent to the premises of
a commercial business establishment, to race the motor of any motor vehicle, or
to make or cause to be made any loud noise, including the blowing of horns,
unless the same is directly related to a business purpose or is to prevent
collision of the motor vehicle with other persons or objects.
(Prior Code, § 114.02) (Ord. passed 10-8-1979) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.03 LEAVING VEHICLE UNOCCUPIED; TOWING.
   No person shall depart from the commercial business establishment premises
after parking any motor vehicle thereon without the expressed permission of the
commercial business establishment. Any such motor vehicle that remains
unoccupied without a specific authorization so indicated in a conspicuous place
on the vehicle for more than five hours may be towed in by the Police
Department or any other law enforcement agency of the state, and the owner
thereof shall pay any towing and/or other charges, fines or fees therefor.
(Prior Code, § 114.03) (Ord. passed 10-8-1979) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.04 OPERATOR OF BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT TO POST NOTICE OF PROHIBITIONS.
   Prior to enforcement of this subchapter as to a specific commercial business
establishment, it shall be the duty of that commercial business establishment
operator who furnishes parking for patrons to post on the premises at least
every 200 feet in a conspicuous location one or more signs bearing the
following legend: “Loud noises, possession of alcoholic beverages and loitering
are prohibited. All unoccupied vehicles without consent will be towed away at
owner’s expense.”
(Prior Code, § 114.04) (Ord. passed 10-8-1979) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.05 CRUISING THROUGH LOT PROHIBITED.
   No person shall drive any vehicle onto the premises of a restaurant and then
drive out of the premises without parking the vehicle, unless there is no
unoccupied parking space available on the premises, or cruise without parking.
(Prior Code, § 114.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.06 CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   With the exception of a permissible event or private party, or a restaurant
or business premises that possesses a valid ABC license under Ord. 17-2001 or
Ord. 12-2002 or Ord. 22-2011, it shall be unlawful for any person on the
premises of a commercial business establishment or public property to drink any
intoxicating beverages, either in or out of a motor vehicle, or to possess any
open bottle or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverages.
(Prior Code, § 114.06) (Ord. passed 10-8-1979; Ord. 14-2002, passed 8-5-2002;
Ord. 04-2012, passed 2-21-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Entertainment destination center alcoholic beverage regulations, see §
120.40
CHAPTER 115: DETECTIVE AND SECURITY AGENCIES
Section
   
115.01   Permit required; bond
   
115.02   Disqualification from permit
   
115.03   Bond required
   
115.04   Liability insurance required
   
115.05   Permit to cover agency and employees
   
115.06   Permit and requirements in addition to other permits
   
115.07   Revocation of permits
§ 115.01 PERMIT REQUIRED; BOND.
   No person shall carry on the business of doing private detective or security
work in the city without first having secured a permit from the Chief of Police
and executing a bond provided for herein.
(Prior Code, § 115.01) (Ord. passed 2-23-1976) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.02 DISQUALIFICATION FROM PERMIT.
   Before any permit shall be issued by the Chief of Police, the applicant
shall provide satisfactory proof the person or persons applying for the permit
or the chief officers or members of a firm if the agency is to be conducted by
a corporation or partnership and all employees have sufficient training,
education or experience to lawfully engage in private detective or security
work. Disqualification from a permit solely because of a prior conviction of a
crime shall be pursuant to KRS 335B.010 through 335B070.
§ 115.03 BOND REQUIRED.
   Before the permit provided for herein is issued to any person, a bond with
surety to be approved by the city shall be executed in the sum of $5,000,
payable to the city for the use and benefit of any person or persons who have
been injured or damaged by an illegal act of the detective or security agency,
or by its owners, operators, employees or agents in carrying on its or their
business.
(Prior Code, § 115.03) (Ord. passed 2-23-1976)
§ 115.04 LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   Before the permit provided for herein is issued to any firm, corporation or
individual, he or it must show evidence that it has obtained personal
individual liability insurance which covers it or him or her and all employees
or agents from acts which may occur as a result of their detective or security
agency business in the amount of at least $100,000 for individual and at least
$300,000 per occurrence.
(Prior Code, § 115.04) (Ord. passed 2-23-1976)
§ 115.05 PERMIT TO COVER AGENCY AND EMPLOYEES.
   When a permit is issued to a detective or security agency hereinabove
described, and a proper bond has been executed, employees of the agency shall
not be required to secure a permit or execute a bond.
(Prior Code, § 115.05) (Ord. passed 2-23-1976)
§ 115.06 PERMIT AND REQUIREMENTS IN ADDITION TO OTHER PERMITS.
   The requirements of this chapter are in addition to and exclusive of any and
all other required occupational license taxes or other permits required by the
city.
(Prior Code, § 115.06) (Ord. passed 2-23-1976)
§ 115.07 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   Permits provided for herein may be revoked at any time by the City Council
if any person shall be injured or damaged on account of any illegal act of any
detective or security agency or its owners, agents or employees, or any other
act which constitutes conduct detrimental to the community and citizens of the
city and for just cause. The permits shall not be revoked until written charges
have been made or proffered against the holder of the permit and until the
charges have been examined, heard and investigated by the City Council after
reasonable notice. After the City Council has received notice of any charges
being placed against a detective or security agency, the agency or owners shall
within ten days after the receipt of the complaint be notified by the City
Clerk. The owner or agency shall, 14 days from the receipt of the notice of the
complaint, answer the complaint in writing, and/or to ask that a hearing be set
to determine the validity of the charges. The date of the hearing shall not be
less than 14, nor more than 30, days from the date of the request for hearing
is received.
(Prior Code, § 115.07) (Ord. passed 2-23-1976)
CHAPTER 116: VEHICLES FOR SALE OR HIRE
Section
Vehicles for Hire
   
116.01   Permit required
Temporary Sales and Displays
   
116.15   License required
   
116.16   Compliance with city and state requirements
   
116.17   Business regulations and requirements
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
§ 116.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any passenger vehicle for
hire and compensation on city streets without first obtaining a license so to
do.
(Prior Code, § 118.01) (Ord. passed 2-1-1926)
TEMPORARY SALES AND DISPLAYS
§ 116.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   The motor vehicle dealer shall hold a proper business license to sell motor
vehicles within the corporate city limits.
(Ord. 32-2018, passed 12-3-2018)
§ 116.16 COMPLIANCE WITH CITY AND STATE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The dealer shall comply with all city planning and zoning requirements
and ensure that the site for the temporary motor vehicle sales shall be in
compliance with all applicable city requirements and standards.
   (B)   The dealer shall comply with the commonwealth’s Building Code and
Electrical Code.
(Ord. 32-2018, passed 12-3-2018)
§ 116.17 BUSINESS REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   The dealer shall comply with all proper business regulations and
requirements. The dealer shall ensure that the site is in compliance with all
property regulations and requirements.
(Ord. 32-2018, passed 12-3-2018)
CHAPTER 117: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
   
117.01   Scope and intent
   
117.02   Notice of commencement of regulations
   
117.03   Rate filings by operator
   
117.04   Support for rate filings; burden of proof
   
117.05   Approval of city necessary
   
117.06   Timing of rate filing
   
117.07   Information to be required
   
117.08   Schedule of action by city; tolling periods
   
117.09   Rate subject to refunds
   
117.10   Certification of compliance
   
117.11   Public hearings
   
117.12   Inflation and external cost adjustments
   
117.13   Proprietary information
   
117.14   Decision
 
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 SCOPE AND INTENT.
   (A)   This chapter governs the regulation of cable television rates for
basic service and equipment for any cable operator providing service in the
city.
   (B)   This chapter is intended to be consistent with FCC regulations and the
city intends to administer these regulations consistent with those regulations,
all as required by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (hereinafter, the “Act”),
47 U.S.C. § 543(b). Likewise, it is the city’s intention that the cable
operator be bound by the FCC regulations to the extent allowed by law.
   (C)   For the purposes of this chapter, “basic service” or “basic cable
service” and “cable operator” have the same meaning as defined by the Act and
FCC regulations. “Operator” shall have the same meaning as “cable operator”.
(Prior Code, § 119.01) (Ord. 18, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 117.02 NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT OF REGULATIONS.
   The city shall notify all cable operators subject to the Act who provide
service in the city that the city has commenced to regulate the basic rates of
the operator. Notice shall be given by certified mail, return receipt
requested.
(Prior Code, § 119.02) (Ord. 18, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 117.03 RATE FILINGS BY OPERATOR.
   Within 30 days of receiving notice from the city that it has commenced
regulation, the operator shall file with the city a schedule of its current
rates for basic service and equipment and justification therefor. The operator
may, if it so chooses, file a proposal with appropriate justification for an
increase in its current rates. An INCREASE shall mean any change lessening the
number of channels or other service available as well as raising the rate for
basic service or equipment. The operator may, at any time thereafter, submit a
proposal to increase its rate, consistent with FCC regulations.
(Prior Code, § 119.03) (Ord. 18, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 117.04 SUPPORT FOR RATE FILINGS; BURDEN OF PROOF.
   (A)   The rate filing submitted by the operator, either for its current
rates or for a change in its current rates must show that the rates the
operator charges or proposes to charge for basic service and equipment are
reasonable and in compliance with all applicable FCC rules and regulations.
   (B)   The burden of proof is on the operator or show that the rates are
reasonable and in compliance with all applicable FCC rules and regulations.
      (1)   If the operator asserts that its current rates or its proposed
rates are within the” benchmark” or “cap”, as defined by the FCC, it must fully
complete applicable FCC forms and otherwise provide material to support its
position.
      (2)   If the operator proposes to increase its rates above that level
permitted by the FCC “benchmark” or “cap”, it may seek to make a “cost-of-
service” showing in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the FCC.
In seeking to make a “cost-of-service” showing, the operator must fully
complete applicable FCC forms and otherwise provide material to supplement its
position.
      (3)   If the operator proposes to add or delete channels or service, or
to remove certain channels from the basic services to the cable programming
service tier as defined by the FCC or to a non-regulated status, it must
explain in writing the impact of the addition, deletion or removal on its basic
service rates and demonstrate why the addition, deletion or removal complies
with FCC rules and regulations.
      (4)   The operator must show why all rates for all customer
classifications are reasonable.
(Prior Code, § 119.04) (Ord. 18, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 117.05 APPROVAL OF CITY NECESSARY.
   Once an operator has been notified that the city has commenced regulation of
its rates, the operator may not therefore increase its rates for basic service
or equipment without the prior approval of the city. This requirement applies
in all cases, including increases it has announced, but not yet implemented
prior to the date it received notice of rate regulation from the city.
(Prior Code, § 119.05) (Ord. 18, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 117.06 TIMING OF RATE FILING.
   Rate filings proposing and supporting rate increases must be filed for
review at least 30 days in advance of the proposed effective date of the
increase.
(Prior Code, § 119.06) (Ord. 18, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 117.07 INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED.
   In addition to any information it provides in support of its current rates
or request for increase in rates, the operator shall provide all other
information requested by the city, subject to a request for confidentially
pursuant to §
117.13 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 119.07) (Ord. 18, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 117.08 SCHEDULE OF ACTION BY CITY; TOLLING PERIODS.
   (A)   After the operator has submitted a rate filing to justify its current
rates, or to seek an increase, the current rates shall remain in effect subject
to further action by the city.
   (B)   If the city takes no action within 30 days of the submission, to
approve, disapprove or toll the period of reviewing the rates, the current
rates or the proposed rates, as the case may be, shall be deemed approved;
provided, however, that, the city may toll the 30-day period by issuing a brief
written municipal order explaining that it needs additional time to request or
review additional information or consider comments from interested parties.
      (1)   For filings not involved cost-of-service showings, the city may
toll the rates for an additional 90 days after the expiration of the initial 30
days.
      (2)   For filings seeking a rate increase based upon a cost-of-service
showing, the city may toll the rates for an additional 150 days after the
expiration of the initial 30 days. If City Council so desires, within 30 days
of receipt of a cost-of-service showing, it may ask the FCC pursuant to 47
C.F.R. § 76.7 to examine the cable operator’s showing. The city shall issue an
order stating that it is seeking Commission assistance and serve a copy of the
order on the cable operator before the 30-day deadline.
      (3)   If the rates are tolled with respect to current rates, the rates
may remain in effect subject to refund as specified in §
117.09 of this chapter. If the rates are tolled with the regard to a proposed
increase, the increase in rates shall not go into effect unless the city orders
that they shall go into effect subject to refund.
(Prior Code, § 119.08) (Ord. 18, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 117.09 RATES SUBJECT TO REFUNDS.
   (A)   If the city chooses to toll the period to review current rates, the
current rates will remain in effect subject to refund. In like manner, if the
city chooses to toll the period to review a proposed rate increase, it may
permit the proposed rate increase to go into effect subject to refund if
ordered by the City Council.
   (B)   If the city has taken no action at the end of the additional 90 or 150
days, the proposed rate increase shall go into effect subject to refund. In all
cases, the city shall issue a brief written order in accordance with 47 C.F.R.
§ 76.933, that the operator keep an accurate account of all amounts received by
reason of the rate of issue and on whose behalf such amounts are paid. Refunds
shall be paid to the full extent allowed by law.
(Prior Code, § 119.09) (Ord. 18, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 117.10 CERTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE.
   Within 90 days of any order of the city mandating a reduction in rates,
ordering a refund of rates, or prescribing rates at a level less than the rate
increase sought by the operator, the operator shall file with the city a
certification, signed by an authorized representative that it has fully
complied with the city’s order and describing in detail the steps taken to
implement the order and showing how refunds, including interest, were
calculated and distributed.
(Prior Code, § 119.10) (Ord. 18, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 117.11 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   Prior to taking any action to approve or disapprove rates, or prior to the
expiration of any period under this chapter that would result in rates going
into effect subject to refund, the city shall hold a public hearing at which
interested parties may orally express their views or submit written comments.
The public hearings shall be held in such a manner as to convenience the city
and its citizens.
(Prior Code, § 119.11) (Ord. 18, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 117.12 INFLATION AND EXTERNAL COST ADJUSTMENTS.
   If the operator requests an increase in whole or in part based upon
inflation adjustments, programming cost increases, or other external factors
permitted by FCC regulations the operator shall provide a detailed explanation
and documentation in support of the request, including calculations as to how
the specific request was derived and a copy of the contract for each
programming service whose costs has increased. In addition, the operator shall
submit, through its Chief Financial Officer or an independent certified
accountant, a sworn statement that it has examined all external costs and
offset any claimed increase by any decrease that has occurred and has otherwise
complied with the requirements of 47 C.F.R. § 76.922(d)(2).
(Prior Code, § 119.12) (Ord. 18, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 117.13 PROPRIETARY INFORMATION.
   (A)   The operator may request that portions of the filings and information
it supplies to the city in support of its current rates or a proposed rate
increase be kept confidential. Such request may be made solely as it relates to
proprietary information.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, PROPRIETARY INFORMATION is
information which if openly disclosed would permit an unfair commercial
advantage to competitors of the cable operator.
      (2)   If possible, the portions of the filing that are proprietary shall
be segregated from the non-proprietary information. The request that the
information be kept confidential must state the reason that the information
would permit an unfair commercial advantage to competitors of the cable
operator.
   (B)   The Mayor, or his or her designee, shall grant the request that the
information be kept confidential if he or she determines that the preponderance
of evidence shows disclosure would permit an unfair commercial advantage to
competitors of the cable operator. If the operator requests confidentiality and
the request is denied, the operator may withdraw its request for a rate
increase and the information it claims to be proprietary will be returned to
it.
   (C)   (1)   If the city requires any additional proprietary information
other than that provided by the operator in support of the rate filing, the
city shall state a justification for such additional information and where
related to an FCC Form 393 (and/or FCC Forms 1200/1205) filing.
      (2)   The city shall indicate the question or section of the form to
which the request specifically relates.
   (D)   If the cable operator makes no request for confidentiality, the
material will be considered public records available for inspection by any
person pursuant to the commonwealth’s Open Records Law, being KRS 61.870 to
61.884.
(Prior Code, § 119.13) (Ord. 18, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 117.14 DECISION.
   (A)   After it completes its review of the rate firing submitted by the
operator, the city shall issue an order approving or disapproving the current
rates sought to be justified or the increased rates sought. If the city had
previously decided pursuant to §
117.08 or this chapter to allow rates to remain in effect or go into effect
subject to refund and, if the city disapproves the rates in question, it shall
issue an appropriate order directing that refunds be made. The city may order
such refunds to the full extent permitted by the FCC regulations.
   (B)   The city may order a reduction in rates where necessary to bring rates
into compliance with FCC regulations. If the city determines that the current
rate or a proposed rate is unreasonable, it may prescribe a reasonable rate.
   (C)   Before disapproving a rate or prescribing a rate or ordering a refund,
the city shall ensure that the operator has had notice and opportunity to
comment on the rate in question or refund. The city shall provide ten days’
written notice and give the operator the opportunity to submit written or oral
comments in addition to its rate filing.
   (D)   If the rates are disapproved in whole or in part, or the city
prescribes rates, or orders refunds, the order issued by the city shall specify
the reasons for the decision. The City Clerk shall provide written notice to
the operator of the city’s decision by providing a copy of the resolution or
order.
   (E)   The city’s decision approving or disapproving the rate in whole or in
part, or prescribing rates, may be appealed to the FCC or as otherwise allowed
by law by the operator or by any citizen who submitted oral or written comment
to the city prior to the order rendering the decision.
(Prior Code, § 119.14) (Ord. 18, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The operator is required to comply with the terms and provisions of
this chapter. If the operator violates any order of the city with respect to
rates, it shall be subject to a fine of $500 a day for each day it fails to
comply.
   (B)   Violation of this chapter or any order with respect to rates may be
considered a violation of this franchise agreement between the operator and the
city.
(Prior Code, § 119.99) (Ord. 18, passed 5-9-1994)
CHAPTER 118: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
118.01   Findings, declaration of public policy and purpose
   
118.02   Definitions
   
118.03   Administration
   
118.04   Effect and limitation
Restrictions and Operating Regulations
   
118.15   Signage
   
118.16   Material not to be subject to public view
   
118.17   Employee age requirements
   
118.18   Restricted hours
   
118.19   Construction requirements
   
118.20   Location restrictions
   
118.21   Sale of alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
118.22   Unlawful activities
Licensing Provisions
   
118.35   License application; contents
   
118.36   Information to be current; Director to be notified of changes
   
118.37   Issuance of license
   
118.38   Inspections
   
118.39   Prohibited activities
   
118.40   License year; fees
   
118.41   Employee license required
   
118.42   License denial, suspension, revocation; hearing and appeal
   
118.43   Scienter necessary to prove liability
   
118.44   Failure of official to meet time frame; applicant or licensee rights
 
   
118.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 118.01 FINDINGS, DECLARATION OR PUBLIC POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   (1)   The City Council relies on such evidence of the adverse
secondary efforts of adult entertainment uses that is within the common
knowledge of municipalities and is widely reported in judicial opinions, media
reports, land use studies and crime impact reports made available to the
Council, several of which are set forth herein. Additionally, the Council
relies on repeated judicial findings validating municipalities’ reasonable
reliance on this body of secondary effects evidence to support time, place, and
manner regulations of sexually-oriented businesses. The Council relies upon and
incorporates the findings of secondary effects discussed in the following non-
exhaustive list of cases: Blue Movies, Inc., et al v. Louisville/Jefferson
County Metro Government, 2007-SC-000812- DG (KY 2010), Pap’s A. M. v. City of
Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S.
425 (2002); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986);
Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes b. Glen Theatre,
Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990);
California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107
F.3d (6th Cir. 1997); Currence v. City of Cincinnati, 2002 U.S. app. LEXIS
1258; Broadway Books v. Roberts, 642 F. Supp. 486 (E.D. Tenn. 1986); Bright
Lights, Inc. v. City of Newport, 830 F. Supp. 379 (E.D. Ky. 1993); Ben’s Bar,
Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); Richard Bookmart v.
Nichols, 137 F3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Center for Fair Public Policy v. Maricopa
County, 336 F.3d 1153 (9th Cir. 2003); Déjá vu vs. Metro Government, 1999 U.S.
App. LEXIS 535 (6th Cir. 1999); Bamon Corp. v. City of Dayton, 923 F.2d 470
(6th Cir. 1991); Triplett Grille, Inc. v. City of Akron, 40 F.3d 129 (6th Cir.
1994); O’Connor v. City and County of Denver, 894 F.2d 1210 (10th Cir. 1990;
Déjá vu of Nashville, Inc., et al v. Metropolitan Government of Nashville and
Davidson County, 274 F.3d 377 (6th Cir. 2001); Z. J. Gifts D-2, LLC v. City of
Aurora, 136 F.3d 683 (10th Cir. 1998); ILQ Investments, Inc. v. City of
Rochester, 25 F.3d 1413 (8th Cir. 1994); World Wide Video of Spokane, Inc. v.
City of Spokane, 227 F. Supp. 2d 1143 (E.D. Wash 2002); Threesome Entertainment
v. Strittmather, 4F. Supp. 2d 710 (N.D. Ohio 1998); Bigg Wolf Discount Video
Sales, Inc. v. Montgomery County, 256 F. Suppl 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); Kentucky
Restaurant Concepts, Inc. v. City of Louisville and Jefferson County, 209 F.
Supp. 2d 672 (W.D. Ky. 2002); Restaurant Ventures v. Lexington-Fayette Urban
County Gov’t, 60 S.W.3d 572 (Ct. App. Ky. 2001); Mr. B’s Bar & Lounge, Inc. v.
Louisville, 630 S.W.2d 564 (Ct. App. Ky. 1981).
      (2)   The Council further relies on reports concerning secondary effects
occurring in and around sexually-oriented businesses, including, but not
limited to, Phoenix, Arizona – 1979; Houston, Texas – 1997; Indianapolis,
Indiana – 1984; Amarillo, Texas – 1977; Garden Grove, California – 1991; Los
Angeles, California – 1977; Whittier, California – 1978; Austin, Texas – 1986;
Seattle, Washington – 1989; Tucson, Arizona – 1990; Testimony, Warner-Robins,
Georgia – 2000; Newport News, Virginia – 1996; St. Cloud, Minnesota – 1994; New
York Times Square study – 1994; Minnesota, State of – 1989; Phoeniz, Arizona –
1995-1998; and also on findings of physical abuse from the paper entitled
“Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence,” by
Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution
Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Based on cases and reports such as these,
the Council finds:
      (3)   Sexually-oriented adult entertainment businesses, as a category of
commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary
effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes,
prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency,
obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on property
values, urban blight, pornographic litter, and sexual assault and exploitation.
      (4)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral and anal sex, sometimes
occur at unregulated adult entertainment businesses, especially those which
provide private or semi-private booths, rooms or cubicles for view films,
videos or live sexually explicit shows, which acts constitute a public nuisance
and pose a risk to public health through the spread of sexually-transmitted
diseases.
      (5)   Adult entertainment businesses should be separated from sensitive
land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and
should be separated from other certain uses, such as other sexually-oriented
businesses and establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages to minimize
the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent a concentration
of sexually-oriented businesses and such uses.
      (6)   Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitute a harm
which the Council has a substantial government interest in abating and/or
preventing in the future.
      (7)   Adult entertainment activity tends to attract an undesirable
clientele which discourages neighboring residents form undertaking civic
improvements, causes residents and businesses to move elsewhere and frustrates
attempts to attract new residences and businesses to come into an area, all of
which factors contribute to a diminution of property values and to a general
deterioration of neighborhoods.
      (8)   The small closet-like rooms or “booths” at adult amusement arcades
in other communities have encouraged person to loiter for the purposes of
engaging in unlawful, often anonymous, sexual conduct and have encouraged lewd
conduct in public places, thereby creating public nuisances and generally
unsanitary and unhealthful conditions that create dangers to the public health,
welfare and safety.
      (9)   The concentration of sexually-explicit movies and books and sexual
paraphernalia in adult entertainment establishments which also house sexually
explicit movies, as well as hotel rooms rented by the hour to “couples”
afforded free sexually-explicit movies in the hotel room, have provided
prostitutes and appealing and visible meeting place to ply their trade and have
created public nuisances in otherwise respectable neighborhoods.
      (10)   Children, the family environment and residential neighborhoods
suffer injury from the deleterious effects and harmful consequences resulting
from the distribution of, and exposure to, certain sexually explicit items and
devices. This is particularly so when such items and devices are permitted to
leave a business’s premises and litter the immediate family environment,
neighborhood and certain areas where children are likely to be.
      (11)   The noise generated by patrons coming and going from adult
entertainment establishments causes a substantial disruption to nearby
residents and modest curtailment of the hours during which entertainment is
offered to patrons of such establishments would afford some relief to person
living in those nearby residences without significantly interfering with the
availability of adult entertainment.
      (12)   Nationally, there is extensive involvement of organized crime in
the business of adult bookstores and the disclosure of persons who own, as well
as the names of those persons who operate adult bookstores and other adult
entertainment establishments will aid law enforcement officials in the
enforcement of the Federal Racketeer Influences and Corrupt Organization Act
(RICO) and the enforcement of the laws of the commonwealth, among others,
prohibiting the distribution of obscene matter, the use of minors to distribute
obscene matter, the advertising of obscene material, the distribution of
obscene material to minors, promoting the sale of obscenity, the use of a minor
in a sexual performance, the distribution of material portraying a sexual
performance by a minor, the promoting of material portraying a sexual
performance by a minor and the advertising of material portraying a sexual
performance by a minor and the use of minors to distribute materials portraying
a sexual performance by a minor.
      (13)   The Council declares as a matter of public policy that in order to
preserve surrounding neighborhoods, to prevent blight and the deterioration of
the neighborhoods of the city, protect property values, promote the return of
residents and businesses to the neighborhoods, protect children form the
deleterious effects of exposure to sexually explicit material and decrease the
incidence of crime and juvenile delinquency, the licensing and regulation of
adult entertainment establishments is a public necessity and is required in the
interest of public health, safety and welfare as well as the economic and
aesthetic well-being of the people.
   (B)   (1)   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-oriented
businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually-oriented businesses
within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose, nor
effect, of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable
access to any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials.
Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material:
         (a)   To prevent the unsanitary conditions which exist at “adult
amusement arcades” and to prevent health risks, including AIDS and other
sexually-transmitted diseases, caused by illicit and unlawful sexual relations
in such public establishments;
         (b)   To protect children and the family environment from the
deleterious and harmful effects of exposure to certain sexually explicit items
and devices; and
         (c)   To obtain the identity of person licensed and to be licensed for
the operation of establishments selling, showing, renting or offering certain
sexually explicit material or entertainment to ensure property identification
of those persons responsible for the operation of such businesses so as to
assist in the proper enforcement of this chapter.
      (2)   It is not the purpose of this chapter to establish community
standards on obscenity, nor to permit persons or entities to engage in any
activity which is in violation of law, including but not limited to, state laws
pertaining to the advertising, promotion, distribution or sale of obscene
matter or matters portraying a sexual performance by a minor, or state laws
pertaining to the use of a minor in a sexual performance or promotion of sexual
performance by a minor, or the use of a minor to distribute material portraying
sexual performance by a minor.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 118.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITY OR ACTIVITIES or ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
ESTABLISHMENT. Regular commercial participation in one or more of the following
defined activities.
      (1)   ADULT AMUSEMENT ARCADE. An establishment having as one of its
principal uses one or more of the following: customer-operated motion picture
devices, peep shows, viewing areas and/or similar devices either coin-, token-
or slug-operated or which, inconsideration of an entrance fee, display matter
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on displays of sexual activities,
as hereinafter defined, or which other male or female persons expose to the
view of the customer the bare female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola, human genitals, public region or buttocks, even if partially
or completed covered by translucent material, or human or simulated male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
      (2)   ADULT BOOK STORE. An establishment having as one of its principal
uses the sale, rent or display of pictures, books, periodicals, magazines,
appliances and similar material which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on displays of sexual activities.
      (3)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An establishment having as one of its
principal uses the presentation of motion pictures, slide projections and other
similar material having as a dominant theme or characterized or distinguished
by an emphasis on matter displaying, describing or relating to sexual
activities, as hereinafter defined, for observation by person therein.
      (4)   ADULT NOVELTY CENTER. A commercial establishment which regularly
features for sale instruments, devices, “adult toys” or paraphernalia which are
designed for or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or
for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others. Such instruments and
devices shall not include condoms, contraceptive devices, spermicidal
substances and lubricants, or other such products designed to prevent pregnancy
or sexually-transmitted diseases.
      (5)   ADULT STAGE SHOW THEATER. An establishment having as one of its
principal uses the regular presentation of live performances of humans or
animals having as a dominant theme or characterized or distinguished by an
emphasis on matter displaying semi-nudity or sexual activities for observation
by persons therein.
      (6)   ADULT VIDEO CASSETTE RENTAL CENTER. A commercial establishment
which has as one of its principal business uses the rental or sale of video
cassettes or other video recordings which display material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on displays of sexual activities.
      (7)   CABARET. An establishment which regularly features as one of its
principal uses person who appear semi-nude before patrons.
      (8)   COMMERCIAL SEXUAL ENTERTAINMENT CENTER. Any commercial
establishment not otherwise described herein which as one of it principal uses
regularly offers matter, services or entertainment appealing to adult sexual
interests if the establishment or its entertainment, services or goods are
advertised by or on behalf of the establishment in a manner patently designed
to appeal to such adult sexual interests.
      (9)   SELF-DESIGNATED ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTER. Any establishment which
designates all or a portion of its premises as for adults only and has a policy
of excluding minors from is premises or from a portion of its premises and
which advertises so as to convey the impression that the services,
entertainment, matter of goods available at the premises or at the portion of
the premises designated for adults only are characterized or distinguished by
displays of human genitals or sexual activities.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department Planning and Development or his or
her designee.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person hired by or suffered or permitted to work in an
establishment engaging in adult entertainment activities whether that person
receives remuneration or compensation directly from the operator or owner of
the establishment, for patrons of the establishment or from any other sources
whether by contract of employment or otherwise, for work or services performed
for the benefit of the adult entertainment establishment. EMPLOYEE does not
include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or for the delivery of goods, such as foods, to the premises.
   ESTABLISHMENT. A business entity or endeavor, fixed, mobile or traveling,
including its owners, operators, directors, shareholders, partners, employees
and possessions.
   HEARING BOARD. The Code Enforcement Board as established pursuant to Ord.
09-2003 of the city.
   LICENSEE.
      (1)   A person in whose name a license to operate an adult entertainment
establishment has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed
as an applicant on the application for an adult entertainment establishment
license. In case of an “employee”, it shall mean the person in whose name the
adult entertainment employee license has been issued.
      (2)   This license is in addition to the regular business license
required by the city for any person or entity desirous of conducting business
within its corporate limits.
   MATERIALS. Any book, magazine, newspaper, or other printed or written
matter, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, video cassette
film or other pictorial representation or mechanical, chemical or electrical
reproduction or any other articles, equipment, machines or materials.
   NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals,
public area, vulva, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque
covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque
covering of any part of the nipple and areola.
   OPERATOR. Any individual, partnership, corporation or business entity who
establishes and/or maintains a business as its owner or manager and may also
mean LICENSEE, as defined hereabove.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation or business entity.
   PRINCIPAL OWNER. Any person owning, directly or beneficially, 20% of a
corporation’s equity securities, 20% or more of the membership interests in a
limited liability company, or, in the case of any other legal entity, 20% or
more of the ownership interests in the entity.
   PRINCIPAL USE. A substantial or significant use, but not necessarily a
majority of the business activity or stock in trade. The fact that a business
may have one or more other PRINCIPAL USES unrelated to adult entertainment
shall not relieve the business from the provisions of this chapter applicable
to adult entertainment establishments. Principal use shall exist in the
following circumstances:
      (1)   Where a business establishment dedicates, or permits the use of, at
least 25% of the utilized square footage of its premises for adult
entertainment activity or activities; or
      (2)   Where at least 25% of the gross receipts of a business
establishment, excluding food and beverage receipts, result from adult
entertainment activity or activities.
   REAL ESTATE OWNER. Any individual, partnership, corporation or business
entity who has legal title to real estate, with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof, or has the beneficial ownership of any real estate and a
right to present use of enjoyment thereof, including a mortgage in possession.
   REGULARLY. As used in the phases herein such as “regularly features” and
“regularly offers”, the term REGULARLY means a consistent or repeated course of
conduct engaged in or permitted by the operator of the business.
   SEMI-NUDE or STATE OF SEMI-NUDITY.
      (1)   A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the
genitals, anus cleft or cleavage, public area, vulva and nipple and areola of
the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps
or devices.
      (2)   This definition shall not include any portion of the cleavage of
the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing
suit or other wearing apparel provided that the areola and nipple are not
exposed in whole or in part.
   SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Partial or complete male and or female nudity in
conjunction with:
      (1)   Displays of human genital in a state of sexual stimulation;
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or
      (3)   Holding or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or breast.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following offenses:
      (1)   KRS 510.040, 510.050 or 510.060 (rape in the first, second and
third degree); KRS 510.070, 510.080 or 510.090 (sodomy in the first, second or
third degree); KRS 510.110, 510.120 or 510.130 (sexual abuse in the first,
second or third degree); KRS 510.140 (sexual misconduct); 510.150 (indecent
exposure); KRS 517.050 (falsifying business records); KRS 529.020 or 529.040
(prostitution); KRS 531.020, 531.030, 531.040 (distributing obscene matter,
distributing obscene matter to minors, using minors to distribute obscene
matter); KRS 218A.140 et seq. (offenses relating to controlled substances); any
offense listed in KRS 531.300 through 531.370 (sexual exploitation of minors
offenses); KRS 529.100 (human trafficking); engaging in organized crime (KRS
506.120) relating to a sexually-oriented business; criminal attempt, conspiracy
or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses or offenses in other
jurisdictions that, if the acts would have constituted any of the foregoing
offenses if the acts had been committed in the commonwealth; for which:
         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
         (c)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month
period.
      (2)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on the disqualification of the applicant.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 118.03 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Director is empowered to enact from time to time such rules and
regulations deemed necessary for the orderly and complete administration of
this chapter.
   (B)   All regulations shall be submitted to the Mayor and shall become
effective within 30 days of submission unless disapproved in writing by the
Mayor prior to that date.
   (C)   All licensees and person with license applications pending shall be
mailed copies of all such regulations and they shall be published one time in
the local newspaper as soon as practical after they become effective.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 118.04 EFFECT AND LIMITATION.
   It is not the purpose of this chapter to establish community standards on
obscenity, nor to permit persons to engage in any activity which is in
violation of law, including, but not limited to, state laws pertaining to the
advertising, promotion, distribution or sale of obscene matter or matters
portraying a sexual performance by a minor, or state laws pertaining to use of
a minor in a sexual performance or promotion of a sexual performance by a
minor, or the use of a minor to distribute material portraying sexual
performance by a minor.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
RESTRICTIONS AND OPERATING REGULATIONS
§ 118.15 SIGNAGE.
   An adult entertainment establishment, except as otherwise provided by laws,
which may be more restrictive, may not have more than one sign outside, flush
to the wall, facia style, not to exceed in size ten feet in length (horizontal
to the ground) and three feet in width (vertical to the ground) with no
flashing lights and with no pictorial matter which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on displays of sexual activities.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.16 MATERIAL NOT TO BE SUBJECT TO PUBLIC VIEW.
   An adult entertainment establishment may not display pictorial
representation of sexual activities in such manner as to be subject to public
view from outside the business premises, including, but limited to, view from
public sidewalks, streets, arcades, hallways or passageways.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.17 EMPLOYEE AGE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   An operator or employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall
not permit a person under 18 years of age to be employed by or to enter the
establishment.
   (B)   An adult entertainment establishment shall, at all times, cause the
entrance of the establishment to be so attended as to ensure compliance with
the requirements contained in division (A) above.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.18 RESTRICTED HOURS.
   No adult entertainment establishment shall be or remain open for business
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.19 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   An adult amusement arcade, except as otherwise provided by laws which
may be more restrictive, shall meet the requirements set forth in this section.
   (B)   (1)   Any wall or partition which is situated so as to create a
viewing area in which any amusement device or viewing screen is located shall
be constructed of not less than one-hour fire- restrictive material and shall
contain no holes, openings or other perforations. No operator or employee shall
allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths nor shall
any person make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing
booths or rooms.
      (2)   The city’s Fire Department shall inspect the premises of the
licensee for compliance with this section.
   (C)   A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult amusement
arcade which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square
feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which
display specified sexual activities as defined in §
118.01 of this chapter shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s or cashier’s station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment. The view required in this chapter must be by direct line of sight
from the manager’s or cashier’s station.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the operator and any employees present in
the premises to ensure that the view area specified in division (C)(1) above
remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials at all times. It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that
there is at least one employee on duty and situated in a public area adjacent
to the adult arcades, where the view area specified in division (C)(1) above is
visible, at all times that any patron is present in the adult arcades.
      (3)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at a time.
      (4)   All floor coverings in viewing booths shall be non-porous, easily
cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. All wall surfaces and ceiling
surfaces shall be constructed of, or permanently covered by nonporous, easily
cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board, other porous material
shall be used within 48 inches of the floor.
   (D)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles measured at the
floor level at all times any patron is present in the premises.
   (E)   All persons regulated pursuant to this section must comply with the
terms and conditions hereof within 60 days after the effective date of this
chapter.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.20 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The public entrance to an establishment engaging in adult
entertainment activities shall not be located within 500 feet of any building
containing a public or private elementary, middle or secondary school,
institution of higher education or business college, or any park-mall or park-
like area of open space under the control of a governmental agency, or any
building used for a place of religious worship, or any building used for a
governmental function or public library. Such distance shall be measured along
a straight line form the nearest property line of the property on which the
building or public park-like area is located to the entrance to such
establishment engaging in an adult entertainment activity.
   (B)   The public entrance to an establishment engaging in adult
entertainment activities may not be located with in 500 feet of an area zoned
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, WDC-1, WDC-2, PNC, PNR-1 and PNR-2 or from an
area used for residential purposes. Such distance shall be measured along a
straight line from the boundary line of the nearest area zoned or used for
residential purposes to the entrance to such establishment engaging in an adult
entertainment activity. All adult entertainment establishments shall comply
with all other pertinent zoning regulations of the city and are allowed to be
located in areas zoned Industrial (I-1 and I-2).
   (C)   The public entrance to an establishment engaging in adult
entertainment activities shall not located within 500 feet of the public
entrance of another adult entertainment activity establishment.
   (D)   The public entrance to an establishment engaging in adult
entertainment shall not be located within 500 feet of the public entrance of an
establishment licensed to serve alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.21 SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   An adult entertainment establishment shall not make application for and
shall not be granted any license to sell alcoholic beverages otherwise issued
pursuant to Ch. 120 of this code of ordinances. The sale, use or consumption of
alcoholic beverages on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment is
prohibited.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.22 UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Nothing contained in this chapter is intended, or shall be construed,
to permit or authorize activities which are unlawful under state law or local
ordinance.
   (B)   It is unlawful for the operator to knowingly violate the following
regulations or to allow, either knowingly or recklessly, an employee or a
patron to violate the following regulations.
      (1)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a patron, employee or
any other person to knowingly or intentionally, in an adult entertainment
establishment, appear in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such public
nudity is expressive in nature.
      (2)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for an employee to
knowingly or intentionally, in an adult entertainment establishment, appear in
a semi-nude condition unless the employee, while semi-nude, remains at least
six feet from any patron or customer and on a fixed stage at least 18 inches
from the floor. The six-foot requirement is measured from the edge of the stage
where the semi-nude employee is located to the patron seating or standing area
or, if patrons are allowed to sit at the stage, from the edge of the stage to a
line or other barrier six feet from the edge beyond which employees are allowed
to appear semi-nude.
      (3)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any employee, while
semi-nude in an adult entertainment establishment, to knowingly or
intentionally receive any pay or gratuity directly from any patron or customer
or for any patron or customer to knowingly or intentionally pay or give any
gratuity directly to any employee, while said employee is semi-nude in an adult
entertainment establishment.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011) Penalty, see §
118.99
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 118.35 LICENSE APPLICATION; CONTENTS.
   (A)   The principal owner(s) or the operator(s) of an establishment
intending to engage, or engaging under a previously issued license in an adult
entertainment activity, shall make application for a license with the Director
in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   Such application shall be in writing, notarized and shall be in the
form prescribed by the Director. The application will be deemed complete when
it contains the following information:
      (1)   The name, business location address, business mailing address and
phone number of the establishment and the name and business address of the
prospective licensee;
      (2)   The applicant’s full true name, mailing address, date of birth and
a copy of a government-issued photo identification card or set of fingerprints.
         (a)   If the applicant is one or more individuals, then all principal
owners shall comply; and
         (b)   If the applicant is other than an individual, such as
corporation or partnership, each officer, director, general partner, principal
owner and each other person who will participate directly in decisions relating
to management of the business shall sign the application for a license as the
applicant and comply with the requirements of this section.
      (3)   The name and address of the prospective licensee’s designated agent
for service of process;
      (4)   If the applicant is not the owner of record of the real property on
which the licensed establishment is located or to be located, the application
shall include the name and address of the owner of record of the real property;
      (5)   A designation of the adult entertainment activities, as defined in
the definitions, in which the applicant seeks to engage at the specified
location;
      (6)   All convictions for specified criminal activities, as defined in
this chapter, of the applicant or applicants whose names are required pursuant
to this section;
      (7)   The name and mailing address of any person to whom the applicant
wants mail notice to be given in case of violation or other matters affecting
any license hereunder; and
      (8)   A drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The
drawing or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 118.36 INFORMATION TO BE CURRENT; DIRECTOR TO BE NOTIFIED OF CHANGES.
   The information required by §
118.35 of this chapter shall be kept current by the licensee at all times even
after the granting of a license by the Director. It shall be the responsibility
of the operator or other person designated in the license application to notify
the Director no later than the close of the fifth business day after the
effective date of any changes, alterations or modifications in any information
contained in the application including, but not limited to: name of the
establishment; any change in the corporate or partnership information submitted
as part of the application; names and mailing addresses of employees; name and
address of designated agent for service of process; designation of the activity
or activities to be engaged in at the establishment, as defined in definitions;
and the name and mailing address of any person the applicant wants mail notice
to be given in case of violation or other matters affecting the license.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 118.37 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   The following license(s) is in addition to a regular business license
required by the city for any person or entity desirous of undertaking business
within it corporate limits.
   (A)   Upon the filing of a completed application for an adult entertainment
establishment license or employee license under §
118.41 of this chapter, the Director shall issue a temporary license to the
applicant, which temporary license shall expire 15 days after the final
decision of the Director to deny or grant the license. Within 20 business days
after the receipt of a completed application, the Director shall cause the
premises to be inspected for compliance with city zoning, building, safety,
health and fire codes. Said inspections shall be performed at the direction of
the Director by whichever department(s) he or she deems is appropriate. If
inspections are not made within the specified 20 days, unless such failure is
due to the applicant’s or the real estates owners’ disallowance of said
inspections, the property shall be deemed to comply with the codes specified in
the previous sentence. Within 20 business days after the receipt of a completed
application, the Director shall direct that a license be issued, or issue a
written notice of intent to deny a license, to the applicant. Said physical
license shall be created by the city’s Police Department, but issued by the
Director. The Director shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or
more of the following is found to be true:
      (1)   An applicant is less than 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant is delinquent in the payment of city of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant in relation
to an adult entertainment establishment;
      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information or true and correct
information required of the applicant for issuance of the license;
      (4)   An applicant, including any principal owner of the adult
entertainment establishment, has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity, as defined in this chapter;
      (5)   The license fee requirement by §
118.40 of this chapter has not been paid;
      (6)   The proposed adult entertainment establishment is located in a
zoning district other than a district in which adult entertainment businesses
are allowed to operate under the applicable zoning regulation of the city or is
not in compliance with the location restriction established for adult
entertainment establishments under this chapter; and
      (7)   The applicant’s premises have been found by the Director or his or
her designee to not be in compliance with city zoning, building safety, health
or fire codes.
   (B)   An applicant that is ineligible for a license due to division (A)(4)
above may qualify for an adult entertainment establishment license only when
the time period required by the applicable divisions in §
118.42 of this chapter has elapsed.
   (C)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to
that applicant, the expiration date and the address of the adult entertainment
establishment. An adult entertainment establishment employee license shall
contain a photograph of the licensee. The adult entertainment establishment
license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such
business so that it may be easily read at any time. An adult entertainment
establishment employee shall keep the employee’s license on his or her person
or the premises where the licensee is then working or performing, and shall
produce such license for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer
or other authorized city enforcement official. Such officer or official,
pursuant to this chapter, shall request verification of an employee’s license
only when reasonable and necessary to advance the purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 118.38 INSPECTIONS.
   The application for or the grant of a license to operate an adult
entertainment establishment is deemed to permit periodic inspections of the
public areas of any such establishment during such establishment’s business
hours for the purpose of verifying compliance with the terms and conditions of
this chapter. This section shall be reasonably construed and applied by
enforcement personnel. Inspections shall be performed by the appropriate city
department as directed and identified by the Director.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 118.39 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Immediately upon the effective date of this chapter, no person shall
operate, own or be employed at an unlicensed adult entertainment establishment.
All pending applications at the time of the effective date hereof and new
applications received thereafter shall be subject immediately to the terms of
this chapter.
   (B)   No owner shall permit adult entertainment activities to operate on his
property without such adult entertainment activities being properly licensed.
   (C)   No person shall permit himself to be an operator or an employee at an
adult entertainment activity which has not been validly licensed hereunder.
   (D)   No person shall own, operate or be employed at an establishment
engaged in adult entertainment activities unless all employees of this
establishment have obtained the license required by §
118.41 of this chapter.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.40 LICENSE YEAR; FEES.
   (A)   All adult entertainment establishment license shall be for the fiscal
year, July 1 to June 30, or the remaining portion of such fiscal year. The
annual license free shall be $1,000 and payable to the city at the time of
application. For new applications, annual fees shall be prorated at the rate of
$100 per month for the remaining full months of a fiscal year, but shall not
exceed $1,000. Application for renewal of a license shall be made at least 90
days, but not more than 120 days, before the expiration of the current license
and shall be accompanied by the annual fee of $1,000. The renewal application
shall also contain any changes in the information required by §
118.35 of this chapter which have occurred since the previous application.
   (B)   If the renewal application and/or the annual fee are not tendered in a
timely fashion, the Director shall serve notice to the licensee that the
failure to submit the renewal application and/or the annual fee within ten
business days will be deemed an abandonment of the license as of the above-
referenced renewal deadline. Service of the notice required by this section
shall be deemed complete upon certified mailing, return receipt requested, or
personal delivery.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 118.41 EMPLOYEE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person intending to be an employee at an adult entertainment
establishment shall make application for an employee license with the Director
in accordance with this section. The application shall be in writing, notarized
and shall be in the form prescribed by the Director and shall be deemed
complete when it contains the following items:
      (1)   The legal name of the applicant;
      (2)   Any and all aliases or names used or to be used by the applicant in
the course of prior, current or prospective appearances or performances as a
dancer, performer or entertainer;
      (3)   The applicant’s mailing address where the applicant may be
contacted by the Director;
      (4)   The applicant’s date of birth;
      (5)   A set of the applicant’s fingerprints suitable or a copy of a
government-issued photo identification card;
      (6)   A recent photograph of the applicant; and   
      (7)   Any information required under this section deemed to be private
and/or confidential within the meaning of KRS 61.878, or within the
constitutional right to privacy, shall not be disclosed to any person other
than law enforcement agencies or other governmental agencies.
   (B)   (1)   The applicant shall submit an annual license fee of $25 with the
application for an employee license and the Director shall immediately issue a
temporary employee license pending a final decision by the Director to grant or
deny the employee license.
      (2)   Within 20 working days of the application, the Director shall
determine whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity, as defined in this chapter.
      (3)   If no record of such conviction is found, the Director shall issue
an annual employee license.
      (4)   The license so granted shall expire on June 30 of each year and
shall be annually reissued by the Director upon application therefore by the
employee unless the Director confirms a conviction of any of the above-
described offenses.
      (5)   In the event the Director confirms a conviction of a proscribed
offense, he or she shall issue the applicant a notice of intent to deny the
employee license.
      (6)   Application for a renewal license shall be made at least 90 days,
and not more than 120 days, prior to expiration of the employee’s current
license.
      (7)   Within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, no person
shall be an employee at an adult entertainment establishment without having
obtained the license required by this section.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 118.42 LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION; HEARING AND APPEAL.
   (A)   The Director shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend an
adult entertainment license or an employee license, as applicable, for a period
not to exceed 30 days if he or she determines that the licensee knowingly or
recklessly violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter.
   (B)   The Director shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke an
adult entertainment establishment license or an employee license, as
applicable, if the licensee knowingly or recklessly commits two or more
violations specified in this chapter within a 12-month period.
   (C)   The Director shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke an
adult entertainment establishment license or an employee license, as
applicable, if:
      (1)    The licensee knowingly gave false information in the material
submitted during the application process;
      (2)   The licensee has knowingly engaged in or allowed possession, use or
sale of control substances on the premises;
      (3)   The licensee has knowingly engaged in or allowed prostitution on
the premises;
      (4)   The licensee has knowingly operated the adult entertainment
establishment during a period of time when the licensee’s license was
suspended;
      (5)   The licensee has knowingly engaged in or allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to occur in or on the
licensed premises. This subsection will not apply to an adult motel, unless the
licensee knowingly allowed the foregoing sexual activities to occur either in
exchange for money or in a place within public view.
   (D)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have effect on the
revocation of the license; provided, however, that, any reversal of a
conviction shall automatically eliminate that conviction from consideration in
this chapter.
   (E)   When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in division (F)
below, the Director revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one
year and the licensee shall not be issued an adult entertainment establishment
license or an employee license for one year from the date revocation becomes
effective; provided that, if the conditions of division (G) below are met, a
provisional license will be granted pursuant to that division (G) below.
   (F)   If facts exist for denial, suspension or revocation of an adult
entertainment establishment license or an employee license issued under this
chapter, the Director shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in
writing of the intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license, including the
grounds therefor, by personal delivery or by certified mail. The notification
shall be directed to the most current business address on file with the
Director, and will provide the address of the Hearing Board to which the
respondent should direct his or her response. Within five working days of
receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the Hearing Board, in
writing, a response that shall include a statement of reasons why the license
or permit should not be denied, suspended or revoked. Within three working days
of the receipt of respondent’s written response, the Hearing Board shall notify
respondent in writing of the hearing date on respondent’s denial, suspension or
revocation proceeding.
      (1)   Within ten working days of the receipt of respondent’s written
response, the Hearing Board shall conduct a hearing at which respondent shall
have the opportunity to be represented by counsel, present evidence and
witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine adverse witnesses. Such
proceeding shall be transcribed or recorded. Within ten working days after any
hearing, the Hearing Board shall issue a written decision on the matter and
mail such decision to the respondent by certified mail no later than five
working days after the date of such decision.
      (2)   (a)   If a response is not received by the Hearing Board in the
time stated or, if after hearing, the Hearing Board finds that grounds as
specified in this chapter exist for denial, suspension or revocation, then such
denial, suspension or revocation shall become final five working days after the
Hearing Board sends, by certified mail, the written decision and notice that
the license has been denied, suspended or revoked.
         (b)   Such notice shall include a statement advising the applicant or
licensee of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (G)   (1)   When a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license becomes
final, the applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application for a
license has been denied, or whose licenses has been suspended or revoked, shall
have the right to appeal such action to a court of competent jurisdiction
within 15 working days of the date of the adverse decision becomes final. Until
the time for an appeal has passed, any temporary license issued to the
aggrieved party under this chapter shall remain in effect throughout the
administrative proceedings described in this section. Upon the filing of any
court action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the enforcement
of the denial, suspension or revocation, the Director shall immediately issue
the aggrieved a provisional license and shall file the record of the
administrative proceeding with the reviewing court within ten business days
after he or she receives notice of said action.
      (2)   The provisional license shall allow the aggrieved party to continue
operation of the adult entertainment establishment or to continue employment as
an adult entertainment employee, as the case may be, and will expire upon the
court’s entry of a judgment on the merits of the aggrieved party’s action to
appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the enforcement of the
Director’s decision.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 118.43 SCIENTER NECESSARY TO PROVE LIABILITY.
   This chapter does not impose strict liability for violations of its
provisions. Where any provision or offense herein fails to state a necessary
level of culpability to establish a violation or liability, the offense shall
be established upon a showing that the person acted knowingly or recklessly
with regard to the predicate act. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for
the purposes of this chapter, an act by an employee shall be imputed to the
adult entertainment licensee for the purpose of establishing a violation of
this chapter, or for purposes of license denial, modification, or revocation
only if a licensee allowed, either knowingly or by reckless failure to
supervise, a violation of this chapter to occur. It shall be a defense to
liability that the adult entertainment establishment licensee was powerless to
prevent the violation.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 118.44 FAILURE OF OFFICIAL TO MEET TIME FRAME; APPLICANT OR LICENSEE RIGHTS.
   In the event that a government official is required to take an act or do a
thing pursuant to this chapter within a prescribed time, and fails to take such
act or such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent
the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act
required of the official under this chapter, but not completed in the time
prescribed, includes approval of condition(s) necessary for approval by the
city of an applicant or licensee’s employee license (including a renewal), the
applicant or licensee shall be deemed to have satisfied the condition(s) for
which approval was sought.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 118.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a civil penalty of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000 as imposed by
the Director. Each day that a violation continues after notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person cited pursuant to this division
(A) and assessed a civil penalty shall have the right to appeal such penalty to
the Hearing Board in accordance with the Code Enforcement Board ordinance. The
process for said appeal shall be governed by §§ 
34.065 through
34.081 of this code of ordinance.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, any person who violates any
provision of this chapter or who knowingly provides false information in an
attempt to gain or maintain a license, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $250, nor more
than $500, or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both, for each offense.
Any person cited hereunder for a failure to meet a requirement hereof may be
cited again for said failure one or more days after a prior citation and in
such case each citation shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   In addition to the penalties provided herein for violations of this
chapter, the Director is authorized to pursue remedial civil action for
violations of this chapter by civil complaint or petition for injunctive
relief, declaration of rights or other appropriate proceeding filed in the
county’s Circuit Court.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
CHAPTER 119: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Section
   
119.01   Purpose
   
119.02   Applicability
   
119.03   Definitions
   
119.04   Determination of reportable quantities
   
119.05   Administering agency
   
119.06   Notification to Fire Communications and Dispatch
   
119.07   Confidential information and trade secrets
   
119.08   Enforcement; notice of violation
   
119.09   Appeals Board
   
119.10   Affirmative defenses
   
119.11   Disclaimer of liability
 
   
119.99   Penalty
§ 119.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is the protection of public health and safety in
the city, through prevention and control of hazardous materials, incidents and
releases, to require the timely reporting of releases and to provide for the
reimbursement to the city for legitimate expenses for emergency responses by
the city.
(Prior Code, § 121.01) (Ord. 13-2000, passed 8-21-2000)
§ 119.02 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all persons who manufacture, use, handle or
store hazardous materials in quantities prescribed by this chapter and as
defined herein, within the city.
(Prior Code, § 121.02) (Ord. 13-2000, passed 8-21-2000)
§ 119.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED RELEASE.
      (1)   A release which is a federally permitted release under 42 U.S.C. §
9601(10);
      (2)   A release to waters of the United States or adjoining shorelines
which is exempt from notification under 40 C.F.R. §§ 117.11 through 117.14;
      (3)   The introduction of any pollutant into a publicly-owned treatment
works (POTW) which is not in violation of applicable pretreatment regulations
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the publicly-owned treatment
works; or
      (4)   Any release which is specifically authorized by a local, state or
federal agency, to facilitate life safety objectives and/or overall control of
a hazardous materials emergency.
   CONSUMER PRODUCT. The meaning stated in 15 U.S.C. § 2052.
   COST RECOVERY.
      (1)   Cost associated with hazardous materials responses include
equipment that is disposed of, rather the re-used, the cost of qualifying the
contaminants and securing legal disposal methods and equipment which must be
replaced to ensure readiness for the next release. In addition, hazardous
materials releases involve additional staffing, either at the scene of the
release for control, isolation of the area, or evacuation of citizens or
employees; or as long-term stand-by personnel at department stations to provide
the normal coverage for other emergency situations that may arise in the
community during a hazardous materials release.
      (2)   Affected departments could include Fire, Police, Water/Wastewater,
Public Works, Natural Gas and Recreation.
      (3)   It is the city’s intent that shelter needs be provided by private
disaster relief agencies, whenever possible, however, costs could be incurred
for evacuees including food, water and personal hygiene materials.
      (4)   Cost recovery includes those amounts charged to the generator of a
spill or release of hazardous materials, by the city or its departments, to
replace equipment utilized (that is not reusable) or requires decontamination
(with associated fees). Also, the city will bill total standard overtime
salaries for non-“technician” employees. “Technician” level city employees (as
defined in OSHA, 29 C.F.R. § 1910.120) shall be billed to the generator of a
spill or release at a rate of $50 per hour/per technician at the scene of a
hazardous material incident; provided, they are actively engaged in leak
control, monitoring, rescue, “back-up” for leak control or monitoring teams,
decontamination or are hourly employees serving at management levels or as
support personnel with the incident command structure. Additional staff,
“called-back”, who are standing by at their respective fire stations shall be
considered as normally on-duty until the number exceeds that defined as normal
staffing for that shift at the beginning of that work day. Any excess “called-
back” personnel will be billed to the generator of a spill or release at a rate
of $15 per hour/per person.
      (5)   It is not a legal requirement that the city provide these emergency
technical services to its citizens and business community; however, it is
within the scope of modern community protection to procure equipment, train
personnel and provide and increased level of response for hazardous materials
incidents, where feasible. This feasibility for the city is dependent upon
total cost recovery for equipment and supplies used and overtime salaries
incurred by its departments during a hazardous materials incident.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who works, with or without compensation, in a
workplace.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
government agency or other entity engaged in a business or in providing
services, that has employees.
   ENVIRONMENT. The atmosphere, the navigable waters of the United States and
any other surface water, drinking water supply, soil surface, subsurface
strata, storm sewer or publicly or privately-owned treatment works (other than
those handling only wastewater generated at a facility) within the boundaries
of the city.
   FACILITY. Either of the following:
      (1)   Any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe or pipeline
(including any pipe into a sewer or POTW), well, pit, pond, lagoon,
impoundment, ditch, landfill, land-farm, waste, wastewater, hazardous material,
sludge or pollutant, management, treatment, storage, disposal recycling or
reclamation site or location, storage container, junkyard, factory, airport,
manufacturing or business site, lot, motor vehicle, roiling stock or aircraft;
or
      (2)   Any site, premises, facility, real estate or location where waste,
wastewater pollutants or hazardous material has been released, discharged,
deposited, treated, stored, disposed of, placed or otherwise come to be
located. However, it shall not include a site solely because of the presence of
a consumer product which is in consumer use or is in its original container.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
      (1)   Any of the following:
         (a)   Any substance designated pursuant to § 311(b)(2)(A) of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act; being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. also known
as Pub. Law 92-500 (also known as the Clean Water Act);
         (b)   Any element, compound, mixture, solution or substance designated
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, § 102 (CERCLA),
being 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq.;
         (c)   Any hazardous waste having the characteristics identified under
or listed pursuant to § 3001 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (commonly known as
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, “RCRA”, being 42 U.S.C. § 6921),
but not including any waste the regulation of which under the Solid Waste
Disposal Act has been suspended by Act of Congress;
         (d)   Any toxic pollutant listed under § 307(a) of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317;
         (e)   Any hazardous air pollutant listed under § 112 of the Clean Air
Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 7412;
         (f)   Any imminently hazardous chemical substance or mixture with
respect to which the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
has taken action pursuant to § 7 of the Toxic Substances Control Act, being 15
U.S.C. § 2606;
         (g)   Any material included in the Title III List of Lists -
Consolidated List of Chemicals Subject to the Emergency Planning and Community
Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 11002 and 11021 through 11023 and
§ 112(r) of the Clean Air Act, as amended, being 42 U.S. Code § 7412 (see also
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-03/documents/
list_of_lists.pdf);
         (h)   Petroleum products, including crude oil or fractions thereof,
which is not otherwise specifically listed or designated as a hazardous
substance under divisions (A)(1) through (1)(g) above; natural gas or synthetic
gas usable for fuel (or mixture of natural gas and such synthetic gas);
         (i)   Radioactive materials and isotopes; and
         (j)   Explosives.
      (2)   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS shall not include household wastes and other
materials excluded by 40 C.F.R. § 261.4.
   NORMAL APPLICATION OF PESTICIDES. Application pursuant to the label
directions for application of a pesticide product registered under §§ 30 or 24
of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act as amended (7 U.S.C.
§§ 136 et seq.) (FIFRA), or pursuant to the terms and conditions of an
experimental use permit issued under § 5 of FIFRA, or pursuant to an exemption
granted under § 18 of FIFRA.
   NORMAL RESPONSE. Those duties consistent with the normal work routine and
staffing levels for the city and its departments.
   OIL. Oil of any kind or in any form including but not limited to petroleum,
fuel oil, sludge, oil refuse and oil mixed with wastes other than dredged
spoil.
   PERSON. Any individual, trust, firm, company, society, corporation, joint
stock company, partnership, consortium, association, cooperative, joint
venture, city, county, city and county special district, the state or any
department or agency or political subdivision thereof, United States Government
or other commercial or legal entities.
   RELEASE. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing of pollutants,
hazardous material, wastewater or wastes into the environment, but excludes:
      (1)   Any release which results in exposure to employees solely within a
workplace, and is recovered by workplace employees under the auspices of an
approved workplace spill prevention control and countermeasures plan (or
equivalent);
      (2)   Emission from the engine exhaust of a motor vehicle, rolling stock,
aircraft, vessel or pipeline pumping station engine; and
      (3)   The normal application of fertilizer and pesticides.
   REPORTABLE QUANTITY. The quantity as set forth in §
119.04 of this chapter.
   STORE. To deposit or place a substance in the city for a period of ten days
or more; provided, such substance is not otherwise in transit.
   USE. To store, maintain, treat, process, handle, generate, dispose of or
otherwise manage. USE shall not include any mode of transportation other than
on-site transportation.
   VESSEL. Every description of watercraft or other artificial contrivance
used, or capable of being used, as a means of transportation on water.
(Prior Code, § 121.03) (Ord. 13-2000, passed 8-21-2000)
§ 119.04 DETERMINATION OF REPORTABLE QUANTITIES.
   (A)   Listed hazardous materials. The quantity in the column “RQ” for each
hazardous material in the “Environmental Protection Agency(ies) “Title in List
of Lists” or as listed by the Local Emergency Planning Committee of the county,
is the reportable quantity for that material. “Reportable quantities” may be
adjusted higher or lower as the Environmental Protection Agency publishes new
“lists” or on the direction of the LEPC. This information is on file in the
City Clerk’s office.
   (B)   Unlisted hazardous materials. Unlisted hazardous wastes designated as
hazardous materials have the reportable quantity of 100 pounds, except for
those unlisted hazardous wastes exhibiting the characteristics of EP toxicity
identified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.24. Unlisted hazardous wastes which exhibit EP
toxicity have the reportable quantities listed on file in the City Clerk’s
office for the contaminant on which the characteristic of EP toxicity is based.
If an unlisted hazardous waste exhibit EP toxicity on the basis of more man one
contaminant, the reportable quantity of that waste shall be the lowest of the
reportable quantities listed in App. A for those contaminants. If an unlisted
hazardous waste exhibits the characteristic of EP toxicity and one or more of
the other characteristics, the reportable quantity shall be the lowest of the
applicable reportable quantity.
   (C)   Oil.
      (1)   The reportable quantity for releases of oil to waters of the United
States or adjoining shorelines is any quantity which violates applicable water
quality standards or causes a film or sheen upon or discoloration of the
surface of the water or adjoining shorelines or causes a sludge or emulsion to
be deposited beneath the surface of the water or upon adjoining shorelines.
      (2)   The reportable quantity for releases of oil to the environment
other than releases to waters of the United States or its adjoining shorelines
is 56 gallons.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a release of
oil from a properly functioning vessel engine shall not be deemed to be in a
reportable quantity; however, this provision shall not be applicable to oil
accumulated in a vessels’ bilge.
   (D)   Release of hazardous material to sanitary sewer system.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, any release of a
hazardous material to a sanitary sewer system which is prohibited under
applicable pretreatment or other regulations governing discharges to the
sanitary sewer shall be deemed to be discharged in a reportable quantity.
   (E)   Component hazardous materials release. A release of a mixture or
solution of which a hazardous material is a component shall be considered to be
a release in a reportable quantity only where the component hazardous material
of the mixture or solution is released in a quantity equal to or greater than
its reportable quantity.
(Prior Code, § 121.04) (Ord. 13-2000, passed 8-21-2000)
§ 119.05 ADMINISTERING AGENCY.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a uniform city-wide program for
protection of the environment from releases of hazardous materials to be
administered by existing governmental agencies. The city’s Fire Department
shall serve as the lead agency in the administration and enforcement of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 121.05) (Ord. 13-2000, passed 8-21-2000)
§ 119.06 NOTIFICATION TO FIRE COMMUNICATIONS AND DISPATCH.
   (A)   Notice upon discovery. Whenever a release (other than an authorized
release) of any hazardous material, in a quantity which exceeds the reportable
quantity occurs on any facilities of any kind, the person in charge, upon
discovery of such release, or evidence of mere having been a release, even
though it has apparently been controlled, shall immediately cause notice of the
existence of such release, the circumstances of same, and the location thereof
to be given to the Emergency Services Dispatches Office (county 911 center).
   (B)   Emergency telephone number. The notice required by this section, in
the city, shall be given by telephoning “911” or other such emergency telephone
number as designated. This one call meets the requirement of notifying local
agencies. This shall not be construed as meeting the reporting requirements
outlines in applicable state and federal legislation.
   (C)   Duty to control release. The requirements of this section shall not be
construed to forbid any person on or about the facilities from using all
diligence necessary to control such release prior to the notification of “911”,
especially if such efforts may result in the containment of the release and/or
the abatement of extreme hazard to the employees or the general public. Delays
in reporting releases due to in-house notification of off-site owners/
supervisors shall not be acceptable and may result in penalties.
   (D)   Accidental air releases. Accidental air releases in excess of the
reportable quantities of listed hazardous materials, on file in the City
Clerk’s office, or, if unlisted (as prescribed in § 119.04 of this chapter),
shall be reported under the requirements of this section unless a different
reportable quantity has been established under a previous agreement between the
LEPC and the particular facility.
   (E)   Duty to report to state or federal agencies. No statement contained in
this section shall be construed to exempt or release any person from any other
notification or reporting procedure required by any state or federal agency.
(Prior Code, § 121.06) (Ord. 13-2000, passed 8-21-2000)
§ 119.07 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION AND TRADE SECRETS.
   (A)   Information and data provided by any person or obtained from any
report, questionnaire, permit application, permit and monitoring program, and
from inspections shall not be made available to the public or any other
governmental agency, unless required by law.
      (1)   Upon submission of information in any form, it shall be the
obligation of the submitter to separate all confidential and trade secret
material from any material subject to disclosure under the law.
      (2)   Any requests made under the law for information containing
confidential or trade secrets shall be brought to the attention of the person
requesting confidentiality of its trade secrets by certified mail, return
receipt requested. The notification shall advise the person requesting
confidentiality of the decision of the administering agency regarding release
of the confidential information. In no event will such confidential information
be released until five days have elapsed from date notice is sent by registered
mail.
      (3)   Within 72 hours after receipt of notification, the person
requesting confidentiality of its trade secrets shall have the burden to
initiate appropriate actions at law or otherwise to protect its confidential or
trade secrets from disclosure, and must demonstrate that public disclosure of
confidential or trade secrets is likely to cause substantial harm to his or her
competitive position.
      (4)   Any individual who releases information containing confidential or
trade secrets in violation of the law or this section shall be subject to
disciplinary action by his or her employer for malfeasance, misfeasance and
willful neglect of official duties, and may further be guilty of misuse of
confidential information under KRS 522.040.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall in no way prohibit the exchange
of information, confidential or otherwise, between public agencies when the
exchange is serving a legitimate governmental need or is necessary in the
performance of a legitimate government function.
(Prior Code, § 121.07) (Ord. 13-2000, passed 8-21-2000)
§ 119.08 ENFORCEMENT; NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Notice. Upon notification or discovery of any violation of the
provisions of this chapter, the city’s Fire Department shall immediately
investigate the site upon which the violation is located. If a violation
exists, a notice describing the violation shall be served upon the person who
is responsible for the facilities upon which die violation has occurred, if the
identity of the person is known. The notice shall also include the following,
if applicable:
      (1)   A statement that the situation must be abated within the period of
time prescribed by the city’s Fire Department, giving the person responsible
for the release the option to initiate clean-up and disposal; provided that, no
unreasonable delay or damage to the public is the result thereof;
      (2)   A statement that if the situation is not remedied within the
prescribed period of time, administering agency with jurisdiction may proceed
to secure appropriate public or private assistance to correct the violation;
      (3)   A statement that the person shall be liable for any costs incurred
by public agencies associated with their responses, except for those costs that
are associated with a normal emergency response;
      (4)   A statement that the nature of hazardous materials emergency
response is outside the definition of “normal emergency response” for local
government agencies as outlined in division (A)(3) above;
      (5)   A statement that if the administering agency, with jurisdiction,
has secured correction of the violation, a bill shall be sent charging the
person the amount of costs and expenses incurred by the governmental agency in
securing the correction of the violation; and
      (6)   A statement that penalties may be levied for violations that have
occurred.
   (B)   Governmental response. In cases where the identity of a person who is
responsible for facilities upon which a violation has occurred is not known at
the time a violation is reported, the city or any governmental agency with
jurisdiction in the city may take reasonable steps to abate any problem and may
take reasonable steps to clean-up the area affected to assure continuing safety
of the public and the environment. When the identity of the person responsible
for the facility is determined, a bill shall be sent to the person for the
costs for correcting the violation according to the provisions of division (A)
above.
   (C)   Injunctive relief. The city is empowered to seek injunctive relief for
violations of this chapter should other means prove ineffective and a threat to
public health and safety exists.
(Prior Code, § 121.08) (Ord. 13-2000, passed 8-21-2000)
§ 119.09 APPEALS BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment and empowerment. The Appeals Board shall serve as the
Board of Appeals in actions relative to violations of this chapter.
   (B)   Appeal. The Board, in hearing an appeal, shall recommend to the city
that the administering agency’s action be modified, upheld, or dismissed or
that a fine or penalty levied upon a person for violation of any provision of
this chapter be set aside, modified or left intact.
(Prior Code, § 121.10) (Ord. 13-2000, passed 8-21-2000)
§ 119.10 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES.
   It shall be an affirmative defense to any enforcement action, other than an
action for violation of §
119.06 of this chapter, including recovery of clean-up costs pursuant to this
chapter, if a person can prove that a release of hazardous materials was caused
solely by:
   (A)   An act of God;
   (B)   An act of war;
   (C)   Negligence on the part of the city;
   (D)   An act or omission of a third party; or
   (E)   Any combination of the foregoing clauses.
(Prior Code, § 121.11) (Ord. 13-2000, passed 8-21-2000)
§ 119.11 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, or any of
its city departments, for any damages that result from reliance on this chapter
or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. All persons are
advised to determine to their own satisfaction the level of protection, in
addition to that required by this chapter, necessary or desirable to ensure
that there is no unauthorized release of hazardous materials.
(Prior Code, § 121.12) (Ord. 13-2000, passed 8-21-2000)
§ 119.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Amount exceeding reportable quantity. The person responsible for a
hazardous material release in an amount exceeding the reportable quantity may
be fined not more than $1,000, if the release is not authorized, and if the
release involved willful violation, negligence or repeated spills under similar
conditions and where a significant quantity of hazardous material is involved
taking into account real or potential damage to the environment and threat to
the public health.
   (B)   Failure to notify 911 dispatch. The responsible person who fails to
notify the 911 dispatch center, as required by §
119.06 of this chapter, may be fined not more than $5,000.
   (C)   Any provision other than notification. The person who otherwise
violates any provision of this chapter, other than §
119.06 of this chapter, shall be fined not more than $100. Every incident
giving rise to such a violation shall constitute a separate offense; however,
no person shall be held responsible for more than one violation per day where
the violations occur at the same facility and are casually related.
   (D)   Civil damage. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, subject to the affirmative defenses set forth in §
119.10 of this chapter, become liable, civilly, to the city government by
reason of such violation, including, but not limited to, any clean-up,
evacuation, administrative or other expenses and legal expenses.
   (E)   Penalties imposed pursuant to legislative authority. Any penalties
imposed under this section shall be levied by the city pursuant to its
legislative authority.
(Prior Code, § 121.09) (Ord. 13-2000, passed 8-21-2000)
CHAPTER 120: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Alcoholic Beverage Control
   
120.01   Title
   
120.02   Purpose
   
120.03   Definitions
   
120.04   Scope
   
120.05   Adoption of state law
   
120.06   Creation of the office of the City Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator
   
120.07   Licenses
   
120.08   License fees
   
120.09   Application/license
   
120.10   Lost or destroyed licenses
   
120.11   Temporary closing
   
120.12   Transfer or assignment
   
120.13   Refusal of license
   
120.14   Review of license
   
120.15   Regulatory license fee
   
120.16   Change of information
   
120.17   Dormancy
   
120.18   Renewal of license
   
120.19   Approval of premises
   
120.20   Delinquent taxes or fees
   
120.21   Books, records, audio/video and reports
   
120.22   Hours for sale and delivery; restrictions
   
120.23   Conditions, prohibitions and restrictions
   
120.24   Mandatory responsible alcoholic beverage service training
   
120.25   Malt beverage keg registration
   
120.26   Information deemed confidential; penalty for disclosure; exceptions
   
120.27   Enforcement
Entertainment Destination Center
   
120.40   Entertainment destination center
 
   
120.99   Penalty
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 120.01 TITLE.
    This subchapter shall be cited and known as the "Alcoholic Beverage Control
Ordinance" of the city.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.02 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this subchapter is to establish uniform regulations and
requirements for the licensing and regulation of alcoholic beverage manufacture
and sales pursuant to authorization of KRS Ch. 241 through 244.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.03 DEFINITIONS.
    The definitions of the words used throughout this subchapter, unless the
context requires otherwise, shall have the same meaning as those set out in the
Kentucky Alcoholic Beverage Control law (KRS Ch. 241, 242, 243 and 244) of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky and all amendments and supplements thereto.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.04 SCOPE.
    This subchapter shall be construed to apply to the manufacture and traffic
in both malt beverages and distilled spirits and wine where the context permits
such application. Nothing in this subchapter shall excuse or relieve the
licensee, or the owner, proprietor, employee, agent, or person in charge of any
licensed premises where alcoholic beverages are sold from the restrictions,
requirements and penalties of any other ordinance of the city or of any
statutes of the commonwealth relating to violations pertaining to alcoholic
beverages.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.05 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   (A)    The provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky (KRS Ch. 241, 242, 243 and 244) and all amendments and
supplements thereto, are adopted so far as applicable to this subchapter except
as otherwise lawfully provided herein.
   (B)   Any violation of state law relating to the sale, production, storing
or otherwise trafficking in alcoholic beverages shall also constitute a
violation of this subchapter.
   (C)   No person shall sell, deal in, barter or exchange or possess for sale,
or for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance give away any alcoholic
beverages in any quantity whatever, or cause the same to be done, without
complying with all the provisions of this subchapter and all state statutes and
regulations applicable thereto.
   (D)   All prohibitions, restrictions, and regulations pertaining to
alcoholic beverages contained in KRS Ch. 241 through 244 shall apply to
alcoholic beverage use in the city.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.06 CREATION OF OFFICE OF THE CITY’S ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)    Pursuant to KRS 241.160, there is hereby created the office of City
Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator (hereinafter referred to as City ABC
Administrator).
   (B)   The Mayor of the City shall appoint a City ABC Administrator and any
deputies or assistants to assist in the enforcement of this subchapter.
   (C)   The salary for said office, if any, shall be fixed from time to time
by the City Council.
   (D)   The functions of the City ABC Administrator shall be the same with
respect to the subchapter licenses and regulations as the functions of the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Board of the Commonwealth of Kentucky (hereinafter
referred to as ABC Board) with respect to state licenses and regulations,
except that no amendment to these regulations proposed by the City ABC
Administrator may be less stringent than the statutes relating to Alcoholic
Beverage Control, or than regulations of the ABC Board. No regulation of the
City ABC Administrator shall become effective until it has first been
appropriately approved by the City Council.
   (E)   No person shall be a City ABC Administrator, an ABC Investigator or an
employee of the subchapter under the supervision of the City ABC Administrator,
who would be disqualified to be a member of the ABC Board under KRS 241.100;
KRS 241.170.
   (F)   The City ABC Administrator shall have all authority as authorized
under Ch. 241 through 244 of the Kentucky Revised Statutes. See also KRS
241.190 Functions of City ABC Administrator.
   (G)   The City ABC Administrator before entering upon their duties as such
shall take the oath as prescribed in Section 228 of the Constitution and shall
swear to faithfully perform the duties of his or her office pursuant to the
provisions of Section 62.060 of the Kentucky Revised Statutes et seq.
   (H)   Appeals from the orders of the City ABC Administrator may be taken to
the state ABC Board pursuant to KRS 241.150 by filing with the Board within 30
days a certified copy of the orders of the City ABC Administrator. Matters at
issue shall be heard by the Board as upon an original proceeding. Appeals from
orders of the City ABC Administrator shall be governed by KRS Ch. 13B.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.07 LICENSES.
    For the privilege of causing, permitting, and engaging in the actions,
business, and transactions authorized thereby concerning traffic in alcoholic
beverages in the city and pursuant to the authority of KRS 243.070, there is
hereby established a corresponding city license for each of the state licenses
described in KRS 243.070. The fee for each city license shall be as set out in
the following schedule and may be amended from time to time as authorized by
law. No premise shall operate in the city without both State of Kentucky and
City of Elizabethtown ABC License.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.08 FEES.
   (A)   Licenses as set forth in KRS 243.030, 243.040 and 243.070:
License Type Fee for Full Year
License Type                                                     Fee for Full
                                                                 Year
Quota retail package license (KRS 243.230, 243.240 804 KAR 9:    $1,000
040)
Quota retail drink license (KRS 243.230, 804 KAR 9:050)          $1,000
NQ retail malt beverage package license (KRS 243.280)            $200
NQ4 retail malt beverage drink license (KRS 243.088)             $200
   *If applying for both an NQ and an NQ4 the total fee is $25 
NQ1 retail drink license (KRS 243.082)                           $2,000
NQ2 retail drink license (KRS 243.083, 243.084)                  $1,000
NQ3 retail drink license (KRS 243.086)                           $300
Limited restaurant license (LR100) (KRS 243.034)                 $1,200
Limited golf course license (KRS 243.038, 243.039)               $1,200
Qualified historic site license (KRS 243.042)                    $1,030
Caterer’s license (KRS 243.033)                                $800
   Fee for holders of NQ1, NQ2 or LR100                       $0
Distiller’s license (KRS 243.120, 243.130)                     $500
Rectifier’s license Class A (KRS 243.120, 243.130)             $3,000
Rectifier’s license Class B (KRS 243.120, 243.130)             $960
Brewer’s license (KRS 243.150, 244.606)                        $500
Microbrewery license (KRS 243.157, KRS 244.606)                  $500
Wholesaler’s license (KRS 243.160, KRS 243.170)                $3,000
Distributor’s license (KRS 243.180, KRS 244.606)               $200
Bottling house or bottling house storage license (KRS 243.035)   $1,000
Supplemental bar license (KRS 243.037, KRS 241.010)               
   Fees required for the first five                            
Special Sunday retail drink license (KRS 244.290, KRS 244.295)   $0
Extended hours supplemental license (KRS 243.050, 804 KAR 4:230) $2,000
   Available only to NQ1, Qualified Historic Site, Commercial  
Airport
Special temporary alcoholic beverage/auction license (KRS        $50
243.036)
Special temporary license for qualifying event (KRS 243.260)     $50
 
   (B)    The City ABC Administrator shall transmit fees upon collection to the
City Finance Department to be deposited into the appropriate designated
account. City licenses shall be issued by the City ABC Administrator upon
receipt of notice from the commonwealth ABC Board Administrator of the finality
of appeal or protest permitted upon such license pursuant to the provisions of
KRS 243.360, and the fact the ABC Board Administrator has approved the
applicant's state license.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.09 APPLICATION/LICENSE.
   (A)   Before an application shall be considered, the applicant must publish
a notice of its intent to apply for an alcohol beverage license in a newspaper
meeting the requirements of KRS Ch. 424.
      (1)   The advertisement shall state the name and addresses of the members
of partnership if the applicant is a partnership, as well as the name of the
business and its address, or if the applicant is a corporation, the names and
addresses of the principal office and directors of the corporation, as well as
the name and addresses of the corporation itself, the location of the premises
for which the license is sought, and the type of license for which application
is made.
      (2)   The applicant shall attach to the application a newspaper clipping
of the advertisement and proof of the publication as provided in KRS 424.170.
   (B)   All licenses granted under this section shall be approved by the City
ABC Administrator. Applications for the issuance of new licenses and for
renewals of existing licenses shall be in writing and upon the forms provided
by the ABC Board and the City of Elizabethtown, as amended and supplemented
from time to time.
   (C)   (1)   The application shall be verified and shall set forth in detail
such information concerning the applicant and the premises for which the
license is sought as required by the Kentucky Revised Statutes, the ABC Board
and the City of Elizabethtown including as follows:
         (a)   Name and address;
         (b)   Nature of interest;
         (c)   Whether or not a citizen of the United States;
         (d)   Date of birth;
         (e)   Date residence was established in Kentucky, if a resident of
Kentucky. If Elizabethtown resident indicate when residence was established in
Elizabethtown;
         (f)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any other license
or corporation or partnership holding a license under this act;
         (g)   Extent of stock ownership;
         (h)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any license or
corporation or partnership holding a license in any other state or province.
      (2)   Each application shall be accompanied by a certified check, cash,
money order or credit card payment (plus any fees related) for the license fee.
Promptly upon receipt thereof, the City ABC Administrator shall transmit the
same to the City Finance Department for deposit into the appropriate designated
account.
   (D)   All city licenses shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the
City ABC Administrator and shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the licensee;
      (2)   The number of the license;
      (3)   The type of license;
      (4)   A description by street and number, or otherwise, of the licensed
premises;
      (5)   The name of the owner of the building in which the licensed
premises are located;
      (6)   The expiration date of the license;
      (7)   A statement in substance that the license shall not be a property
or vested right and that it may be revoked at any time pursuant to law.
   (E)   After January 1, 2017, all licenses approved by the City ABC
Administrator and issued by the City of Elizabethtown shall be valid for a
period of no more than a year and shall be renewable upon the date established
by the Kentucky Department of Alcohol Beverage Control for the expiration of
state licenses.
   (F)   The renewal by the City ABC Administrator of the license shall not be
construed to be a waiver or acceptance of any violation which occurred prior to
such renewal and shall not prevent subsequent proceedings against the licensee.
   (G)   Any licenses issued for less than six months of any year shall be
assessed a fee one-half of license fee set by this subchapter.
   (H)   The subchapter shall not be required to refund any portion of the
license fee to any licensee whose license has been revoked for any reason.
   (I)   See also §
120.24 Mandatory Responsible Alcoholic Beverage Service Training for training
compliance.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.10 LOST OR DESTROYED LICENSES.
    When a license has been lost or destroyed without fault on the part of the
licensee or his agent or employees, a duplicate in lieu of the original license
shall be issued by the City ABC Administrator and sent electronically.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.11 TEMPORARY CLOSING.
    In the course of any one day of operation of a licensed premise, should
multiple violations of the ordinance or other statutes or ordinances of a
public disorder nature, e.g. disturbing the peace, be reported and investigated
by the City ABC Administrator or the City Police Department, such one-day
multiple occurrences shall be reported to the City ABC Administrator by the
Chief of Police. The City ABC Administrator or the Chief of Police shall, in
the interest of public health, safety, morals and welfare, suspend the license
in question for the remaining hours of the day in question by locking the
premises after dispersing the patrons. The temporary suspension shall remain in
effect until review of the alleged violations by the City ABC Administrator,
such review shall occur on the next business day.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.12 TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT.
    No license issued under this subchapter shall be transferred or assigned
either as to licensee or location except by filing application to the State of
Kentucky Alcoholic Beverage Control for a transitional license and notification
in writing to the City ABC Administrator.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.13 REFUSAL OF LICENSE.
    A city license shall be refused:
   (A)   For any cause that the state shall refuse to issue or renew a license
and for suspension or revocation of a city license shall be the same as
provided for state licenses according to KRS 243.450, 243.490 and 243.500, as
well as violation of any city ordinance regarding alcohol beverage licensing,
sales or the administration thereof; or
   (B)   If the applicant has committed any act for which a revocation of
license would be authorized; or
   (C)   If the applicant has made any false material statement in the
application; or
   (E)   If the applicant is seeking a license for the sale and distribution of
distilled spirits, wine and/or malt-based beverages in a sexually oriented
business; or
   (E)   For any reason that the City ABC Administrator which he or she, in the
exercise of his or her sound discretion may deem sufficient.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.14 REVIEW OF LICENSE.
    Applicants to whom a license is issued authorizing the sale of alcoholic
beverages pursuant to this subchapter shall use the designated regulatory
license fee return form of the city with periodic information demonstrating
compliance. This document shall be provided on a schedule to be coordinated
with the applicant's regulatory fee filings per § 120.15. The City of
Elizabethtown form includes the following statement: "I declare, under
penalties of perjury, that this return has been examined by me and to the best
of my knowledge and belief is a true, correct and complete return."
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.15 REGULATORY LICENSE FEE.
   (A)    A regulatory license fee is imposed on the gross receipts of sale of
alcoholic beverages of each license issued by the City ABC Administrator. Said
license fee is set by ordinance. Such percentage rate shall be established to
generate revenue that does not exceed the total of the reasonable expenses
actually incurred by the subchapter in the previous fiscal year for the
additional cost, as demonstrated by reasonable evidence, of policing,
regulation and administration as the result of the sale of alcoholic beverages
within the subchapter. Such fee shall be in addition to any other tax, fee or
license permitted by law, but a credit against such fee shall be allowed in the
amount equal to the license or fee imposed and such regulatory fee shall be
applied annually from July 1 to June 30.
   (B)   For retail drink license, quota retail package license and limited
golf course license, payment of such regulatory fees shall be remitted to the
City ABC Administrator and shall accompany the alcohol regulatory fee returns
approved for such use by the subchapter. These returns and payments are due
monthly by the twentieth day of the following month at which time one-twelfth
of the annual fees shall be deducted as a credit. Regulatory fee form is due by
above date even if no fee is due and will be subject to fines (see division
(H).
   (C)   For all other licenses, payment of such regulatory fees shall be
remitted to the City ABC Administrator and shall accompany the alcohol
regulatory fee returns approved for such use by the subchapter. These returns
and payments are due no later than by the end of the month immediately
following each calendar quarter at which time one-fourth of the annual fees
shall be deducted as a credit (Due April 30; July 31; October 31 and January
31). Regulatory fee form is due by above date even if no fee is due and will be
subject to fines (see division (H).
   (D)   Failure to pay such remittance within ten days of the due date
constitutes a violation and subject's license to suspension or revocation of
their license.
   (E)   Penalty for failure to file a return and pay monthly remittance by the
due date is 5% of the fee for each 30 days or fraction thereof. The total late
filing penalty shall not exceed 25% of the fee, provided, however, in no case
shall the penalty be less than $10.
   (F)   Penalty for failure to file a return and pay quarterly remittance by
the due date is 5% of the fee for each 90 days or fraction thereof. The total
late filing penalty shall not exceed 25% of the fee, provided, however, in no
case shall the penalty be less than $10.
   (G)   Interest at the rate of 8% per annum will apply to any late payments.
   (H)   If a regulatory fee form is due, but no payment is applicable and the
form is late, a flat late fee of $50 will apply. If not received within ten
days from the due date, a $100 late fee will apply. Anything past due this
period will be subject to suspension.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.16 CHANGE OF INFORMATION.
   (A)    Since a number of licenses issued by the subchapter are in the name
of a corporation, it is necessary that stock ownership changes in such
corporation be reported to the City ABC Administrator. The City ABC
Administrator can, therefore, investigate the person to whom the stock is
transferred in order to ascertain whether that person is precluded by statute
from holding an interest in an alcoholic beverage license.
   (B)   As used herein, the word "change" is construed to include any change
in directors or officers of the corporation or change in ownership of stock
whereby any person secures 10% of the outstanding stock. Transfer of more than
10% of the total stock shall require a new license.
   (C)   (1)   The following information will be required concerning any new
director, officer, or person securing any interest in alcoholic beverage
license:
         (a)   Name and address;
         (b)   Nature of interest;
         (c)   Whether or not a citizen of the United States;
         (d)   Date of birth;
         (e)   Date residence was established in Kentucky if a resident of
Kentucky. If Elizabethtown resident indicate when residence was established in
Elizabethtown;
         (f)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any other license
or corporation or partnership holding a license under this act;
         (g)   Extent of stock ownership;
         (h)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any license or
corporation or partnership holding a license in any other state or province.
      (2)   This information shall be filed with the City ABC Administrator as
an amendment of the application pursuant to which the license was granted.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.17 DORMANCY.
   (A)    It is necessary that a licensee conduct the business authorized by
such a license or else the license will be declared dormant and become null and
void after 90 days of no business activity. Such is the intent of this
subchapter. Realizing that a licensee, like other businesses, may have business
interrupted by situations not under the licensee's control; various exceptions
to the dormancy rule have been included in this subchapter.
   (B)   Any license under which no business is transacted during a period of
90 days shall become null and void. At the expiration of the 90-day period the
license shall be surrendered to the City ABC Administrator.
   (C)   Except that the provisions of division (B) hereof shall not apply to
any licensee who is unable to continue in business at the premises for which a
license is issued due to construction, an act of God, casualty, death, the
acquisition of the premises by any federal, state, city or other governmental
agency under power of eminent domain, whether acquisition is voluntary or
involuntary, or loss of lease through failure of landlord to renew existing
lease. Such licensee shall furnish to the City ABC Administrator a verified
statement setting forth the fact that the licensee is unable to continue in
business prior to the expiration of the 90 days of inactivity, for any of the
reasons set forth herein, and the City ABC Administrator may grant an extension
of the dormancy with the license continuing to remain in effect during the
license period or until same is transferred to another premises,
notwithstanding the fact that no business is transacted during said period;
provided, however, no such license shall be considered valid unless business is
conducted thereunder within 12 months from the date of notice to the City ABC
Administrator. Such an extension may not extend beyond the renewal date but may
be for such times as the City ABC Administrator deems appropriate.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.18 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
    All renewal licenses must be on file with the City ABC Administrator within
14 days prior to the expiration of the licenses for the preceding license
period or the same shall be canceled, except where the licensee is unable to
continue in business at the same premises licensed during the preceding license
prior due to construction, an act of God, casualty, death, the acquisition or
threatened acquisition of these premises by any federal, state, city or other
governmental agency or private corporation, possessing power of eminent domain,
whether such acquisition is voluntary or involuntary, or loss of lease through
failure of landlord to renew existing lease; then said licensee shall file a
written verified statement no less than 20 days prior to the expiration date of
the license, setting forth these facts. The City ABC Administrator is hereby
authorized to extend the time for filing of a renewal of such license for a
reasonable length of time within the sound discretion of the City ABC
Administrator; provided, however, such licensee shall pay the scheduled license
fee from the expiration date of the former license or licenses. Said license
fee shall not be payable until application is made for the transfer of said
license to a new location.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.19 APPROVAL OF PREMISES.
    The City ABC Administrator shall not grant any alcoholic beverage license
or approve the renewal of a license until said applicant's place of business
have been approved for occupancy by the City Building Official, and any and all
other inspections required by the Kentucky Building Code are completed.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.20 DELINQUENT TAXES OR FEES.
    No license to sell alcoholic or malt beverages shall be granted or renewed
to any person who is delinquent in the payment of any taxes or fees due the
subchapter at the time of the issuing of the license; nor shall any license be
granted or renewed to sell upon any premises or property, owned and occupied by
the licensee upon which there are any delinquent taxes or fees due the
subchapter. Further, if a licensee becomes delinquent in the payment of any
taxes or any fees due the subchapter at any time during the license period, the
license to sell alcoholic or malt beverages shall be subject to revocation or
suspension. Licensee shall be in compliance with all city ordinances.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.21 BOOKS, RECORDS, AUDIO/VIDEO AND REPORTS.
   (A)    Every licensee under this subchapter shall keep and maintain upon the
licensed premises adequate books and records of all transactions involved in
the sale of alcoholic beverages in the same manner required by the reasonable
rules and regulations of the ABC Board. Such books, video/audio and records
shall be available at all reasonable times for inspection by the City ABC
Administrator and such subchapter employees who may assist the City ABC
Administrator in his or her review.
   (B)   Licensees that have video/audio recordings shall be required to
maintain all available video/audio recordings for a minimum of seven days
unless other applicable rules and regulations require otherwise.
   (C)   For the purpose of assisting the City ABC Administrator in enforcement
of this section, every licensee required to report to the ABC Board under KRS
243.850 shall provide a copy of such report to the City ABC Administrator.
Copies of any and all reports and correspondence to the ABC Board required by
Statute shall be furnished to the City ABC Administrator. Any results from said
reporting or correspondence from the ABC Board will be strictly enforced by the
City of Elizabethtown.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.22 HOURS FOR SALE AND DELIVERY; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)    Upon the licensee being granted a license for the retail or wholesale
sales of distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages or the sale of malt-based
beverages by the drink on its premises, it shall be permitted to sell or
dispense said beverages Sunday through Saturday between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 1:00 a.m.
   (B)   The licensee may sell or dispense distilled spirits, malt beverages
and wine on Election Day during normal times allowed under this section.
   (C)   All deliveries of alcoholic beverages in the subchapter shall be made
during normal business hours, Monday through Saturday. No delivery shall occur
between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday (see KRS
244.480). No delivery shall occur on Sunday.
   (D)   The licensee shall secure and/or lock any access to alcoholic
beverages during prohibited hours if said licensee is open for business during
the prohibited hours. No alcoholic beverages are allowed to be out at any time
after 1:00 a.m.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.23 CONDITIONS, PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)    No gambling or game of chance unless otherwise authorized by the
Commonwealth of Kentucky shall be permitted in any form on such licensed
premises. Dice, slot machines, or any device of chance are prohibited and shall
not be kept on such premises.
   (B)   The licensee shall be responsible for maintaining security on the
premises including providing adequate outside lighting to permit customers to
utilize the parking area and to promote the safety, health and welfare of the
general public utilizing the licensed premise. Security standards are further
necessary to discourage unlawful activity in and around the licensed premises.
No alcohol will be allowed in any parking area. Alcohol outside of the building
will only be allowed in a clearly defined area that abuts the building premises
such as a patio or supplemental bar as part of their permanent outside space.
This area will be defined with a physical boundary (i.e. a fence, wall,
shrubbery) as approved by the City ABC Administrator and in conformance with
all local, state, and federal rules and regulations. Any exit from said area
shall have signage that states that no alcohol is allowed beyond this point.
Said sign shall be a minimum of eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in size.
If the business is part of the Entertainment Destination Center, they must also
follow Ordinance No. 05-2023.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the licensee under this subchapter who sells
alcoholic beverages of any kind, to give away or offer to give away anything
tangible of value as a premium or prize, or for any other purpose in direct
connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages nor shall any licensee give
away any alcoholic beverage in any quantity for less than a full monetary
consideration.
   (D)   No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit (sell or
serve) any person to become drunk, intoxicated or under the influence on the
premises, nor shall any licensee permit any drunk or intoxicated person to
remain on the licensed premises.
   (E)   The licensee shall not sell or dispense alcoholic beverages to any
person who is under 21 years of age. The licensee shall check all
identifications to ascertain that every person attempting to purchase or
consume alcoholic beverages is at least 21 years of age.
   (F)   The licensee shall display at all times in a prominent place a sign at
least eight inches by 11 inches in 30-point or larger type which states as
follows:
 
Persons under the age of twenty-one (21) are subject to a fine of up to One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) if they:
   1. Enter licensed premises to buy, or have served to them, alcoholic
beverages.
   2. Possess, purchase or attempt to purchase, or get another to purchase
alcoholic beverages.
   3. Misrepresent their age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic beverages.
 
   (G)   The licensee, before commencing any business for which a license has
been issued, shall post, and display the subchapter issued license at all times
in a conspicuous place in the room or principal room where the business is
carried on so that all persons visiting the place may readily see the license.
The licensee shall not at any time post the license on premises other than the
licensed premises or upon premises where traffic in alcoholic beverages is
being carried on by any person other than the licensee, or knowingly deface,
destroy or alter the license in any respect.
   (H)   The licensee shall post in a prominent place easily seen by patrons a
printed sign at least eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in size, with
gender-neutral language supplied by the Cabinet for Health Services, which
shall warn that drinking alcoholic beverages prior to conception or during
pregnancy can cause birth defects (see KRS 243.895).
   (I)   Any off-premises signage advertising the sale of alcoholic beverages
is prohibited.
   (J)   No wholesaler or distributor shall sell any alcoholic beverages to any
person in the subchapter for any consideration except under the usual credit or
cash terms of the wholesaler or distributor at or before the time of delivery.
Nor shall any retail licensee sell to a purchaser for any consideration except
for cash at time of purchase.
   (K)   (1)   No licensee shall knowingly employ in connection with their
business, in any capacity whatsoever, any person who:
         (a)   For the purposes of selling and serving alcoholic beverages, is
under the age of 20 years, unless the person employed is at least 18 years of
age and under the supervision of a person 20 years of age or older.
         (b)   Within two years prior to the date of his employment, has had
any subchapter license under this subchapter revoked for cause.
      (2)   Violation of this section shall subject both employer and employee
to penalties provided in this subchapter and shall be cause for revocation of
license.
   (L)   All persons who shall be serving alcoholic beverages shall undergo
training required by this subchapter, the cost of which shall be the
responsibility of the licensee. See §
120.24 for further training requirements.
   (M)   No licensee shall offer or permit nudity, adult entertainment
activities, including nude or nearly nude dancing, adult motion picture,
television, slide or stage shows, cabarets or sexual entertainment centers on
any licensed premise. No licensee shall permit explicit sexual activity,
whether actual or simulated, upon any licensed premise. No licensee shall
sponsor or permit wet t-shirt or wet clothing contests, lingerie fashion shows,
mud wrestling or similar activities, nor shall a licensee allow dancing with
touching for compensation (including but not limited to wages, tips or
gratuities), or any other service, display or contest requiring physical
contact between patrons and/or patrons and employees on any licensed premises.
No licensee shall sponsor, offer or permit drinking contests, all-you-can-drink
specials or free drinks on any licensed premise in the subchapter.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.24 MANDATORY RESPONSIBLE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SERVICE TRAINING.
   (A)    All persons involved in the serving or selling or holds a special
temporary license of alcoholic beverages shall participate in and complete a
responsible beverage service-training program similar to the criteria of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky S.T.A.R. Training Program. A responsible beverage
service program shall effectively train its participants in the identification
of valid and fake identification, reducing illegal alcohol sales to minors,
reducing sales to persons who are already intoxicated, promoting responsible
consumption, provide information to sellers and servers to protect themselves
from third-party liability lawsuits and educating licensees and servers about
Kentucky liquor laws. Any similar training program shall be subject to review
by the City ABC Administrator to determine the completeness of the training. It
shall be the sole determination of the City ABC Administrator whether said
program meets the intent of this subchapter.
   (B)   All persons required to complete training under the above division (A)
shall complete that training within 30 days of the date on which the person
first becomes subject to the training requirement. When a new business is
licensed to serve alcoholic beverages, all employees must be trained prior to
the opening of the business. All persons completing the training required by
this section shall be re-certified through a responsible alcoholic beverage
service training program not less than once every three years thereafter.
   (C)   The owner of any license serving alcoholic beverages shall be
responsible for compliance with the training requirements and shall maintain
for inspection by the City ABC Administrator a record or file on each employee
that shall contain the name, job title, date of employment and proof of
certification of each seller or server regulated by this section. This
information shall be available at any reasonable time to any alcoholic beverage
control officer or any police officer.
   (D)   Responsible training records for each employee/server shall be
provided at time of application for license and each year at the time of
license renewal to receive the local license.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.25 MALT BEVERAGE KEG REGISTRATION.
   (A)   As used in this section, KEG is defined as a container designed and
capable of holding six or more gallons of malt beverage.
   (B)   All retail licensees (herein referred to as "licensee") operating
within the subchapter who sell malt beverages in kegs for consumption off the
premises of the licensee shall attach a control label. The label must have a
control number, and the name of the business. Each label must be affixed to
each keg at the time of sale and shall require the purchaser to complete and
sign a keg registration form for the keg stating the following:
      (1)   The purchaser is of legal age to purchase, possess and use the malt
beverage;
      (2)   The purchaser is not purchasing the keg for resale and will not
allow any person under the age of 21 to consume the malt beverage;
      (3)   The purchaser will not remove, obliterate or allow to be removed or
obliterated the identification label;
      (4)   The purchaser will state the property address where the keg will be
consumed and physically located; and
      (5)   The purchaser is aware of his/her duty to maintain a copy of the
keg registration form visible and readily accessible from the location of the
keg.
   (C)   The licensee shall obtain the name, address and telephone number of
the purchaser and shall require the purchaser to produce a valid driver's
license number and, if that is not available, to produce at least one other
valid form of identification.
   (D)   The licensee shall retain copies of the keg registration forms for a
period of one year and shall make the keg registration form available for
inspection by state and local alcoholic beverage control officers and other
enforcement officers.
   (E)   The keg registration form shall be forwarded to the City ABC
Administrator within five working days in all situations when the keg is not
returned or returned with the identification label removed or obliterated.
   (F)   The City ABC Administrator is authorized to develop appropriate rules
and regulations and to develop and make available forms for the identification
label and keg registration forms.
   (G)   All licensees that sell or offer for sale kegs shall post on the
licensed premises a notice provided by the subchapter concerning the provisions
of this subchapter.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale kegs
without the identification label attached and the keg registration form
completed. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove or to obliterate
the identification tag or to fail to have the declaration form visible and
readily accessible from the location of the keg. The penalties for violation of
this section shall be the penalties as set out in the penalties section of this
subchapter. In addition, licensees violating this section shall be subject to
appropriate alcoholic beverage control administrative action.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.26 INFORMATION DEEMED CONFIDENTIAL; PENALTY FOR DISCLOSURE; EXCEPTIONS.
    Any information, including returns, documents, or payments made pursuant
hereto and any other information gained by the City ABC Administrator or any
other official, agent, or employee of the subchapter as a result of any return,
investigation, hearing or verification required or authorized by the ordinance
shall be confidential; except, in accordance with proper judicial order, and
any person or agent divulging such information shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500 or imprisonment not
to exceed 30 days, or both, at the discretion of the court. Provided, however,
such person may disclose to the Commissioner of the Revenue Cabinet of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky or his or her duly authorized agent, or the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue Service, or his or her duly authorized agent,
all such information and extend the right to inspect any of the books and
records of the subchapter to said Commissioner of the Revenue Cabinet of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky and/or to said Commissioner of the Internal Revenue
Service who must grant to the subchapter the reciprocal right to obtain
information from the files and records of the Internal Revenue Service and
maintain the privileged character of the information so furnished to them.
(Ord 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.27 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Any license may be revoked or suspended by the City ABC
Administrator if the licensee shall have violated any of the provisions of
Kentucky Revised Statutes Ch. 241, 243 or 244, or any rule or regulation of the
ABC Board or of the Department of Revenue relating to the regulation of the
manufacture, sale and transportation or taxation of alcoholic beverages or if
such licensee shall have violated or shall violate any act of Congress or any
rule or regulation of any federal board, agency or commission, or this
subchapter or any other ordinance of the City of Elizabethtown now, heretofore,
or hereafter in effect relating to the regulation of the manufacture, sale and
transportation or taxation of intoxicating liquors or any rules or regulations
of the subchapter heretofore in existence or authorized by the terms of
Kentucky Revised Statutes Ch. 241, 243 and 244 to be created, or referred to,
irrespective of whether the licensee knew of or permitted the violation or
whether the violation was committed in disobedience of his instructions, or any
such license may be revoked or suspended for any cause which the City ABC
Administrator in the exercise of his or her sound discretion deems sufficient.
      (2)   If any licensee receives a final order of violation from the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Board whether 1) license to be suspended; or 2) in
lieu of suspension has imposed fine amount in final order, the subchapter shall
impose same penalty with 20 days to comply.
   (B)   A license may be revoked for any of the reasons for which the City ABC
Administrator would have been required to refuse a license if the facts had
been known.
   (C)   Any license must be revoked or suspended for the following causes:
      (1)   Conviction of the licensee or his agent or employee for selling any
illegal beverages on the premises licensed.
      (2)   Making any false, material statements in an application for a
license.
      (3)   If, within a period of two consecutive years, any licensee or any
of the clerks, servants, agents or employees of the licensee shall have been
convicted of two violations of the terms and provisions of KRS Ch. 241, 243 or
244 or any act heretofore or hereafter in effect relating to the regulation of
the manufacture, sale and transportation of alcoholic beverages or if, within
such period, any licensee or any of the clerks, servants, agents or employees
of the licensee shall have twice been convicted of any felony or of any
misdemeanor directly or indirectly attributable to the use of alcoholic
beverages, or of one such felony and one such misdemeanor.
      (4)   Willful and deliberate failure or default of a licensee to pay an
excise tax or any part thereof, or any penalties imposed by or under the
provisions of any statutes, this subchapter or acts of Congress relative to
taxation, or for a violation of any rules or regulations of the Department of
Revenue made in pursuance thereof.
      (5)   Revocation of any license granted under any act of Congress
relative to the regulation of manufacture, sale, and transportation of
alcoholic beverages. Any license must be revoked or suspended in the case of
sale of alcoholic beverages by the licensee at a price in excess of the price
set by federal or state regulations.
      (6)   Setting up, conducting, operating, or keeping, on the licensed
premises, any gambling game, device, machine or contrivance, or lottery or gift
enterprise, or handbook or facility for betting or transmitting sports bets; or
permitting to be set up, conducted, operated, kept, or engaged in, on the
licensed premised, any such game, device, machine, contrivance, lottery, gift
enterprise, handbook or facility.
   (D)   For any offenses for which revocation is not mandated, as identified
in division (C) above, the following process will apply (see also § 120.99
Penalty):
      (1)   The ABC Administrator and/or ABC Enforcement Officer or police
officer may issue a warning in writing that describes the offense and cites the
authority. It will provide a date by which the offense must be corrected. The
ABC Administrator and/or ABC Enforcement Officer or police officer has the
discretion to issue a violation with fine without a written warning.
      (2)   If the offense is not corrected by the date set forth, then the ABC
Administrator and/or ABC Enforcement Officer or police officer may assess a
fine of $100 per day until compliance or up to seven calendar days, whichever
occurs first.
      (3)   After the seven calendar days the license shall be revoked unless
the licensee can show good cause why it should not be revoked.
   (E)   (1)   Upon the determination of the ABC Administrator that a license
is to be revoked, the ABC Administrator will deliver a written notice of
revocation to the licensee at the premises where the licensee distributes
alcohol. The written notice of revocation shall include the reason for
revocation and the authority there under. The ABC Administrator may designate
the Chief of Police or other Officer of the Police Department to deliver the
revocation.
      (2)   A written notice of the revocation shall be mailed by regular mail
or by electronic mail to the owner of the licensed premises at the address
shown in the last application for a license or in the last statement
supplemental to the application and this shall be deemed sufficient compliance
for notice under this subchapter. The Commonwealth of Kentucky Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control will be notified of any revocation by the City ABC
Administrator.
   (F)   Upon revocation, the licensee shall at once surrender the license to
the City ABC Administrator. If the revoked license is not forthwith surrendered
by the licensee, the Chief of Police at the request of the City ABC
Administrator shall immediately cause one of his officers to take physical
possession of the license and return it to the City ABC Administrator.
   (G)   If a license is revoked or suspended by an order of the City ABC
Administrator, the licensee shall at once suspend all operations previously
authorized under said license.
   (H)   When a license has been revoked, the former licensee may, with prior
approval of the City ABC Administrator, dispose of and transfer the stock of
alcoholic beverages to an appropriate entity.
   (I)   Appeal from the decision of the City ABC Administrator shall be to the
Commonwealth of Kentucky ABC Board.
   (J)   City police officers and the City ABC Administrator or the officers of
that department are authorized to enforce this subchapter for alleged
violations.
   (K)   See also KRS 83A.065 Enforcement of City Ordinances and KRS 534.040
Fines.
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 120.40 ENTERTAINMENT DESTINATION CENTER.
   (A)   The Mayor and/or his or her designee is directed to apply for an
entertainment destination center license through the Kentucky Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control for the downtown entertainment destination center as
described herein.
   (B)   The geographical boundaries of the downtown entertainment destination
center in the city are graphically shown on Attachment “A” attached to
Ordinance 05-2023 and incorporated herein by reference. The Mayor and/or his or
her designee shall erect signs indicating the boundaries of the entertainment
destination center to the public in conformance with the requirements of the
license obtained from the Kentucky Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
   (C)   The hours of operation for the entertainment destination center shall
be Monday through Sunday 12:00 p.m. (noon) local time to 12:00 a.m. (midnight)
local time. Extended hours of operation may be promulgated by the Mayor and/or
his or her designee for recognized holiday celebrations.
   (D)   The Mayor and/or his or her designee shall develop rules, regulations,
and operational requirements for the entertainment destination center and
establish agreements and contracts for local business participation in the
entertainment destination center in compliance with Kentucky Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control licensing standards and the Kentucky Revised
Statutes.
   (E)   In establishing the entertainment destination center, patrons of
properly licensed premises may be allowed to carry alcoholic beverages within
the common areas of the entertainment destination center on sidewalks and
parking areas. Businesses within the entertainment destination center may
prohibit alcoholic beverages on their premises.
   (F)   Events that are held within the entertainment destination center must
comply with all licensing requirements and rules and regulations of the
Kentucky Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
   (G)   Notwithstanding the above, all permission or license to sell alcohol
in the entertainment destination center common area shall comply with state and
local laws.
   (H)   Patrons are prohibited from taking alcoholic beverages outside the
physical boundaries of the entertainment destination center.
   (I)   Written permission may be granted by the city’s Alcoholic Beverage
Control Office for the sale of alcohol in a common area of the entertainment
destination center after a determination that the requirements contained in
state law as may be amended including Kentucky Administrative Regulations in
804 KAR 4:370 have been met or will be met at a proposed event. If permission
is denied by the city’s Alcoholic Beverage Control Office, the licensee may
file an appeal of the decision in writing with the City Administrator or his or
her designee. The City Administrator or his or her designee shall thereafter
conduct a hearing within 14 days of receipt of the notice of appeal and shall
either uphold or overturn the decision of the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Office.
(Ord. 05-2023, passed 3-27-2023)
§ 120.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Per KRS 243.480, Suspension of licenses-payments in lieu of
suspension-appeal.
      (1)   Upon proceedings for the revocation of any license under KRS
243.520, the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, or the local alcoholic beverage
administrator, may in its or his or her discretion order a suspension of the
license for any cause for which it may, but is not required to, revoke the
license under the provisions of KRS 243.490 and 243.500. However, the licensee
may have the alternative, subject to the approval of the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Board or the local alcoholic beverage administrator, to pay in lieu of
part or all of the days of any suspension period, a sum as follows:
         (a)   Except for violations arising from retail sales activities,
including sales under licenses issued pursuant to KRS 243.086 and sales at
retail under KRS 243.0305:
            1.   Distillers, rectifiers, wineries, and brewers, $1,000 per day;
            2.   Wholesale liquor licensees, $400 per day; and
            3.   Wholesale beer licensees, $400 per day.
         (b)   1.   Retail licensees authorized to sell distilled spirits,
wine, or beer by the package or drink, $50 per day; and
            2.   Distillers, wineries, and brewers for violations arising from
their retail sales activities, including sales by distillers under licenses
issued pursuant to KRS 243.086 and sales at retail under KRS 243.0305, $50 per
day.
         (c)   All remaining licensees, $50 per day.
      (2)   Payments in lieu of suspension or for board-ordered agency server
training, collected on a cost recovery basis, collected by the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Board shall be deposited in the State Treasury and credited to
the general expenditure fund. Payments in lieu of suspension collected by local
alcoholic beverage administrators shall be deposited and used as local
alcoholic beverage license tax receipts are deposited and used.
      (3)   In addition to or in lieu of a suspension of a license, the board
may order a licensee to pay for and require attendance and completion by some
or all of the licensee's alcoholic beverage servers in the department's server
training program.
      (4)   Appeals from orders of suspension and the procedure thereon shall
be the same as are provided for orders of revocation in KRS Ch. 13B.
   (B)   Penalties shall be in addition to any criminal prosecution instituted
in Hardin County District or Circuit Court against an alleged violator.
   (C)   The City ABC Administrator may probate any fine for one year. Any
subsequent violation will carry its own enhanced penalty and cause the probated
fine to come due immediately. Any violation, warning, or offense will stay on
the business record for 12 months.
   (D)   For those offenses which do not require proof of compliance the City
ABC Administrator in their discretion may assess a fine of up to $1,000 per
violation. The payment of said fine shall be transmitted to the City Finance
Department to be deposited in the appropriate designated account.
   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
§§
120.01 through
120.27, for which no other penalty is hereby provided, shall, for the first
offense, be fined not less than $100 per day of violation and for the second
and each subsequent violation, the license holder shall be fined not less than
$200 per day of violation. The penalties provided for in this section shall be
in addition to the revocation or suspension of the licensee holder's license.
If the offender is a corporation, LLC, partnership, joint stock company,
association, fiduciary or other business entity, the principal officer or
officers responsible for the violation may be fined.
   (F)   See also KRS 83A.065 Enforcement
(Ord. 34-2022, passed 11-7-2022; Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-2-2024)
CHAPTER 121: RESTAURANTS
Section
Restaurant Tax
   
121.01   Definitions
   
121.02   Restaurant tax
   
121.03   Reporting procedures to City Council
   
121.04   Reporting procedures for restaurants
   
121.05   Transfer of funds to the city’s Tourism and Convention Bureau
   
121.06   Collection and enforcement
   
121.07   Interest and penalties
   
121.08   Information deemed confidential; penalty for disclosure; exceptions
   
121.09   Duties of Director of Finance
   
121.10   Procedure for applying for refund or overpayment
   
121.11   Failure to file return; failure to pay the restaurant tax withheld;
underpayment of amount due
Outdoor Cafés
   
121.25   Permit required
   
121.26   Application process
   
121.27   Permit fee and applicability
   
121.28   Standards and conditions
   
121.29   Requirements not covered
   
121.30   Enforcement
 
   
121.99   Penalty
RESTAURANT TAX
§ 121.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSION. The Elizabethtown Tourism and Convention Bureau.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. Any individual or entity that only operates a food
establishment which is on wheels and mobile in which both prepared and pre-
packaged food is sold (examples are: food truck; trailer; or cart). A mobile
food unit that is associated with a restaurant, as defined in this subchapter,
is not considered a MOBILE FOOD VENDOR under the definition of this subchapter
and all food sales from such units shall be reported with the overall sales of
the restaurant and pay all applicable taxes as required by KRS 91A.400.
   RESTAURANT. Any fixed commercial establishment with a permanent physical
location that engages in the preparation and serving of ready-to-eat foods in
portions to the consumer, including, but not limited to: restaurants; coffee
shops; cafeterias; short order cafés; luncheonettes; grilles; tea rooms;
sandwich shops; soda fountains; roadside stands; catering kitchens;
delicatessen; or similar places in which food is prepared for sale for
consumption on the premises or elsewhere. Not included in the definition of a
RESTAURANT for purposes of this subchapter are school cafeterias which are
operated by the school system, food vending machines, hospital cafeterias owned
by a governmental entity and cafeterias that are located inside industrial
factories in which services are limited to employees only.
(Prior Code, § 126.01) (Ord. 22-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 25-2019, passed
11-4-2019)
§ 121.02 RESTAURANT TAX.
   (A)   On and after 7-1-2007, there is hereby levied upon the retail sale of
all food and beverages by a restaurant located within the municipal limits of
the city a tax equal to 2% of the gross amount of each sale (excluding any
other tax). This tax may or may not be passed on to the ultimate customer/
consumer at the discretion of the restaurant.
   (B)   (1)   Effective 1-1-2020, all mobile food vendors are required to pay
on a calendar year basis, an annual business license fee of $250. The mobile
food vendor will not be required to file a monthly restaurant tax return. All
licenses expire December 31 each year.
      (2)   This fee does not apply to any restaurant business that has a
permanent physical location inside the city limits and also operates a mobile
food unit. Any such business shall be required to file monthly restaurant tax
returns, obtain an annual business license, remit any occupational withholdings
due, and file an annual net profits license fee return as required by city
ordinance.
   (C)   Any mobile food vendor that only participates in city sponsored events
or festivals shall be exempted from this license, however, they shall be
required to pay the applicable vendor set-up fee associated with each city
event or festival.
(Prior Code, § 126.02) (Ord. 22-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 23-2007, passed 5-
21-2007; Ord. 25-2019, passed 11-4-2019)
§ 121.03 REPORTING PROCEDURES TO CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   The funds collected from this tax shall be maintained by the city’s
Director of Finance in a special fund and disbursed to the Commission monthly.
All such money shall be used solely for the purpose of promoting recreational,
convention and tourist activity in the city, as set out in KRS 91A.390, and
shall not be used to provide a subsidy in any form to any motel, hotel or
restaurant.
   (B)   The Commission must obtain approval from the City Council prior to
using any revenues from the restaurant tax for the purposed of capital
improvements including the purchase or acquisition of land. In the event that
an approved capital project must be debt serviced by bonds or bonded by either
the city or the city’s Elizabethtown Public Properties Holding Company LLC, the
Commission will pledge amounts agreed upon by the Commission and City Council
necessary to satisfy principal and interest payments of the bond issue.
   (C)   The Commission is strongly encouraged to obtain approval from the City
Council for any projects that are estimated at a cost of $10,000 or more. In
obtaining the approval, the Commission must provide the City Council a complete
copy of any and all plans, data, research, appraisals, blueprints and the like
regarding the project.
   (D)   The Commission will continue to tender its annual budget to the City
Council for approval as required by KRS 91A.390.
   (E)   The Commission shall provide a monthly written report to the City
Council which includes all income, expenditures, disbursements and request
pertaining to restaurant tax funds.
(Prior Code, § 126.03) (Ord. 22-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 16-2009, passed 9-
8-2009)
§ 121.04 REPORTING PROCEDURES FOR RESTAURANTS.
   On or before the twentieth day of each calendar month, each restaurant owner
and/or operator shall report to the city’s Director of Finance on forms
provided by the city the gross amount of sales of the restaurant from food and
beverages for the preceding calendar month, and calculation of the tax due for
that month by computing 2% of its gross sales from food and beverages. The
owner/operator of the restaurant shall remit with the form the tax due to the
city’s Director of Finance.
(Prior Code, § 126.04) (Ord. 22-2007, passed 4-23-2007)
§ 121.05 TRANSFER OF FUNDS TO THE CITY’S TOURISM AND CONVENTION BUREAU.
   On or before the last day of each calendar month, the city’s Director of
Finance shall transfer to the city’s Tourism and Convention Bureau the gross of
moneys collected from the restaurant tax collected as of the twenty-fifth of
the current month. The city’s Tourism and Convention Bureau shall reimburse the
city 5% of the tax collected as reimbursement for the costs of collections,
including, but not limited to, the cost of reporting forms, postage, court
cost, attorney’s fees and all other expenses incurred in collection of this tax
by the fifth day following the monthly transfer of funds.
(Prior Code, § 126.05) (Ord. 22-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 16-2009, passed 9-
8-2009)
§ 121.06 COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the city’s Director of Finance to collect and
receive the restaurant tax imposed by this subchapter.
   (B)   The city’s Director of Finance shall keep records showing the amount
paid by each restaurant owner and/or operator and the date of such receipt.
   (C)   The city’s Director of Finance is hereby charged with the enforcement
of provisions of this subchapter, and is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt
and promulgate, and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of the
ordinance, including, but not limited to, provisions of the reexamination and
correction of returns to which and underpayment or overpayment is claimed or
found to have been made, and the rules and regulations as promulgated by him or
her shall be binding upon the taxpayer; provided, however, all such rules,
regulations and decisions shall be subject to the consent and approval of the
Mayor and City Council.
   (D)   The city’s Director of Finance, or any agent or employee designated by
him or her in writing, may examine the books, papers and records of any
restaurant in order to determine the accuracy of any return made, or if no
return was made, to ascertain the amount of restaurant tax imposed by the terms
of this subchapter as he or she may deem is reasonably necessary for the
purpose incident to the performance of his or her duties hereunder. The city’s
Director of Finance may enforce this right by application to the appropriate
court having jurisdiction over these matters.
   (E)   The city’s Director of Finance may dispense with examination of the
books, papers and records of any taxpayer in any case where the city’s Director
of Finance is furnished with a certificate of a qualified certified public
accountant, or the sworn statement of any other reputable accountant or
bookkeeper stating that the amount of restaurant tax reported conforms to the
state or federal income tax return filed for the applicable period.
   (F)   A restaurant owner and/or operator who collects the restaurant tax
from one or more persons and who fails to file a return and make payments
therewith shall in addition to the penalties prescribed herein upon conviction
be subject to a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $500, or imprisonment
for not more than 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each
offense. Such criminal penalties shall be in addition to the penalties imposed
within this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 126.06) (Ord. 22-2007, passed 4-23-2007)
§ 121.07 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person who fails to file any return required within the afore
stated time due to who fails to pay such restaurant tax when same shall become
due, shall be charged a penalty of 5% of the amount of the unpaid restaurant
tax for each month such return remains un-filed or tax unpaid, not exceeding a
penalty of 25% in the aggregate.
   (B)   All restaurant taxes imposed by this subchapter which remain unpaid
after they become due shall bear interest at the rate of 0.5% per month (or
part thereof).
   (C)   Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or pay
any tax due required by this subchapter, or to pay the city those so withheld
under the terms of this subchapter, or any person who shall refuse to permit
the city’s Director of Finance or any agent or employee designated by him or
her in writing, to examine books, records and papers pertaining to information
required under this subchapter, or who shall knowingly make any incomplete,
false or fraudulent return, or who shall attempt to do anything whatsoever to
avoid the full disclosure of the amount of gross receipts in order to avoid the
payment of the whole or any part of the restaurant license tax, shall become
liable to the city for such tax as well as the interest and penalty thereon,
and shall in addition, be subject to a fine of not less than $50, or more than
$500, or imprisonment for not less than 30 days, each day of non-filing
constituting a separate offense. Such criminal penalties shall be in addition
to the penalties imposed above.
(Prior Code, § 126.07) (Ord. 22-2007, passed 4-23-2007)
§ 121.08 INFORMATION DEEMED CONFIDENTIAL; PENALTY FOR DISCLOSURE; EXCEPTIONS.
   Any information, including returns, documents or payments made pursuant
hereto and any other information gained by the city’s Director of Finance or
any other official, agent or employee of the city as a result of any return,
investigation, hearing or verification required or authorized by the ordinance
shall be confidential; except, in accordance with proper judicial order, and
any person or agent divulging such information shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $500, or imprisonment not
to exceed 30 days, or both, at the discretion of the court and, upon
conviction, shall be dismissed from employment by the city; provided, however,
such person may disclose to the Commissioner of the Revenue Cabinet of the
state or his or her duly authorized agent, or the other Commissioner of
Internal Revenue Service, or his or her duly authorized agent, all such
information and extend the right to inspect any of the books and records of the
city to said Commissioner of the Revenue Cabinet of the state and/or to said
Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service who must grant to the city the
reciprocal right to obtain information from the files and records of the
Internal Revenue Service and maintains the privileged character of the
information so furnished to them.
(Prior Code, § 126.08) (Ord. 22-2007, passed 4-23-2007)
§ 121.09 DUTIES OF DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
   (A)   The city’s Director of Finance, or any agent or employee designated by
him or her in writing, shall have the following duties in connection with the
restaurant tax:
      (1)   Keep accurate records of all returns and of all sums received for
restaurant taxes. Such records shall contain the names and addresses of each
taxpayer, and the dates and amounts of payments. He or she shall keep the
original returns on file for a period of not less than three years after
filing;
      (2)   Enforce the provisions of this subchapter, all in accordance with
any policies set forth in any ordinance, municipal order or executive order;
      (3)   Prepare forms and instructions for the returns and payments
required by this subchapter. All instructions shall be clear and shall be as
short as possible;
      (4)   Examine returns. And for any returns appearing to be correct, made
inquiries, investigations and adjustments in the amount of tax due; and
      (5)   Where necessary to determine accurate figures for determining the
amount of tax due, examine books, records and information stored in computers
of any taxpayer; provided that, each city officer or employee acting under this
subchapter shall identify himself or herself and request the information
desired. If the officer or employee is refused admission to any place of
business or refused access to any records or computer memory, the city’s
Director of Finance or employee shall leave the premises and shall seek an
appropriate court order, with the assistance of the city attorney, to obtain
access to the information needed.
   (B)   The city’s Director of Finance shall approve the form of all returns
and written instructions prior to use by an agent or employee designated by him
or her in writing.
   (C)   The city’s Director of Finance may prepare pamphlets for distribution
to the public, clearly explaining the restaurant tax, returns and payments
required.
(Prior Code, § 126.09) (Ord. 22-2007, passed 4-23-2007)
§ 121.10 PROCEDURE FOR APPLYING FOR REFUND FOR OVERPAYMENT.
   (A)   Any taxpayer (pursuant to this subchapter) who truly believes that he
or she has made or permitted an overpayment of his or her liability for any
restaurant tax required by this subchapter may apply for refund of said
overpayment provided that he or she files an amended return, verified under
oath and setting forth in detail the full explanation of the reason of the said
claimed overpayment of his or her liability, within one year of the date of
said overpayment is made or the date he or she said restaurant tax payment was
due, whichever occurs first.
   (B)   If a refund has been properly claimed according to the provisions of
division (A) above, then the city’s Director of Finance shall have the
authority to honor and refund any such overpayment actually made above
liability upon the restaurant tax required under this subchapter which he or
she determines, within his or her sole discretion, was made through honest
mistake or inadvertence.
   (C)   In no event shall any refund be made for any payment upon any
restaurant tax unless the refund claim is submitted and filed in strict
compliance with the foregoing provisions of this section upon such refund claim
forms or amended return forms as hereafter shall be promulgated by the city’s
Director of Finance from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 126.10) (Ord. 22-2007, passed 4-23-2007)
§ 121.11 FAILURE TO FILE RETURN; FAILURE TO PAY THE RESTAURANT TAX WITHHELD;
UNDERPAYMENT OF AMOUNT DUE.
   (A)   (1)   If the taxpayer liable for collecting the restaurant tax and
filing a return fails to make a return, the city’s Director of Finance shall
prepare an estimate of the amount of restaurant taxes due based on the best
information available to them. The city’s Director of Finance may make
investigations to assist in making the estimate. He or she may consider the
volume of business done in the same type of business, and any other relevant
maters.
      (2)   When the city’s Director of Finance estimates the restaurant taxes,
the amount of interest and late charges provided by this subchapter shall be
added to the taxes due. He or she shall notify the taxpayer of the amount due.
Such notification shall be in writing and shall contain a brief description of
the method and estimated figures used in arriving at the estimated tax. Any
taxpayer may dispute the amount of the estimated tax by filing within 30 days
of notification of the estimated taxes a return accompanied by payment of the
entire balance due together with the interest and late charges due. Such return
shall be processed like any late return, and shall establish the restaurant tax
liability of the taxpayer in place of the estimated amount prepared by the
city’s Director of Finance.
      (3)   However, the city’s Director of Finance may later determine that
the amount shown in the return is insufficient so there is a deficiency, in the
same manner as in the case of other returns.
   (B)   (1)   If the city’s Director of Finance determines, by examining
available evidence, that the amount of restaurant taxes paid over by the
taxpayer is less than the amount required by this subchapter, he or she shall
notify the taxpayer of the deficiency. The city’s Director of Finance may use
any of the methods authorized in division (A) above to determine whether a
deficiency exists and to determine the amount of such deficiency. He or she
shall thereupon notify the taxpayer of the deficiency. Such notice shall be in
writing and shall state not only the amount of the deficiency, but also the
methods and estimates used in arriving at the amount of the deficiency
      (2)    If the taxpayer does not object in writing within 30 days of the
date of receiving such notice, the taxpayer shall be deemed to have accepted
the revised figures for the restaurant tax liability. If the taxpayer does file
written objection within the time specified, the taxpayer shall pay the fees,
together with penalties and interest, under protest and may thereupon pursue
administrative and judicial remedies as provided by this subchapter and by
state law to seek a refund.
   (C)   If the city’s Director of Finance finds that any taxpayer has
overpaid, he or she shall notify them of overpayment and shall refund the
amount of the overpayment to them.
   (D)   When the city’s Director of Finance notifies any taxpayer of any
estimated amount due, alleged overpayment or refund, he or she shall include in
the notice clear instructions on how, when and where the taxpayer may protect
or appeal the decision.
   (E)   (1)   If any taxpayer or any person, firm, association or corporation
required by this subchapter to pay a restaurant tax or to file a return shall
fail to file any return for any month, such failure to file shall constitute a
continuing offense against the city and the city’s Director of Finance may
proceed to estimate and collect the restaurant taxes at any time.
      (2)   In all other cases, no increases shall be made in the taxpayer’s
restaurant tax liability unless the first notice of such increase is received
by the taxpayer within three years of the time the return was first due.
(Prior Code, § 126.11) (Ord. 22-2007, passed 4-23-2007)
OUTDOOR CAFÉS
§ 121.25 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person or business to create,
establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be engaged in the business of
operating an outdoor café on city property in the downtown unless he or she
shall hold a permit issued under the terms of this subchapter.
      (2)   Exceptions. During “special community events” recognized by the
city, a listing of which shall be maintained in the office of the Mayor.
   (B)   Outdoor café encroachment permits shall only be issued to businesses
properly licensed by the city, which wish to provide services to its patrons or
to locate tables and chairs or other objects directly related to their business
of food and refreshment service on the public property immediately adjacent to
their business in the downtown area.
(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-16-2015; Ord. 18-2023, passed 8-21-2023) Penalty, see
§
121.99
§ 121.26 APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   An application for an outdoor café encroachment permit shall be made
to the Department of Planning and Development using an application form
prepared by the city. Any such application filed to comply with the provisions
of this subchapter shall provide the minimum information required by the
application form and shall be signed by both the person or business that
operates the food service business to which the permit would apply and the
owner of the property in which the business is located if not the same. The
application form shall provide the following additional information to the
city:
      (1)   A copy of a valid city business license to operate a business
establishment adjacent to the public property which is subject to the outdoor
café operation;
      (2)   Proof of current liability insurance, issued by a company licensed
to do business in the commonwealth, insuring the licensee and the city against
all claims or liability for damage to property or for bodily injury including
death, arising from the result, direct or indirect, of the use of the public
property pursuant to the outdoor café encroachment permit, including liquor
liability insurance coverage (with a minimum amount of $1,000,000). The
insurance shall name the city as an additional insured and shall provide that
the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the stated expiration
date without a 30-day advance written notice to the city by the insure. The
policy shall provide coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000; however, the
city may require a higher minimum amount at its reasonable discretion;
      (3)   A drawing of the proposed outdoor café encroachment seating area
showing the locations and dimensions of the area, all proposed encroachments
and publicly-owned benches, tables and other objects within the area. This
information should include, but not be limited to, the width of the public
right-of-way, public street name, width of the public sidewalk, information on
the type and materials of the improvements (furniture and other fixtures) and
other information deemed to be pertinent to review the request; and
      (4)   Proof of any required ABC license(s), Health Department permits and
any/all other applicable permits for the lawful operation of the business.
   (B)   The applicant shall be notified within 30 days of filing a completed
application form with the city of the approval or denial of the permit.
(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 121.27 PERMIT FEE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   There shall be no fee charged for an outdoor café encroachment permit.
   (B)   Any permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
valid from January 1 to December 31 of each calendar year.
   (C)   Any person who shall operate an outdoor café upon public property
without a proper permit as required by this subchapter shall be subject to
penalties as established by this subchapter.
   (D)   Any permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
used only by the person or business entity listed in the application form filed
and the permit issued. Said permit shall be only for the location listed in the
application form filed and the permit issued. Said permit is not transferable
to another applicant, person, business entity or to another location.
(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-16-2015; Ord. 08-2016, passed 5-16-2016)
§ 121.28 STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   All outdoor café encroachments must be within the permitted area as
indicated on the application filed and the approved permit issued by the city.
The city may require the area to be marked or physically indicated.
   (B)   All outdoor café encroachments must maintain a minimum 54-inch clear
passage way on the public sidewalk for pedestrians and shall not block access
to any building, driveway or crosswalk.
   (C)   Any change in the outdoor café encroachment area or the materials
(furniture or fixtures) approved to be within the outdoor café encroachment
area must receive written approval from the city.
   (D)   Outdoor café encroachment areas may be open to patrons of the business
from 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. (midnight) daily.
   (E)   All outdoor café encroachment areas must maintain a minimum five-foot
unobstructed clearance from a fire hydrant.
   (F)   All outdoor café encroachment areas must be kept sanitary, neat and
clean at all times. The area shall be free from accumulation of food, litter
and other potentially dangerous and unsanitary matter. Table tops must be so
designed and of such material and workmanship as to be smooth, non-porous,
easily cleanable and durable and shall be in a good condition to be readily
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (G)   No loudspeakers shall be allowed within the outdoor café encroachment
area.
   (H)   Smoking shall be prohibited in any outdoor café encroachment area.
   (I)   All improvements (furniture and other fixtures) used in the outdoor
café encroachment area must be readily removable without damage to the surface
of the public right-of-way and there shall be no penetration of the public
sidewalk surface.
   (J)   The outdoor café encroachment area must be accessible to persons with
disabilities.
   (K)   Heating is permitted in outdoor café encroachment areas, as long as
the heaters are portable and can be removed. The heating unit must be approved
by the Fire Chief or his or her designee and the City’s Electrical Inspector.
   (L)   The permitted use of the outdoor café encroachment area may be
temporarily suspended by the city when street, sidewalk or utility repairs are
necessary.
(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-16-2015; Ord. 18-2023, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 121.29 REQUIREMENTS NOT COVERED.
   Requirements necessary for the public safety, health and general welfare,
not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the Mayor or his
or her designee.
(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 121.30 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of
this subchapter. The Mayor or his or her designee shall have the authority to
render interpretations of this subchapter and to adopt policies and procedures
in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations,
policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of
this subchapter. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of
waiving requirements specifically provided for in this subchapter.
(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 121.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person or private entity who fails to comply with the
provisions of §§
121.25 through
121.30 of this chapter or any order issued pursuant to §§
121.25 through
121.30 of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine. An
official of the city may issue a citation for any violation of §§
121.25 through
121.30 of this chapter.
      (2)   Fines shall be $200 for the first offense; $250 for the second
offense; and $500 for the third offense and any additional offenses.
      (3)   The outdoor café permit issued under the provisions of §§
121.25 through
121.30 of this chapter is a temporary license that may be denied, suspended or
revoked for any conduct that is contrary to the provisions of §§
121.25 through
121.30 of this chapter or for any use of the permitted area that in any manner
creates a public nuisance or constitutes a danger to the public’s health,
safety or welfare in the sole discretion of any official of the city.
      (4)   Violations of §§
121.25 through
121.30 of this chapter may be abated by the city. The city may recover the
reasonable costs of any abatement action.
      (5)   Any person or private entity cited under §§
121.25 through
121.30 of this chapter may appeal said citation and request a hearing before
the Elizabethtown Code Enforcement Board pursuant to the process and procedures
of Ord. 09-2003, adopted April 2003, as amended.
(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-16-2015)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST MUNICIPAL REGULATIONS
      
131.   HOODS AND MASKS
      
132.   FIRE AND/OR POLICE ALARMS
      
133.   FIREWORKS
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST MUNICIPAL REGULATIONS
Section
   
130.01   Curfew
   
130.02   Air or spring guns
   
130.03   Deadly weapons; flourishing or firing
§ 130.01 CURFEW.
   (A)   Curfew for minors.
      (1)   It is a curfew violation for a child 13, 14, 15, 16 or 17 years of
age to be in a public place:
         (a)   After 1:00 a.m. and before 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday;
         (b)   After midnight on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or
Thursday; or
         (c)   Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or
Friday.
      (2)   It is a curfew violation for a child under 13 years of age to be in
a public place after 10:00 p.m. or before 5:00 a.m. on any day.
   (B)   Exemptions. This section does not apply to a child who is:
      (1)   Accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or custodian;
      (2)   Accompanied by an adult specified by his or her parent, guardian or
custodian;
      (3)   Carrying out an errand or other lawful activity as directed by his
or her parent, guardian or custodian; or
      (4)   Participating in, going to or returning from:
         (a)   Lawful employment; or
         (b)   A lawful athletic, educational, entertainment, religious or
social event.
   (C)   Authority of police during curfew hours.
      (1)   Any police officer may stop and question any minor suspected of
violating this section’s provisions and may take the minor into custody when
found violating provisions of this section. The officer shall take the minor to
the city police headquarters where the name of the minor’s parent, guardian or
person having legal custody of him or her shall be ascertained.
      (2)   The parent, guardian or person having legal custody shall be
notified of the child’s detention as required by KRS 610.200 and summoned by
the investigating officer to appear at police headquarters to assist in the
completion of the investigation. If the parent, guardian or person having legal
custody fails to appear within two hours from the time the child was taken into
custody, the investigating officer shall follow the requirements set forth in
KRS Ch. 610 and other applicable provisions of the state’s Unified Juvenile
Code, regarding detention or release of the child.
      (3)   Unless the nature of the offense or other circumstances are such as
to indicate the necessity of keeping the child in secure custody, the officer
shall release the child to the custody of his or her parent, guardian, person
having legal custody or other responsible adult.
      (4)   If the investigating or apprehending officer is satisfied that a
violation of division (A) above has occurred, he or she shall cause formal
charges to be filed requiring the child and his or her parent, guardian or
person having legal custody to appear in the appropriate court to answer the
charge of a violation of division (A) above.
      (5)   If formal charges are to be brought, before a child is released to
the custody of a parent, guardian, person with legal custody or other
responsible adult, the investigating officer shall obtain a written promise
signed by such person that the person will bring the child to the court at the
stated time or at such time as the court may order. The written promise, along
with the written report of the investigating officer, shall be submitted to the
court as required by KRS 610.200.
   (D)   Violation. Any child violating division (A) above shall be subject to
the procedures and penalties provided for by the state’s Unified Juvenile Code.
Any parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a child who violates any
provision of division (A) above may be subject to the financial penalty
provided for in KRS 610.180.
(Prior Code, § 130.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.02 AIR OR SPRING GUNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge within the city any “BB”
gun, air rifle or other weapon having as its propelling force a compressed air,
gas or spring mechanism.
(Prior Code, § 130.02) (Ord. passed 11-19-1956) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03 DEADLY WEAPONS; FLOURISHING OR FIRING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to:
      (1)   Flourish a deadly weapon or firearm within the city limits; and/or
      (2)   Discharge or fire any firearm or deadly weapon within the city
limits, except at a facility designed for the discharge of such weapons
specifically approved by the city, and operated under standard operating
procedures.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, FIREARM shall mean any weapon which
will expel a projectile by the action of an explosive.
(Prior Code, § 130.03) (Ord. passed 11-6-1978) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 131: HOODS AND MASKS
Section
   
131.01   Purpose and findings
   
131.02   Definition
   
131.03   Wearing hoods or masks in public places
   
131.04   Exemptions
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   The government of the city exists to serve equally all of its citizens and
to protect all of its citizens from crimes and inciteful disturbances.
(Prior Code, § 131.01) (Ord. 10-2001, passed 4-16-2001)
§ 131.02 DEFINITION.
   PUBLIC PLACES are all walks, alleys, streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes,
roads, highways or other ways or thoroughfares dedicated to public use or owned
or maintained by public authority; all grounds and buildings owned, leased or
operated for the use of organizations enjoying all tax-exempt privileges as a
charitable use.
(Prior Code, § 131.02) (Ord. 10-2001, passed 4-16-2001)
§ 131.03 WEARING HOODS OR MASKS IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No group of three or more persons shall, while wearing any hood, mask or
device whereby a substantial portion of the face is hidden or covered so as to
conceal the identity of the wearer, enter, be or appear in any public place
within the city.
(Prior Code, § 131.03) (Ord. 10-2001, passed 4-16-2001) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are exempted from the provision of §
131.03 of this chapter:
   (A)   Any person under 16 years of age;
   (B)   Any person using masks in theatrical productions including use in
Mardi Gras celebrations and masquerade balls;
   (C)   Any person lawfully engaged in trades or employment or in a sporting
activity where a mask or facial covering is worn for the purpose of ensuring
the physical safety and physical protection of the wearer, or because of the
nature of the occupation, trade or professional or sporting activity; and/or
   (D)   Any emergencies, including health emergencies.
(Prior Code, § 131.04) (Ord. 10-2001, passed 4-16-2001)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates §
131.03 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined no
more than $100 and/or imprisoned for no longer than 50 days.
(Prior Code, § 131.05) (Ord. 10-2001, passed 4-16-2001)
CHAPTER 132: FIRE AND/OR POLICE ALARMS
Section
   
132.01   Definitions
   
132.02   Unlawful false alarms; notice and duty to inspect, repair and initiate
training after five preventable false alarms
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FALSE ALARMS. The activation of any mechanical, burglary, robbery, security
or fire alarm system for the purpose of summoning police and/or fire personnel,
or which causes one or more police or fire personnel to be dispatched or
summoned to a particular location within the city, when, in fact, no crime,
fire or other emergency has, or is being attempted or committed, on the
premises.
   PREVENTABLE FALSE ALARM. The careless activation of any police security or
fire alarm by any individual, or activation of any police security or fire
alarm system proximately caused by the failure of the owner, lessee, operator
or occupant, or their contractor or agent, to properly design, install or
reasonably maintain the security or alarm system in a safe operating condition.
Police security or fire alarms shall not be deemed a PREVENTABLE FALSE ALARM in
violation of this chapter if it is determined by the Chief of Police, Chief of
the Fire Department, or their designees, that the alarm was caused by:
      (1)   A act of vandalism causing physical damage to the premises;
      (2)   Alarms occurring during electrical storms, tornadoes, blizzards or
other acts of God where there is evidence of damage or disruption to the alarm
system;
      (3)   Electrical power or telephone circuit disruption beyond the control
of the alarm company and/or user; or
      (4)   Any and all other acts or omission by persons, or events beyond the
reasonable control of the owner, lessee, operator or occupant of the premises
and the security alarm system.
(Prior Code, § 132.01) (Ord. 13-2002, passed 8-5-2002)
§ 132.02 UNLAWFUL FALSE ALARMS; NOTICE AND DUTY TO INSPECT, REPAIR AND INITIATE
TRAINING AFTER FIVE PREVENTABLE FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   Prohibition; preventable false alarms. It shall be unlawful for any
person to activate, initiate, transmit or otherwise cause, authorize or allow
more than five “preventable false alarms” at the same location within a six-
month period.
   (B)   Notice and corrective action requirement.
      (1)   General. If the Police or Fire Department, through their respective
designees, have probable cause to believe that five preventable false alarms
have occurred at the same location within a six-month period, the Chief of the
respective department, or his or her designee, shall within 48 hours of having
established probable cause, notify the property owner or other entity, user or
person in charge of the alarm system, in writing (by delivering said notice in
person or by certified mail, return receipt requested), of the nature and
number of preventable false alarms that have occurred to date, including a
brief description of the date and circumstances of each preventable false
alarm, and shall further advise the property owner, entity, user or person in
control of the alarm system, that any additional preventable false alarms after
this period of correction provided in division (B)(2) below shall constitute a
violation of this chapter for which the offender may be subject to prosecution
or civil penalty. Therefore, a compliance status with zero preventable alarms
shall be maintained for at least six months to avoid additional penalty.
      (2)   Duty to inspect and repair. Upon written notification from the
Police or Fire Departments, through then-respective designee, of the occurrence
of five preventable false alarms within a six-month period, the property owner,
entity, user or person in control of the police or fire security alarm system
in question, shall have the alarm system inspected by a representative of the
manufacturer of the alarm system or a qualified and reputable representative of
a fire and security alarm system dealer, to determine if the false alarms are
the result of mechanical failure, malfunction, improper design, installation,
lack of proper maintenance or human error due to carelessness or lack of
training. The inspection report shall note any and all deficiencies believed to
exist in the professional opinion of the qualified inspector, and what repairs
or other corrective action the inspector believes is required to render the
alarm system safe, operational and functional in relation to the type of
property or business it was designed and intended to secure. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner, entity, user or other person in control
of the alarm system to make the necessary repairs and/or take any and all other
remedial measures reasonably identified and required by the qualified
inspector, and to submit a copy of the inspection report along with written
proof of the repairs and/or remedial action taken to correct any malfunctions
or deficiencies identified in the alarm system to the Police or Fire
Departments from whom the original notice was received, within 14 days of
receipt of the formal notification required in division (B)(1) above.
      (3)   Duty to train and provide orientation to employees and occupants.
Upon written notification from the Police or Fire Departments, through their
respective designee, of the occurrence of five preventable false alarms within
a six-month period, the property owner, entity, user or person in control of
the police or fire security alarm system in question, shall provide system
operation instruction to all system operators or potential authorized users of
the premises, and shall provide written documentation of the framing to the
Police or Fire Departments from whom the original notice was received, within
14 days of receipt of the formal notification required in division (B)(1)
above.
   (C)   Exception. A false alarm shall not be deemed a “preventable false
alarm” under the prohibition in division (A) above if it occurs at a location
for which the property owner, entity, user or person in control of the alarm
system has been formally notified to inspect and repair any malfunctions or
deficiencies in accordance with divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above; provided
that, the false alarm occurs within the time period prescribed for the alarm
system to be inspected and repaired, if necessary.
(Prior Code, § 132.02) (Ord. 13-2002, passed 8-5-2002) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found to be in violation of any section of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof for each offense,
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500. As an alternative to, or in
conjunction with, the penalties set forth herein, any person found to be in
violation of this chapter may also be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed
$500, payable to the city within 20 days of the issuance of the citation. Civil
penalties not paid within the time prescribed herein may be recovered by the
city in a civil action, in the same manner provided for the collection of a
civil debt.
   (B)   The enforcing agency, department or individual may choose to seek
enforcement through the Code Enforcement Board enacted on 4-30-2003 by Ord. 09-
2003.
(Prior Code, § 132.03) (Ord. 13-2002, passed 8-5-2002; Ord. 19-2003, passed 6-
23-2003; Ord. 03-2005, passed 2-21-2005)
CHAPTER 133: FIREWORKS
Section
   
133.01   Sale of fireworks
   
133.02   Age restrictions; purchasing, selling and the like
   
133.03   Sales restricted to retail only
   
133.04   Public fireworks display
   
133.05   Training
   
133.06   Days and hours for using consumer fireworks
   
133.07   Use of fireworks on city property
   
133.08   Seizure of fireworks
   
133.09   State law affirmed
 
   
133.99   Penalty
§ 133.01 SALE OF FIREWORKS.
   No fireworks shall be offered for sale within the city limits unless they
comply with the definition of “consumer fireworks”, as defined in KRS 227.700
through 227.752. However, no consumer fireworks shall be offered for sale
unless they comply with provisions of KRS Ch. 227.
(Prior Code, § 133.01) (Ord. 10-2008, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 04-2010, passed 6-
7-2010) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.02 AGE RESTRICTIONS; PURCHASING, SELLING AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 shall purchase, possess, use or
transport consumer fireworks, as defined in §
133.01 of this chapter, except in the presence of a responsible adult.
(Prior Code, § 133.02)
   (B)   No person under the age of 18 shall sell or otherwise handle fireworks
for sale or transport. No person under the age of 18 shall visit and remain in
a fireworks stand or storage facility as a family member or friend of an
employee.
(Prior Code, § 133.03)
(Ord. 14-2011, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.03 SALES RESTRICTED TO RETAIL ONLY.
   (A)   No person shall offer fireworks at wholesale, or as a dealer, or
jobber, with the city limits, except as provided for in KRS Ch. 227.
   (B)   Fireworks shall not be sold or used, on city-owned property, public
rights-of-way or public places, except for a lawful display of fireworks
subsequent to issuance of fireworks permit under §
133.05 of this chapter.
   (C)   In addition to any permit or registration fee required by the state,
the city will require a $100 permit fee for the issuance of certificate of
occupancy to any temporary consumer fireworks retail sales facility as defined
in NFPA 1124 (Ch. 3.329.1, current edition).
(Prior Code, § 133.04) (Ord. 10-2008, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 04-2010, passed 6-
7-2010; Ord. 14-2011, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.04 PUBLIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY.
   No person shall conduct a “public fireworks display” without obtaining the
requisite permit from the State Fire Marshal’s office in accordance with KRS
Ch. 227. Public fireworks display shall be defined as any display of “consumer”
or “display” fireworks at a public area or as any display of fireworks at a
private location if the fireworks are other than those approved by §
133.01 of this chapter. The request for permit to the local Fire Chief shall be
accompanied by a $100 permit fee, unless waived, and a permit shall only be
issued if the conditions of KRS 227.710, KRS 227.720 and NFPA 1123 (most
current edition) have been met in total.
(Prior Code, § 133.05) (Ord. 10-2008, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 04-2010, passed 6-
7-2010; Ord. 14-2011, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.05 TRAINING.
   (A)   Only persons “certified” through attendance at a locally recognized
training program, or other program acceptable to the city’s Fire Marshal, will
be designated a “competent operator” and thus allowed to supervise a public
fireworks display.
   (B)   All display assistants shall be trained in the duties they are to
perform, be under the direct supervision of the competent operator and be at
least 18 years old.
   (C)   Renewal of certification shall be automatic upon proof of actively
participating in at least three outdoor fireworks displays during the previous
four years.
(Prior Code, § 133.06) (Ord. 10-2008, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 04-2010, passed 6-
7-2010) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.06 DAYS AND HOURS FOR USING CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
   Unless specifically permitted by the city’s Fire Department, persons may
only use, ignite, fire or explode consumer fireworks on Memorial Day, July 3,
July 4, July 5 and Labor Day between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m.
(midnight) and December 31 between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:30 a.m. on
January 1. Any person wishing to use, ignite, fire or explode consumer
fireworks any other day or time must notify the city’s Fire Department and
receive express permission.
(Ord. 08-2012, passed 6-4-2012; Ord. 07-2017, passed 6-19-2017) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.07 USE OF FIREWORKS ON CITY PROPERTY.
   It is not permitted for any person to ignite fireworks on city property
including parks and public spaces, except for approved public fireworks
displays.
(Ord. 08-2012, passed 6-4-2012) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.08 SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS.
   Any law enforcement officer or Fire Department officer deputized to act on
behalf of the State Fire Marshal, shall be legally authorized to remove, at the
expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks which are stored and held in
violation of KRS Chapter 227.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see KRS 227.750
§ 133.09 STATE LAW AFFIRMED.
   All provisions of state law regarding the sale and use of fireworks shall
continue in force and effect, except as modified through enactment of this
section.
(Prior Code, § 133.08) (Ord. 10-2008. passed 6-16-2008)
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating this chapter shall be cited for a civil offense
pursuant to the Code Enforcement Board Ordinance and fine schedule. Each day of
violation shall be considered a separate occurrence. The civil fine shall be
paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date
of notification, then the city may recover said fine in a civil action in a
court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain an injunction or
abatement order to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   The citing officer may, at his or her discretion, cite the offender to
appear before the Code Enforcement Board, per Ord. 09-2003.
(Prior Code, § 133.09) (Ord. 10-2008, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 14-2011, passed 6-
20-2011)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
152.   PLANNING
      
153.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
      
154.   ZONING CODE
      
155.   EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
      
156.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Standard Codes
   
150.01   Adoption of Kentucky Building Code and Standards of Safety;
enforcement agents
   
150.02   Application
   
150.03   Other standard codes adopted by reference
Administration and Enforcement
   
150.15   Code Official
   
150.16   Permit and application fees
   
150.17   Non-compliance with permit requirements
 
   
150.99   Penalty
STANDARD CODES
§ 150.01 ADOPTION OF KENTUCKY BUILDING CODE AND STANDARDS OF SAFETY;
ENFORCEMENT AGENTS.
   (A)   Adoption of the Kentucky Building Code.
      (1)   The 2018 Kentucky Building Code promulgated in 815 KAR 7:120 and
the 2018 Residential Code promulgated in 815 KAR 7:125 by the Board of Housing,
Buildings and Construction, Commonwealth of Kentucky, including all referenced
codes and appendixes and together with any and all subsequent amendments are
hereby adopted in full as an ordinance of the city as if set out at length
herein.
      (2)   A copy of said codes are on file in the office of the Department of
Planning and Development and the Director shall at all times keep a copy of
said building codes for reference.
      (3)   An attested copy of this section shall be transmitted to the
Department of Housing, Buildings and Construction of the commonwealth.
   (B)   Designated enforcement officer. The Department of Planning and
Development shall be designated as the local enforcement agency for said codes.
All Building Code inspections shall be performed by persons certified by the
commonwealth’s Department of Housing, Buildings and Construction. All
electrical inspections shall be performed by a certified electrical inspector
specifically approved by this jurisdiction.
   (C)   Building inspection program. Pursuant to KRS 198B.060(8), a building
inspection program is hereby established in the city for application to all
buildings, including single-family dwellings as provided in said adopted codes.
The city shall continue to perform additional plan review and inspection
functions in conformance with the agreement with the commonwealth pursuant to
KRS 198B.060(5).
   (D)   Permits and fees. The fees for permits and inspections shall be
provided for by a separately adopted city ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 150.01) (Ord. passed 4-3-1972; Ord. 6, passed 1-21-1991; Ord.
27, passed 7-1-1991; Ord. 1, passed 1-7-2002; Ord. 26-2007, 6-2-2007; Ord. 03-
2008, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 26-2018, passed 9-17-2018)
§ 150.02 APPLICATION.
   Pursuant to KRS 198B.060(8), a building inspection program is hereby
established in the city for application to all buildings, including single-
family dwelling as provided in the adopted codes.
(Prior Code, § 150.02) (Ord. 27, passed 7-1-1991; Ord. 26-2007, passed 6-2-
2007)
§ 150.03 OTHER STANDARD CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   In addition to the codes adopted in §
150.01 of this chapter, the following codes shall be in full force and effect
as to all buildings, structures, real estate and improvements to real estate in
the city:
      (1)   Kentucky Residential Code, current edition;
      (2)   National Fuel Gas Code, current edition;
      (3)   National Electric Code, current edition;
      (4)   Life Safety Code, current edition; and
      (5)   National Fire Code, current edition.
   (B)   The above codes, regulations, interpretations and pamphlets are on
file in the office of the Department of Planning and Development.
   (C)   Any and all fixture amendments and modifications, interpretations and
regulations of the above codes’ ordinances to the extent of the amendments,
interpretations, regulations and pamphlets shall become a part of this code and
this section and have the same force and effect as this section, as they are
received by the office of the Department of Planning and Development.
   (D)   The city’s Department of Planning and Development shall be designated
the local enforcement agency for the codes, regulations, interpretations and
pamphlets hereinabove referred to.
(Prior Code, § 150.03) (Ord. passed 12-7-1970; Ord. passed 6-5-1978; Ord.
passed 2-7-1983; Ord. passed 1-20-1986; Ord. 14-2009, passed 8-24-2009; Ord.
01-2012, passed 1-17-2012)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.15 CODE OFFICIAL.
   (A)   The office of Code Official is hereby created and the Director of
Department of Planning and Development shall be known as “Code Official”.
   (B)   The Code Official shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
City Council. The appointment shall continue during good behavior and
satisfactory service. He or she shall not be removed from office, except for
cause after full opportunity has been given to be heard on specific charges.
During temporary absence or disability of the Code Official, the appointing
authority shall designate an Acting Code Official.
   (C)   To be eligible to appointment, the candidate for the position shall
have had experience as an architect, structural engineer, building inspector or
superintendent of building construction. He or she shall be in good health,
physically capable of making the necessary examinations and inspections. He or
she shall not have any interest whatever, directly or indirectly, in the sale
or manufacture of any material, process or device entering into or used in or
in connection with building construction, alterations, removal and demolition.
   (D)   (1)   The Code Official or his or her personnel and/or department
shall devote the necessary time to perform duty of the office. The Code
Official shall examine the premises for which permits have been issued and
shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied
with and that construction is prosecuted safely. The Code Official shall, when
requested by proper authority, or when the public interest so requires, make
investigations in connection with matters referred to in the Code and render
written reports on the same and shall issue such notices or orders as may be
necessary to enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe
conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction or to
require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures.
      (2)   Inspections required under the provisions of the Building Code
shall be made by the Code Official or his or her duly appointed assistant. The
Code Official may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection
services, after investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No
certificate called for by any provision of the Code shall be issued on such
reports unless the same are in writing and certified to by a responsible
officer of such service.
      (3)   All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and
sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from
the office of the Code Official without his or her written consent.
      (4)   The Code Official shall make written reports to his or her
immediate superior once each month, or more often if requested, including
statements of permits and certificates issued, and orders promulgated.
   (E)   The Code Official or any employee charged with the enforcement of this
chapter, acting in good faith and without malice for the city in the discharge
of his or her duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself liable
personally and he/she is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any
damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required
or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his or her duties. Any
suit brought against the Code Official or employee, because of such act or
omission performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provisions of this
chapter, shall be defended by the legal department of the city until final
termination of the proceedings.
   (F)   The Code Official may request and shall receive so far as may be
necessary, in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and
cooperation of other officials of the municipality.
   (G)   The Code Official, or other authorized officer in the discharge of his
or her official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to
enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour.
   (H)   The Code Official shall be compensated in the amount as established by
the City Council from time to time by ordinance.
   (I)   No person shall be appointed or act as the Code Official unless such
person has taken the oath required by § 228 of the Constitution of the
commonwealth and has provided bond, if required, with corporate surety
authorized to transact business in the commonwealth and conditioned upon the
performance of the duties specified herein.
(Prior Code, § 150.15) (Ord. passed 12-7-1970; Ord. passed 4-3-1972)
§ 150.16 PERMIT AND APPLICATION FEES.
   The fees for permits and inspections shall be as set out below:
Application Fees
   Amended preliminary plat                         $250
   Conditional use permit                           $150
   Land use restriction fee                         $25
   Map amendment                                    $350
   Planned unit development                         $500
   Preliminary plat                                 $500
   Record plat                                      $250
   Variance                                         $150
Construction Permit Fee Schedule
   Up to $9,999                                     No fee
   $10,000 to $19,999                               $25
   $20,000 to 34,999                                $50
   $35,000 to $49,999                               $100
   $50,000 to 74,999                                $150
   $75,000 to $99,999                               $200
   $100,000 to $149,999                             $250
   $150,000 to $199,999                             $500
   $200,000 to $299,999                             $750
   $300,000 to $399,999                             $1,000
   $400,000 to $499,999                             $2,000
   $500,000 to $749,999                             $3,000
   $750,000 to $999,999                             $4,000
   $1,000,000 to $2,499,999                         $5,000
   $2,500,000 to $4,999,999                         $7,500
   $5,000,000 +                                     $10,000
   Sign installation fee                            $100
   Temporary banner sign installation fee           $35
Demolition Fee Schedule
   Commercial                                       $100
   Moving of structure or building (any building)   $50
   Residential                                      $50
Electrical Permit Fee Schedule
   Accessory building/garages                       No charge
   Change out of service                            $30
   Industrial/commercial                            2% of electric contract;
                                                       minimum $100
   Mobile or manufactured homes                     $30
   Multi-family dwelling (each unit)                $50
   Rechecks                                         No charge
   Remodel/finishing or basement                    No charge
   Single-family Under 1,500 sq. ft.                $50
dwelling
   Single-family Over 1,500 sq. ft. to 2,500 sq.    $100
dwelling            ft.
   Single-family Over 2,500 sq. ft.                 $150
dwelling
   Swimming pools                                   $30
   Temporary on main                                No charge
   Temporary service poles                          $30
   Generator (residential)                          $30
   Generator (commercial)                           $100
   Temporary structure                              $125
Plan Review Fee Schedule (non-rental)
                                                       Plan examination fees
   All occupancy types, except single-family        are adopted as specified
residential dwellings                                  in the Kentucky Building
                                                       Code
   Single-family residential dwellings - 1,999 sq. f$100
or less
   Single-family residential dwellings - 2,000 sq. f$150
or more
 
(Prior Code, § 150.16) (Ord. 17-1999, passed 6-21-1999; Ord. 02-2003, passed 1-
6-2003; Ord. 14-2003, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 08-2008, passed 6-16-2008; Ord.
11-2009, passed 8-17-2009)
§ 150.17 NON-COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   Where work for which a permit is required by city ordinance or regulation is
started or proceeded with prior to obtaining a permit, during the first 30 days
of violation or 50% of construction, whichever comes first, a penalty of 50% of
the cost of the usual permit fee will be added to the permit fee. After 30 days
of violation or more than 50% construction the usual fee will be doubled, but
the payment of such penalty shall not relieve any persons or corporation from
fully complying with the other codes, ordinances or regulations of the city in
the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed by the
codes, ordinances or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 150.17) (Ord. passed 4-3-1972; Ord. passed 12-17-1984; Ord. 35-
1988, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 27, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of the state codes adopted in §
150.01 shall be subject to the following penalties.
   (A)   Violators of the Kentucky Building Code shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not less than $10, nor more than $1,000, for each offense.
(KRS 198B.990(1))
   (B)   (1)   Violators of the state’s Standards of Safety shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $25, nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense.
(KRS 227.990(1))
      (2)   The imposition of penalties shall not preclude the city from
instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent
the occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to prevent an illegal
act, conduct, business or use in or about any premises.
   (C)   Violators of the state’s Plumbing Code shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not less than $10, nor more than $100, imprisonment for
not more than 90 days, or both, for each offense.
(KRS 318.990)
   (D)   Any person, firm, corporation or other organization violating §§
150.16 or
150.17 of this chapter by work begun or services performed without the payment
of the appropriate fee shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, the violator shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $500,
plus court costs.
(Prior Code, § 150.99) (Ord. passed 2-17-1964; Ord. passed 4-3-1972; Ord.
passed 12-17-1984; Ord. 35-1988, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 27, passed 7-1-1991)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Statement of purpose
   
151.04   Objectives
   
151.05   Definitions
   
151.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
151.07   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas
   
151.08   Establishment of development permit
   
151.09   Compliance
   
151.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.11   Interpretation
   
151.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
151.13   Enforcement, violation notice
Administration
   
151.25   Designation of local administrator
   
151.26   Establishment of development permit
   
151.27   Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator
   
151.28   Appeals and variance procedures
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
151.40   General construction standards
   
151.41   Specific standards
   
151.42   Streams without established base flood elevation (unnumbered A Zones)
and/or floodways
   
151.43   Areas of shallow flooding zones
   
151.44   Subdivision proposals
   
151.45   Accessory structures in all zones beginning with the letter “A”
   
151.46   Critical facilities
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the commonwealth has, in KRS 82.082, delegated to local
government units the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City
Council hereby adopts the following floodplain management chapter, as follows.
(Prior Code, § 151.01) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007; Ord. 32-2007, passed 9-
17-2007)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard area of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood loses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstruction
in floodplains causing increased in flood heights and velocity, and by the
location in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to
other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or otherwise
unprotected from flood damage.
(Prior Code, § 151.02) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private loss due to flooding by
provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocity;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which accommodate or channel flood waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion of flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Prior Code, § 151.03) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard or other flood-prone areas in such
a manner as to minimize future flood blighted areas caused by flooding;
   (G)   Ensure that potential home buyers are on notice that property is in a
special flood hazard area; and
   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy a special flood hazard area assume
responsibility for their actions.
(Prior Code, § 151.04) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A ZONE. Portions of the special flood area (SFHA) in which the principle
source of flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt or a combination of both.
In A ZONES, flood waters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not
a significant threat to structures. Areas of 100-year flood, base flood
elevations and flood hazard factors are not determined.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principle structure, the use of which is incidental
to the use of the principle structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should constitute a
minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation and should be
designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns and hay
sheds.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principle
use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is
connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls is new construction.
   AE ZONES. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 1% annual chance flood
(100-year flood). Base flood elevation (BFEs) are determined.
   AH ZONES. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between one
and three feet (usually shallow ponding). Base flood elevations are shown.
   AO ZONES. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where water depth is between
one and three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain). Flood depths are
shown.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or from the Floodplain
Administrator’s ruling on a request for a variance.
   AR/A1-A30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO AND AR/A ZONES. Special flood hazard areas
(SFHAs) that result from the de-certification of a previously accredited flood
protection system that is in the process of being restored to provide a 100-
year or greater level of flood protection. After restoration is complete, these
areas will still experience residual flooding from other flooding sources.
   A99 ZONE. The part of the SFHA inundated by the 100-year flood which is to
be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection system under
construction. No base flood elevations are determined.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) where the base flood depths from one to three feet,
there is no clearly defined channel, the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate; and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. (Also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD.) BASE FLOOD is the term used
throughout this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30 AR/AH and AR/AO
that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1%
or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all four sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure that is principally aboveground,
including a manufactured home, gas or liquid storage tank or other human-made
facilities or infrastructures. See definition for STRUCTURE.
   COMMUNITY. A political entity having the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance
Administration to provide incentives to those communities in the regular
program to go beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop
extra measures for protection from flooding.
   COMMUNITY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (CFHA). An area that has been determined by the
Floodplain Administrator (or other delegated, designated or qualified community
official) from available technical studies, historical information and other
available and reliable sources, which may be subject to periodic inundation by
flood waters that can adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare. Included are areas downstream from dams.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any property that, if flooded, would result in severe
consequences to public health and safety or a facility which, if unusable or
unreachable because of flooding, would seriously and adversely affect the
health and safety of the public. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not
limited to: housing likely to contain occupants not sufficiently mobile to
avoid injury or death unaided during a flood; schools, nursing homes,
hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, vehicle and
equipment storage facilities, emergency operations centers likely to be called
upon before, during and after a flood, public and private utility facilities
important to maintaining or restoring normal services before, during and after
a flood, and those facilities or installations which produce, use or store
volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials,
hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
   D ZONE. An area in which the flood hazard is undetermined.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations or permanent storage
of materials or equipment.
   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. For insurance purposes, a non-basement structure built
to have the lowest floor elevated above ground level by foundation walls, shear
walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor on the FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of
certification that verifies a structure’s elevation and other related
information to verify compliance with this chapter.
   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The initial phase under which a community participates in
the NFIP, intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized
rates on all insurable structures in that community before the effective date
of the initial FIRM.
   ENCLOSURE. The portion of a structure below the base flood elevation (BFE)
used solely for parking of vehicles, limited storage or access to the
structure.
   ENCROACHMENT. The physical advance or infringement of uses, plant growth,
fill, excavation, structures, permanent structures or development into a
floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before 1-1-1975, for FIRMS
effective before that date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as
EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the city based on
specific technical base flood elevation data which established the area of
special flood hazards.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD. The flood that has a 0.2% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any year. Areas subject to the 500-year flood have a moderate to
low risk of flooding.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source;
      (3)   Mudslides which are proximately caused by flooding and are akin to
a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas,
as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of
the current; and
      (4)   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which
results in flooding.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). A map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has
delineated the areas of flood hazards and the regulatory floodway.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). A map on which the boundaries of the
flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow), and flood-related erosion areas having special
hazards have been designated as Zones A, M and/or E by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has
delineated special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) containing
flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and/or the Flood Boundary
Floodway Map (FBFM) and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by flood waters from any source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed by a NFIP participating
community to administer and enforce the floodplain management ordinances.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing
natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency
preparedness plans, flood-control works, floodplain management ordinances and
open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other applications of
police power, which control development in flood-prone areas. This term
describes federal, state and/or local regulations, in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOOD-PROOFING CERTIFICATE. A certification by a registered professional
engineer or architect, on a FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of
certification stated that a non-residential structure, together with attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities is water-tight to a specified design
elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water
and all structural components are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy and anticipated
debris impact forces.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also
referred to as the REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. That area of the floodplain on either side of the
regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted without additional
hydraulic and/or hydrologic analysis.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet about the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than those calculated for the base flood. FREEBOARD must be applied not
just to the elevation of the lowest floor or flood-proofing level, but also to
the level of protection provided to all components of the structure, such as
building utilities, HVAC components and the like.
   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION. As related in §
151.28 of this chapter, the variance granted must not cause fraud on or
victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City Council
will consider the fact that every newly constructed structure adds to
government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100
years. Structures that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood
elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from
floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are
subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those
increased flood damages may incur. In addition, future owners may purchase the
property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be
insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE FACILITY. A facility, structure or other
development, which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located
or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only a docking or
port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers,
shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood processing facilities. This term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
   GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit (i.e., county or municipality) that
is empowered to adopt and implement ordinances to provide for the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
   HAZARD POTENTIAL. The possible adverse incremental consequences that result
from the release of water or stored contents due to failure of a dam or
misoperation of a dam or appurtenances. The HAZARD POTENTIAL classification of
a dam does not reflect in any way the current condition of a dam and its
appurtenant structures (e.g., safety, structural integrity, flood-routing
capacity).
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the Natural Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminary determined by
the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).
      (1)   Increased cost of compliance coverage provides for the payment of a
claim for the cost to comply with state or community floodplain management laws
or ordinances after a direct physical loss by flood. When a building covered by
a Standard Flood Insurance Policy under the NFIP sustains a loss and the state
or community declares the building to be substantially or repetitively damaged,
ICC will help pay up to $30,000 for the cost to elevate, flood-proof, demolish
or remove the building.
      (2)   ICC coverage is available on residential and non-residential
buildings (this category includes public or government buildings, such as
schools, libraries and municipal buildings) insured under the NFIP.
   KRS 151.250 - PLANS FOR DAMS, LEVEES, ETC TO BE APPROVED AND PERMIT ISSUED
BY CABINET - (ENVIRONMENTAL AND PUBLIC PROTECTION CABINET).
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person and no city,
county or other political subdivision of the state, including levee districts,
drainage districts, flood control districts or systems, or similar bodies,
shall commence the construction, reconstruction, relocation or improvement of
any dam, embankment, levee, dike, bridge, fill or other obstruction (except
those constructed by the Department of Highways) across or along any stream, or
in the floodway of any stream, unless the plans and specifications for such
work have been submitted by the person or political subdivision responsible for
the construction, reconstruction or improvement and such plans and
specifications have been approved in writing by the Cabinet and a permit
issued. However, the Cabinet, by regulation, may exempt those dams, embankments
or other obstructions which are not of such size or type as to require approval
by the Cabinet in the interest of safety or retention of water supply.
      (2)   No person, city, county or other political subdivision of the state
shall commence the filing of any area with earth, debris or any other material,
or raise the level of any area in any manner, or place a building, barrier or
obstruction of any sort on any area located adjacent to a river or stream or in
the floodway of the stream so that such filling, raising or obstruction will in
any way affect the flow of water in the channel or in the floodway of the
stream unless plans and specifications for such work have been submitted to and
approved by the Cabinet and a permit issued as required in division (1) above.
      (3)   Nothing in this section is intended to give the Cabinet any
jurisdiction or control over the construction, reconstruction, improvement,
enlargement, maintenance or operation of any drainage district, ditch or system
established for agricultural purposes, or to require approval of the same,
except where such obstruction of the stream or floodway is determined by the
Cabinet to be a detriment or hindrance to the beneficial use of water resources
in the area, and the person or political subdivision in control thereof so
notified. The Department for Natural Resources, through KRS Ch. 350, shall have
exclusive jurisdiction over KRS Ch. 151 concerning the regulation of dams,
levees, embankments, dikes, bridges, fills or other obstructions across or
along any stream or in the floodway of any stream which structures are
permitted under KRS Ch. 350 for surface coal mining operations.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Board and Floodway
Maps and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMCs include the following categories.
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated SFHA. A LOMA
amends the current effective FIRM and establishes that a specific property is
not located in a SFHA.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that, usually due to human-made changes, show changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations and planimetric features.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION-FILL (LOMR F). A determination that a
structure or parcel has been elevated by properly placed engineered fill above
the BFE and is, therefore, excluded from the SHFA.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LIMITED STORAGE. An area used for storage and intended to be limited to
incidental items which can withstand exposure to the elements and have low
flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood-resistant material, void
of utilities, except for essential lighting, and cannot be temperature
controlled.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The elevation of the sidewalk, patio, deck support or
basement entryway immediately next to the structure and after the completion of
construction. It does not include earth that is emplaced for aesthetic or
landscaping reasons around a foundation wall. It does include natural ground or
properly compacted fill that comprises a component of a structure’s foundation
system.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including
basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking
of vehicles, structure access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a structure’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that, such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected or attached to the required utilities. The
term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable
structures placed on site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be
improved property. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational
vehicle”. (See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.)
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) or
land divided into tow or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MAP. The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
   MAP PANEL NUMBER. The four-digit number on a flood map, followed by a letter
suffix, assigned by FEMA. The first four digits represent the map panel. The
letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been revised.
(The letter “A” is not used by FEMA; the letter “B” is the first revision.)
   MARKET VALUE. The structure value, excluding the land (as agreed between a
willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market
will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent certified appraisal,
replacement cost depreciated by age of structure (actual cash value) or
adjusted assessed values.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide.
For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the MSL is used as a
reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain as shown on
a community’s FIRM. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with
either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) 1929 or North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) 1988.
   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to
people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of mitigation
is twofold: to protect people and structures and to minimize the costs of
disaster response and recovery.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW). Describes a condition where there is a river, flow
or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual
condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on
the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A
MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide
is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Floodplain Administrator
only if the mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage
that occurs.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT. The operation of and overall
program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing mudslide (i.e.
mudflow) damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans,
mudslide control works and floodplain management regulations.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA. An area with land surfaces and slopes
of unconsolidated material where the history, geology and climate indicate a
potential for mudflow.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, a vertical
control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations with the
floodplain. (Generally used as the vertical datum on the older FIRMs. Refer to
FIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the city’s floodplain management regulations
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the city’s adopted floodplain management ordinances.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL. Structures that are not designed for human habitation,
including, but is not limited to: small business concerns; churches; schools;
farm structures (including grain bins and silos); pool houses; clubhouses;
recreational structures; mercantile structures; agricultural and industrial
structures; warehouses; and hotels or motels with normal room rentals for less
than six months’ duration.
   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD). As corrected in 1988, a vertical
control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain. (Generally used on the newer FIRMs and Digitally Referenced FIRMs
(DFIRMs). (Refer to FIRM or DFIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes but is not limited to any dam, wall, embankment,
levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge,
conduit, culvert, structure, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or
velocity of the flow of water, due to its location, its propensity to snare or
collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried
downstream.
   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). (See BASE FLOOD.) The flood that
has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any
flood zone that begins with the letter A is subject to the 100-year flood. Over
the life of a 30-year loan, there is a 26% chance of experiencing such a flood
with the SFHA.
   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. A community that voluntarily elects to participate
in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that
are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.
   PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement, which
started on or before 12-31-1974, or before the effective date of the initial
FIRM of the community, whichever is later.
   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement that started
on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community or after
12-31-1974, whichever is later.
   PROBATION. A means of formally notifying participating NFIP communities of
violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local
floodplain management regulations. During a period of probation, each insurance
policy is subject to a $50 surcharge.
   PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a community’s floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation
of those floodplain management standards or of the standards of 44 C.F.R. §§
60.3, 60.4, 60.5 and/or 60.6.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to safety or health
of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons,
or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of
any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection:
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable to a light
duty truck: and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of a community’s participation in the NFIP where
more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher
amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations
determined in a FIS.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
See BASE FLOOD.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. The process by which a community brings a structure or
other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management
regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impact of non-
compliance. Reduced impact may include protecting the structure or other
affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement
provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations,
or reducing state or federal financing exposure with regard to the structure or
other development.
   REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two or
more separate occasions during a ten-year period where the value of damages
equals or exceeds an average of 50% of the current value of the structure,
beginning on the date when the damage first occurred, or four or more flood
losses of $1,000 or more over the life of the structure, or three or more flood
losses over the life of the structure that are equal or greater than the
current value of the structure.
   REPETITIVE LOSS PROPERTY. Any insurable building for which two or more
claims of more than $1,000 were paid by the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq.,s within any rolling ten-year period,
since 1978. At least two of the claims must be more than ten days apart but,
within ten years of each other. A RL PROPERTY may or may not be currently
insured by the NFIP.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SECTION 1316. The section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as
amended, which states that no new or renewal flood insurance coverage shall be
provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a
duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations or ordinances that
are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy
in flood-prone areas.
   SEVERE REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE.
      (1)   Any insured property that has met at least one of the following
paid flood loss criteria since 1978, regardless of ownership:
         (a)   Four or more separate claim payments of more than $5,000 each
(including building and contents payments); or
         (b)   Two or more separate claim payments (building payments only)
where the total of the payments exceeds the current market value of the
property.
      (2)   In either case, two of the claim payments must have occurred within
ten years of each other. Multiple losses at the same location within ten days
of each other are counted as one loss, with the payment amounts added together.
   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The portion of the floodplain subject to
inundation by the base flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards as shown on a
FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AO or AR.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. (Includes substantial improvement and other new
development.) The date the building permit is issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual START
means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a
manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings,
installation of piles, construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparations such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms: the installation on the property of accessory
structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START OF
CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground;
including manufactured homes, gas or liquid storage tank, or other human-made
facilities or infrastructures. See BUILDING.
   SUBDIVISION. Any division, for the purposes of sale, lease or development,
either on the installation plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and
conditions of any tract or parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels.
   SUBROGATION. An action brought by FEMA to recover insurance money paid out
where all or part of the damage can be attributed to acts or omissions by a
community or other third party.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement
of a structure, taking place during a one-year period in which the cumulative
percentage of improvements equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the
actual repair work performed.
      (2)   The term does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided that, the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS OR SUBDIVISIONS.
Repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities
and pads equals or exceeding 50% of the value of the streets, utilities and
pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
   SUSPENSION. Removal of a participating community from the NFIP for failure
to enact and/or enforce floodplain management regulations required for
participation in the NFIP. New or renewal flood insurance policies are no
longer available in suspended communities.
   UTILITIES. Includes electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment.
   VARIANCE. Relief from some or all of the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. Failure of a structure or other development to fully comply with
this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which water flows at least periodically.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
   WATERSHED. All the area within a geographic boundary from which water,
sediments, dissolved materials and other transportable materials drain or are
carried by water to a common outlet, such as a point on a larger stream, lake
or underlying aquifer.
   X (SHADED) AND B ZONES. Areas of the 0.2% annual chance (500-year) flood
that are outside of the SFHA, areas subject to the 100-year flood with average
depths of less than one foot or with contributing drainage area less than one
square mile, and areas protected by levees from the base flood.
   X (UNSHADED) AND C ZONES. Areas determined to be outside the 500-year
floodplain.
   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or a Flood
Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
(Prior Code, § 151.05) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007; Ord. 24-2011, passed
11-21-2011)
§ 151.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard areas (SFHA),
areas applicable to KRS 151.250 and, as determined by the Floodplain
Administrator or other delegated, designated or qualified community official as
determined by the City Council from the available technical studies, historical
information and other available and reliable sources, areas within the
jurisdiction of the city, which may be subject to periodic inundation by flood
waters that can adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare
of the citizens of the city.
(Prior Code, § 151.06) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Hardin County,
dated 8-16-2007, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS), other
supporting data and any subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of these regulations by the city and for
those land areas acquired by the city through annexation. This FIS and
attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may
be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this
chapter and which are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain
Administrator and are enacted by the City Council pursuant to statutes
governing land use management regulations. The FIS and/or FIRM are permanent
records of the county and are on file and available for review by the public
during regular business hours at the office of the county’s Planning Commission
at 14 Public Square, Elizabethtown, Kentucky, or the office of the Flood Plain
Administrator at City Hall, 200 West Dixie Avenue, Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
(Prior Code, § 151.07) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007; Ord. 32-2007, passed 9-
17-2007)
§ 151.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   A development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provision of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in the special flood hazard area (SFHA). See §
151.26 of this chapter for instructions and explanation.
   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnish by
the Floodplain Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 151.08) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.09 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable state regulations. Violation of the
requirement (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein
shall prevent the City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Prior Code, § 151.09) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 151.10) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.11 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit, nor repeal, any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 151.11) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.12 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the area of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the City Council any officer or
employee, the commonwealth, the Federal Insurance Administration or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 151.12) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.13 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION NOTICE.
   (A)   Civil offense. If, at the time, development occurs which is not in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter including obtaining or complying
with the terms and conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any
approved modifications, such development shall constitute a civil offense.
   (B)   Notice of violation. If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or
agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a
person has caused development to occur which is not in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter including obtaining or complying with the terms and
conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any approved modifications
thereof, a duly authorized employee of the Floodplain Administrator shall issue
a notice to the person responsible for the violation and/or property owner,
stating the facts of the offense or violation, the section of this chapter and/
or of the permit violated, when it occurred, how the violation is to be
remedied to bring the development into conformity with this chapter or with the
approved permit, and within what period of time the remedy is to occur, which
period of time shall be reasonable and shall be determined by the nature of the
violation and whether or not it creates a nuisance or hazard. The remedy may
include an order to stop work on the development. The notice shall also state
that a citation may be forthcoming in the event that the requested remedies and
corrective actions are not taken, which citation will request a civil monetary
fine and shall state the maximum fine which would be imposed. See below.
   (C)   Notice of citation. If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or
agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a
person has caused development to occur which is not in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter including obtaining or complying with the terms and
conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any approved modifications
thereof, a duly authorized employee of the Floodplain Administrator may issue a
citation to the offender stating the violation, prior notices of violation
issued, how the violation is to be remedied to bring the development into
conformity with this chapter or with the approved permit, and within what
period of time the remedy is to occur, and what penalty or penalties are
recommended. When a citation is issued, the person to who the citation is
issued shall respond to the citation within seven days of the date the citation
is issued by either carrying out the remedies and corrections set forth in the
citation, paying the civil fine set forth in the citation or requesting a
hearing before the governing body. If the person to whom the citation is issued
does not respond to the citation within seven days, that person shall be deemed
to have waived the right to a hearing and the determination that a violation
occurred shall be considered final.
(Prior Code, § 151.13) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.25 DESIGNATION OF LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Council hereby appoints the Director of Storm Water Management to
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter by granting or
denying development permits in accordance with it provisions, and is herein
referred to as the “Floodplain Administrator”.
(Prior Code, § 151.25) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.26 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other
development begins within any special flood hazard area established in §
151.07 of this chapter. Application for a development permit shall be made on
forms furnished by Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Endorsement of local administrator is required before a state floodplain
construction permit can be processed. Specifically, the following information
is required.
   (A)   Application stage.
      (1)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level (MSL) of the
proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures in Zone A and
elevation of highest adjacent grade; or
      (2)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure will be flood-proofed;
      (3)   All appropriate certifications from a registered professional
engineer or architect that the non-residential flood-proofed structure will
meet the flood-proofing criteria in §§
151.41(B) and
151.43(B) of this chapter; and
      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
   (B)   Construction stage.
      (1)   Upon placement of the lowest floor, and before construction
continues, or flood- proofing by whatever construction means, it shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator and to the
state a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or flood-proofed
elevation, as built, in relation to mean sea level. In AE, A1-30, AH and A
Zones where the community has adopted a regulatory base flood elevation, said
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same.
      (2)   When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, said
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
certified professional engineer or architect. Any continued work undertaken
prior to the submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder’s
risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor and flood
proofing elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review
shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further
progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or
failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a
stop-work order for the project.
(Prior Code, § 151.26) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.27 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or staff is hereby appointed,
authorized and directed to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator is further authorized to render
interpretations of this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and
purpose by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its
provisions.
   (B)   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Permit review. Review all development permits to ensure that:
         (a)   Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
         (b)   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained:
advise permittee that additional federal and state permits may be required and,
if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies
of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit;
         (c)   Flood damages will be reduced in the best possible manner; and
         (d)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of affected watercourses. For purposes of this chapter, ADVERSELY
AFFECTS means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
      (2)   Review and use of any other base flood data. When base flood
elevation data has not been provided in accordance with §
151.07 of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer provisions for
flood hazard reduction. Any such information shall be submitted to the City
Council for adoption.
      (3)   Notification of other agencies.
         (a)   Notify adjacent communities, the commonwealth’s Division of
Water and any other federal and/or state agencies with statutory or regulatory
authority prior to any alteration or relocation of the watercourse;
         (b)   Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); and
         (c)   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
      (4)   Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and maintain for
public inspection and make available as needed the following:
         (a)   Certification required by §
151.41(A) of this chapter (lowest floor elevations) as shown on a completed and
certified elevation certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
or substantially improved structures, in accordance with §
151.26(B) of this chapter;
         (b)   Certification required by §
151.41(B) of this chapter (elevation or floodproofing of non-residential
structures) as shown on a completed and certified flood-proofing certificate.
Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
the new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in
accordance with §
151.26(B) of this chapter;
         (c)   Certification required by §
151.41(C) of this chapter (elevated structures);
         (d)   Certification of elevation required by §
151.44(A) of this chapter (subdivision standards);
         (e)   Certification required by §
151.41(E) of this chapter (floodway encroachments);
         (f)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished;
         (g)   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance; and
         (h)   Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in
§§
151.13 and
151.99 of this chapter.
      (5)   Map determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions.
         (a)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §
151.28(C)(2) of this chapter;
         (b)   When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been
provided in accordance with §
151.07 of this chapter, then the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonable utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provision for
flood hazard reduction.
         (c)   When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the
Floodplain Administrator shall obtain certification from a registered
professional engineer or architect, in accordance with §
151.41(B), a flood-proofing certificate; and
         (d)   All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall
be maintained in the office of the Floodplain Administrator and shall be open
for public inspections.
      (6)   Right of entry.
         (a)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this chapter, or whenever the Administrator has reasonable cause
to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises any
condition or ordinance violation which makes such building, structure or
premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Administrator may enter such
building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or
perform any duty imposed upon the Administrator by this chapter.
         (b)   If such structure or premises are occupied, he or she shall
first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure
or premises are unoccupied, he or she shall first make reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such request
entry.
         (c)   If entry is refused, the Administrator shall have recourse to
every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
         (d)   When the Administrator shall have first obtained a proper
inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or
occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building,
structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as
herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Administrator for the
purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter.
      (7)   Stop work orders. Upon notice from the Administrator, work on any
building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and
shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the
person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be
resumed.
      (8)   Revocation of permits.
         (a)   The Administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under
the provisions of this chapter, in case there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which
the permit or approval was based.
         (b)   The Administrator may revoke a permit upon determination by the
Administrator that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving,
demolition, installation or replacement of the structure for which the permit
was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of
this chapter.
      (9)   Liability. Any officer, employee or member of the Floodplain
Administrator’s staff, charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for
the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his or her duties, shall
not thereby render himself or herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved
from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
or her duties. Any suit brought against any officer, employee or member because
of such act performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provision of this
chapter shall be defended by the Department of Law until the final termination
of the proceedings.
      (10)   Expiration of floodplain construction permit. A floodplain
construction permit, and all provisions contained therein, shall expire if the
holder of a floodplain construction permit has not commenced construction
within 180 calendar days from the date of its issuance by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 151.27) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.28 APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Nature of variances.
      (1)   The variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are
based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece
of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a
parcel of property which physical characteristics so unusual that complying
with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to
the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants or the property owners.
      (2)   It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its citizens
from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that variances from
the flood elevation or from other requirements in this chapter are quite rare.
The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be
met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines
provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that
must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are
designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a
variance are more appropriate.
   (B)   Designation of Variance and Appeal Board. The City Council shall
establish an Appeal Board consisting of the City Engineer, Director of Planning
and Development, the Executive Assistant to the Mayor and one designated member
of the City Council.
   (C)   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board.
      (1)   The Appeals Board shall hear and decide requests for variances from
the requirements of this chapter and appeals of decisions or determinations
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
      (2)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the county’s Circuit Court, as provided in
Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   (D)   Appeals/variance procedures. In passing upon such applications, the
Appeal Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
all standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:
      (1)   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
      (2)   Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and
future owners of the property;
      (4)   Importance to the community of the services provided by the
proposed facility;
      (5)   Necessity that the facility be located on a waterfront, in the case
of functionally dependent facility;
      (6)   Availability of alternative locations which are not subject to
flooding or erosion damage;
      (7)   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
      (10)   Expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
      (11)   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, streets and bridges.
   (E)   Conditions for variances. Upon consideration of the factors listed
above and the purposes of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the “minimum necessary” to afford relief considering the flood
hazard. MINIMUM NECESSARY means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation
from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to
an elevation requirement, this means the City Council need to grant permission
for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the
applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City Council believes
will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance
is the “minimum necessary” to afford relief considering the flood hazard. In
the instance of an historical structure, a determination shall be made that the
variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief and not destroy the historic
character and design of the structure.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant (as defined in this chapter); and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood height, additional threats to public safety, cause
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance (as defined herein), cause fraud
or victimization of the public (as defined in the definition section) or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (5)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
      (6)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) and the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) upon request.
      (7)   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use; provided that, the provisions hereof are satisfied
and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional
threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.
   (F)   Variance notification. Any application to whom a variance is granted
shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain
Administrator in the office of the County Clerk and shall be recorded in a
manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land;
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
variances actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in the community’s biennial report submission to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
   (G)   Historic structures. Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of “historic structures” (see definition) upon determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
   (H)   No impact certification within the floodway. Variances shall be issued
within any mapped or designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge would result.
(Prior Code, § 151.47) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007; Ord. 32-2007, passed 9-
17-2007)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.40 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use
of over-the-top or fame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (F)   Within Zones AH and AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (G)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (H)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (I)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (J)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure,
which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the
requirements of “new construction”, as contained in this chapter.
   (K)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure,
which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be
undertaken only if said non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced.
(Prior Code, § 151.40) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data has been
provided, as set forth in §
151.07 of this chapter, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Residential construction.
      (1)   New construction or substantial improvement of any residential
structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor including
basement, mechanical equipment and ductwork elevated no lower than one foot
above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used
to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of
division (C) below.
         (a)   In an AO Zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a
height exceeding the depth number of specified in feet on the FIRM by at least
one foot, or elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade if
no depth number is specified.
         (b)   In an A Zone, where no technical data has been produced by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, elevated one foot above the base flood
elevation, as determined by this community. The Floodplain Administrator will
determine the method by which base flood elevations are determined. Methods
include, but are not limited to, detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses,
use of existing data available from other sources, use of historical data, best
supportable and reasonable judgment in the event no data can be produced. Title
401 KAR (Kentucky Administrative Regulations) Ch. 4, Reg. 060, states as a part
of the technical requirements for a state floodplain permit: “the applicant
shall provide cross-sections for determining floodway boundaries (and thereby
base flood elevations) at any proposed construction site where FEMA maps are
not available. All cross-sections shall be referenced to mean sea level and
shall have vertical error tolerances of no more than plus five-tenths (+0.5)
foot. Cross-sections elevations shall be taken at those points which represent
significant breaks in slope and at points where hydraulic characteristics of
the base floodplain change. Each cross-section shall extend across the entire
base floodplain and shall be in the number and at the locations specified by
the Cabinet. If necessary to ensure that significant flood damage will not
occur, the Cabinet may require additional cross-sections or specific site
elevations which extend beyond those needed for making routine regulatory
floodway boundary calculations”.
         (c)   In all other zones, the lowest floor shall be elevated at least
one foot above the base flood elevation.
      (2)   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor, and verified by the Community Building Inspection
Department to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall
be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
      (3)   (a)   Freeboard requirements add height above the base flood
elevation to account for future flood fringe development, uncertainties
inherent with the methodologies, lack of data, debris that accompanies the base
flood, and flood levels higher than that of the base flood. A freeboard
requirement means that new construction and substantial improvements of
existing structures will be protected to a level higher than the base flood
elevation.
         (b)   Freeboard is applied not just to the elevation of the lowest
floor or flood- proofing level, but also to the level of protection provided to
all components of the structure. All structure utilities, including ductwork,
must be elevated or protected to the freeboard level and all portions of the
structure below the freeboard level must be constructed using materials
resistant to flood damage. If the lowest floor of garages or accessory
structures is below the freeboard level, the structure must meet the opening
requirements of division (C) below.
      (4)   Two references on these requirements are Protecting Building
Utilities from Flood Damage, FEMA-348, and Flood Resistant Materials
Requirements, FIA-TB-2.
   (B)   Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or non-residential structure
(including manufactured home used for non-residential purposes) shall be
elevated to conform with division (A) above or together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities:
      (1)   Be flood-proofed below an elevation one foot above the level of the
base flood elevation so that the structure is water-tight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
      (3)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, mechanical equipment and
ductwork, elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood
elevation;
      (4)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in §
151.26(A)(3) of this chapter;
      (5)   Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in division (D) below;
      (6)   All new construction and substantial improvement with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are
subject to flooding, shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials below an
elevation one foot above the base flood elevation, and, shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of flood water. Opening sizes (FEMA Technical Bulletin
1-93) for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
         (a)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect;
or
         (b)   Have a minimum of two openings with a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided that, they permit the automatic entry and exit
of flood water.
   (C)   Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated structures on columns, posts or pilings (e.g., that include fully
enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base
flood elevation) shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
      (1)   Opening sizes for complying with this requirement must either be
certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum
criteria:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation or
higher than the exterior foundation grade); and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of flood waters in
both directions.
      (2)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow
for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator);
      (3)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned
or finished into separate rooms;
      (4)   The total floor area of all such enclosed areas shall not exceed
300 square feet; and
         (5)   For enclosures greater than seven feet in interior height, where
elevation requirements exceed six feet above the highest adjacent grade, a copy
of the legally recorded deed restriction prohibiting the conversion of the area
below the lowest floor to a use or dimension contrary to the structures’
originally approved design, shall be presented as a condition of issue of the
final certificate of occupancy.
   (D)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
      (1)   All new or substantially improved manufactured homes placed on
sites located within A, A1-30, AO, AH and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) must meet all the requirements for new construction, including
elevation and anchoring. Locations include:
         (a)   On individual lots or parcels;
         (b)   In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or
subdivisions;
         (c)   In new manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
         (d)   In substantially improved manufactured home parks or
subdivisions;
         (e)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; or
         (f)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site
upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result
of a flood,
      (2)   All manufactured homes must be:
         (a)   Elevated on a permanent foundation;
         (b)   Have its lowest floor elevated no lower than one foot above the
level of the base flood elevation; and
         (c)   Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
      (3)   Except manufactured homes that have incurred substantial damage as
a result of a flood, all manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in
an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that:
         (a)   The manufactured home is securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement,
so that either the:
            1.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower
than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or
            2.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less
than 36 inches in height above the highest adjacent grade.
      (4)   All recreational vehicles placed on sites located within A, A1-30,
AO, AH and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must either:
         (a)   Be on the site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         (c)   Meet the permit requirements for new construction of this
chapter including anchoring and elevation requirements for “manufactured
homes”.
      (5)   A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed
and insured in accordance with the state motor vehicle regulations, is on it
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
   (E)   Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§
151.07 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is
an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following
provisions shall apply:
      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments unless certification (with
supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base
flood elevation levels during occurrence of base flood discharge;
      (2)   If this division (E) is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements and other proposed new development shall comply with
all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this subchapter.
   (F)   Standards for utilities.
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:
         (a)   Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
         (b)   Discharge from the system into flood waters.
      (2)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them, or contamination from them during flooding.
   (G)   Structures elevated on fill. A residential or non-residential
structure may be constructed on permanent fill in accordance with the
following.
      (1)   The lowest floor (including basement) of the structure or addition
shall be no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation.
      (2)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep
before compacting and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation of
the structure before sloping below the base flood elevation, said slope being
no greater than a two to one (2:1) ratio unless a stability analysis is
provided by a registered professional engineer.
      (3)   The top of the fill shall be no lower than one foot above the base
flood elevation. However, the ten-foot minimum may be waived if a structural
engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the structure from damage
due to erosion, scour and other hydrodynamic forces.
      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
      (5)   All new structures built on fill must be constructed on properly
designed and compacted fill (ASTM D-698 or equivalent) that extends beyond the
building walls before dropping below the base flood elevation and has
appropriate protection from erosion and scour. The design of the fill or the
fill standard must be approved by a licensed professional engineer.
      (6)   If the community adopts and enforces the soil testing and
compaction requirements set fourth by the Standard, Uniform or National
Building Codes or the International Residential and Building Codes, it may
qualify for additional CRS credit.
   (H)   Vegetative buffer strips (riparian zones). For all activities
involving construction within 25 feet of the channel, the following criteria
shall be met.
      (1)   A natural vegetative buffer strip shall be preserved within at
least 25 feet of the mean high water level of the channel.
      (2)   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the
construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction.
      (3)   The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in the buffer
strip. Access through this buffer strip shall be provided for stream
maintenance purposes.
(Prior Code, § 151.41) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007; Ord. 32-2007, passed 9-
14-2007)
§ 151.42 STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (UNNUMBERED A ZONES)
AND/OR FLOODWAYS.
   Located with the special flood hazard areas established in §
151.07 of this chapter, where streams exist but where no base flood data has
been provided or where base flood data has been provided without floodways, the
following provisions apply.
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be
located within special flood hazard areas, unless certification by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering
certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standards
hydraulic engineering principles.
   (B)   New construction or substantial improvements of structures shall be
elevated or flood- proofed to elevations established in accordance with §
151.07 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 151.42) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.43 SHALLOW FLOODING ZONES.
   (A)   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
151.07 of this chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding areas.
   (B)   These areas have flood hazards associated with base flood depths of
one to three feet (1:3), where a clearly defined channel does not exist and the
water path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the
following provisions apply.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or
above either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO the flood depth specified
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO,
if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be
elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-
residential structures shall:
         (a)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO the flood depth specified on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO, if no
flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be
elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade; and
         (b)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
completely flood- proofed either to the base flood elevation or above or, in
Zone AO, to or above the specified flood depth, plus a minimum of one foot so
that any space below that level is water-tight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in §
151.41(B) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 151.43) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.44 SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard
area and the elevation of the base flood and be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (D)   In areas where base flood elevation and floodway data is not available
(Zone A or unmapped streams), base flood elevation and floodway data for
subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured
home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is
the lesser, shall be provided.
   (E)   All subdivision plans will include the elevation of proposed structure
(s) and lowest adjacent grad. If the site is filled above the base flood
elevation, the lowest floor and lowest adjacent grade elevations shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
   (F)   All new subdivision proposals shall include streets for emergency
access that will be subject to no more than six inches of flood waters during
the 1% annual chance flood (100-year flood).
(Prior Code, § 151.44) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.45 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN ALL ZONES BEGINNING WITH THE LETTER “A”.
   For all accessory structures in special flood hazard areas designated “A”,
the following provisions shall apply:
   (A)   Structure must be non-habitable;
   (B)   Must be anchored to resist floatation forces;
   (C)   Will require flood openings/vents no more than one foot above grade,
total openings are to be one square inch per one square foot of floor area, at
least two openings required on opposite walls;
   (D)   Built of flood resistant materials below a level one foot above the
base flood elevation;
   (E)   Must elevate utilities above the base flood elevation;
   (F)   Can only be used for storage or parking; and
   (G)   Cannot be modified for a different use after permitting.
(Prior Code, § 151.45) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 151.46 CRITICAL FACILITIES.
   Critical facilities shall be constructed on properly compacted fill and have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least one foot above the
elevation of the 500-year flood. A critical facility shall have at least one
access road connected to land outside the 500-year floodplain that is capable
of supporting a 12,500-pound vehicle. The top of the road must be no lower than
six inches below the elevation of the 500-year floodplain.
(Prior Code, § 151.46) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007; Ord. 32-2008, passed 9-
17-2007)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with granting of a variance or special exceptions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor offense. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
no more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 12 months, or both, and in
addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Floodplain Administrator from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Prior Code, § 151.13) (Ord. 27-2007, passed 7-16-2007)
CHAPTER 152: PLANNING
Section
   
152.01   Comprehensive plan
   
152.02   Planning Commission
§ 152.01 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   (A)   The comprehensive plan for the city, as officially adopted by the
city’s Planning Commission on 9-22-2020, and officially titled “Envision
Elizabethtown 2040 Comprehensive Plan”, is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated into this code of ordinances as if fully set forth herein. The
plan was adopted in conformance with the requirements of KRS Ch. 100. In
conformance with the requirements of KRS 100.193, the City Council adopted the
statement of goals and objectives, included in the comprehensive plan, on 10-
12-2020.
   (B)   Copies of the plan are available in the office of the Department of
Planning and Development.
(Prior Code, § 153.01) (Ord. 30-1988, passed 8-15-1988)
§ 152.02 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   There is hereby re-established and reconfirmed the Planning Commission
pursuant to KRS 100.133 et seq. The Planning Commission shall consist of five
voting members. The term of office for members of the Planning Commission shall
be four years, but the term of office of members first appointed shall be
staggered so that a proportionate number shall serve one, two, three and four
years respectively, and later appointments or re-appointments shall continue
the staggered pattern. An ex officio member of the Planning Commission shall be
a member of the City Council whose term in office shall be the same as his or
her official tenure as a member of the City Council. Any vacancies created
herein shall be filled pursuant to KRS Ch. 100. The jurisdiction of the
Planning Commission shall be the city limits and all extraterritorial
jurisdiction it has under the law.
(Prior Code, § 153.02) (Ord. passed 7-6-1970; Ord. passed 6-20-1983)
CHAPTER 153: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Title
   
153.002   Scope
   
153.003   Intent
   
153.004   Applicability
   
153.005   Definitions
   
153.006   Referenced standards
Administration and Enforcement
   
153.020   Department of Planning and Development
   
153.021   Appointment of Code Official
   
153.022   Deputies
   
153.023   Liability
   
153.024   Fees
   
153.025   Code Official; duties and powers
   
153.026   Violations
   
153.027   Notices and orders
Approvals
   
153.040   Modifications
   
153.041   Alternative materials, methods and equipment
   
153.042   Required testing
   
153.043   Used material and equipment
   
153.044   Approved materials and equipment
   
153.045   Research reports
Means of Appeals
   
153.060   Application for appeal
   
153.061   Membership of Code Enforcement Board
   
153.062   Notice of meeting
   
153.063   Open burning
   
153.064   Procedure
   
153.065   Abatement by owner
   
153.066   Abatement by city
Stop-Work Orders
   
153.080   Authority
   
153.081   Issuance
   
153.082   Emergencies
   
153.083   Failure to comply
Unsafe Structures and Equipment
   
153.095   General
   
153.096   Closing vacant structures
   
153.097   Notice
   
153.098   Placarding; removal
   
153.099   Prohibited occupancy
   
153.100   Abatement methods
   
153.101   Record
Emergency Measures
   
153.115   Imminent danger; emergency action
   
153.116   Temporary safeguards
   
153.117   Closing streets
   
153.118   Emergency repairs; costs
   
153.119   Hearing
Demolition
   
153.130   General
   
153.131   Notices and orders
   
153.132   Failure to comply
   
153.133   Salvage materials
General Property Requirements
   
153.145   Scope; responsibility; vacant structures and land
   
153.146   Exterior property areas
   
153.147   Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs
   
153.148   Exterior structures
   
153.149   Interior structures
   
153.150   Component serviceability
   
153.151   Handrails and guardrails
   
153.152   Rubbish and garbage
   
153.153   Pest elimination
Light, Ventilation and Occupancy
   
153.165   Scope; responsibility; alternative devices
   
153.166   Light
   
153.167   Ventilation
   
153.168   Occupancy limitations
Plumbing Requirements
   
153.180   Scope; responsibility
   
153.181   Required facilities
   
153.182   Toilet rooms
   
153.183   Plumbing systems and fixtures
   
153.184   Water system
   
153.185   Sanitary drainage system
   
153.186   Storm drainage
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements
   
153.200   Scope; responsibility
   
153.201   Heating facilities
   
153.202   Mechanical equipment
   
153.203   Electrical facilities
   
153.204   Electrical equipment
   
153.205   Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters
   
153.206   Duct systems
Fire Safety
   
153.220   Scope; responsibility
   
153.221   Means of egress
   
153.222   Fire-resistance ratings
   
153.223   Fire protection systems
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as the “Property Maintenance Code of
Elizabethtown, Kentucky”, hereinafter referred to as “this chapter”.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.002 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall apply to all existing residential and non-residential
structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and
standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light,
ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life
safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary
maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the
occupancy of existing structures and premises; and for administration,
enforcement and penalties.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.003 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this chapter to ensure public health, safety and welfare
in so far as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of
structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply
with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level
of health and safety, as required herein.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.004 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a
specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. Where differences
occur between provisions of this chapter and the referenced standards, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. Where, in a specific case, different
sections of this chapter specify different requirements, the most restrictive
requirement shall govern.
   (B)   Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by
this chapter or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or
premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good
working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service,
facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be
removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except
for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are
in progress. The requirements of this chapter are not intended to provide the
basis for removal or elimination of fire protection and safety systems and
devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner
or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of
buildings, structures and premises.
   (C)   Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the applicable code as referenced in §
153.006 of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to cancel,
modify or set aside any provision of other codes, or regulations of utility
providers, or ordinances or regulations of the city.
   (D)   Existing remedies. The provisions in this chapter shall not be
construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its
officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure
which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary.
   (E)   Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations
which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this chapter
shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
   (F)   Historic buildings. The provisions of this chapter shall not be
mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings
when such buildings or structures are judged by the Code Official or his or her
designee to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare.
   (G)   Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in
this chapter shall be those that are listed in §
153.006 of this chapter and considered part of the requirements of this chapter
to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in
divisions (G)(1) and (G)(2) below. Exception: where enforcement of a code would
violate the conditions of the manufacturer’s instructions for the equipment or
appliance, the conditions of the manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.
      (1)   Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this chapter
and the referenced standards, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
      (2)   Provisions in referenced codes and standards. Where the extent of
the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is
within the scope of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter, as
applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or
standard.
   (H)   Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary for the
strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or
equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not
specifically covered by this chapter, shall be determined by the Code Official.
   (I)   Other laws. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to
nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.005 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown in this
chapter.
      (2)   Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter;
the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
      (3)   Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this
chapter and are defined in the referenced codes as listed in §
153.006 of this chapter, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
stated in those codes.
      (4)   Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings
such as the context implies.
      (5)   Parts. Whenever the words “dwelling unit”, “dwelling”, “premises”,
“building”, “rooming house”, “rooming unit”, “housekeeping unit” or “story” are
stated in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by
the words “or any part thereof”.
   (B)   General definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ANCHORED. Secured in a manner that provides positive connection.
      APPROVED. Approved by the Code Official or his or her designee.
      BASEMENT. The portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade.
      BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or
shower.
      BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping
purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.
      BOARD. The Elizabethtown Code Enforcement Board as established by city
ordinance in accordance with state statutes.
      CITY. City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
      CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this chapter, or any duly authorized representative.
      CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
      DEPARTMENT. The Department of Planning and Development.
      DETACHED. When a structural element is physically disconnected from
another and that connection is necessary to provide a positive connection.
      DETERIORATION. To weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay and lose
effectiveness.
      DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
      EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner to the use of land by the public, a
corporation or persons, for specific purposes such as the construction of
utilities, drainage ways and roadways.
      EQUIPMENT SUPPORT. Those structural members or assemblies of members or
manufactured elements, including braces, frames, lugs, snuggers, hangers or
saddles, that transmit gravity load, lateral load and operating load between
the equipment and the structure.
      EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
      GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
      GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at
or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the
possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
      HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered HABITABLE SPACES.
      HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating
which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or
shower.
      IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-
threatening injury or death at any time.
      INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or
premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
      INOPERABLE VEHICLE. A vehicle, motorized or non-motorized, which cannot
be driven, pulled, drawn or towed upon the public street for any reason
including, but not limited to, being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state
of disrepair or incapable of being moved under its own power.
      LABELED. Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a
label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized
testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with
product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the
above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment,
material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found
suitable for a specified purpose.
      LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET. To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to
a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
      NEGLECT. The lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure.
      OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.
      OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
      OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available
for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
      OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
      OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or Administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
      PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting
as a unit.
      PEST ELIMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that serve as their food or water; by other approved
pest elimination methods.
      PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way,
including any structures thereon.
      PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley, driveway or similar parcel of land
essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated
or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
      ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or
without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family
dwelling.
      ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking
purposes.
      RUBBISH. Combustible and non-combustible waste materials, except garbage;
the term shall include wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper,
rags, cartons, boxes, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard
trimmings, bottles and cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, tires, vehicle
parts, inoperable vehicle, lawn and garden equipment, furniture, crockery and
dust and other similar materials.
      SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also
include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or
kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a
dwelling unit are not SLEEPING UNITS.
      STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited,
or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
      STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
      SWIMMING POOL. A structure, public or private, whether above or below
grade level, designed to hold in depth, 24 inches or more of water and used for
recreational purposes.
      TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
      TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal, but not a
bathtub or shower.
      ULTIMATE DEFORMATION. The deformation at which failure occurs and which
shall be deemed to occur if the sustainable load reduces to 80% or less of the
maximum strength.
      VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned
or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
      WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner (e.g., generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work).
      YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.006 REFERENCED STANDARDS.
   This chapter lists the standards that are referenced in various sections of
this chapter. The standards are listed herein by the promulgating agency of the
standard, the standard identification, the effective date and title and the
section or sections of this document that reference the standard. The
application of the referenced standards shall be as specified in §
153.004(G) of this chapter. The current version of the referenced standards
shall be applicable as adopted by the authority having jurisdiction:
   (A)   ASME. A17.1/CSA B44, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators;
   (B)   ASTM. F 1346, Performance Specifications for Safety Covers and
Labeling for all covers for Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs;
   (C)   ICC.
      (1)   International Building Code with Kentucky amendments;
      (2)   International Mechanical Code; and
      (3)   International Residential Code with Kentucky amendments.
   (D)   NFPA.
      (1)   13, Installation of Sprinkler Systems;
      (2)   25, Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire
Protections Systems;
      (3)   54, Fuel Gas Code;
      (4)   70, National Electrical Code;
      (5)   72, National Fire Alarm Signaling Code; and
      (6)   101 Life Safety Code.
   (E)   City of Elizabethtown. Elizabethtown Zoning Ordinance;
   (F)   State of Kentucky.
      (1)   Kentucky Building Code;
      (2)   Kentucky Plumbing Code;
      (3)   Kentucky Residential Code;
      (4)   Standards of Safety; and
      (5)   Uniform Fire Code.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.020 DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT.
   The Department of Planning and Development shall administer and enforce this
chapter and the Director shall be known as the Code Official.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.021 APPOINTMENT OF CODE OFFICIAL.
   The Code Official shall be appointed by the Mayor.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.022 DEPUTIES.
   In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the city and with the
concurrence of the appointing authority, the Code Official shall have the
authority to appoint staff members of the Department and other city departments
as deputies. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the Code
Official.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.023 LIABILITY.
   The Code Official, member of the Code Enforcement Board or employee charged
with the enforcement of this chapter, while acting for the city, in good faith
and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this chapter or
other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable
personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage
accruing to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or
omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any
officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in
the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this chapter shall
be defended by the legal representative of the city until the final termination
of the proceedings. The Code Official or any subordinate shall not be liable
for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.024 FEES.
   The fees for activities and services performed by the Department in carrying
out its responsibilities under this chapter shall be as established by separate
ordinance by the City Council.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.025 CODE OFFICIAL; DUTIES AND POWERS.
   (A)   General. The Code Official is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Code Official shall have the
authority to render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt policies and
procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such
interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent
and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall not have the
effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   Inspections. The Code Official or his or her designee shall make all
of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved
agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing
and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The Code Official or his or her designee is authorized
to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual
technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the Mayor and City
Council.
   (C)   Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the Code Official or his or her
designee has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or
upon a premises a condition in violation of this chapter, the Code Official or
his or her designee is authorized to enter the structure or premises at
reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this chapter;
provided that, if such structure or premises is occupied, the Code Official or
his or her designee shall present credentials to the occupant and request
entry. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the Code Official or his or
her designee shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry.
If entry is refused, the Code Official or his or her designee shall have
recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
   (D)   Identification. The Code Official or his or her designee shall carry
proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance
of duties under this chapter.
   (E)   Notices and orders. The Code Official or his or her designee shall
issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (F)   Department records. The Code Official or his or her designee shall
keep official records of all business and activities of the Department
specified in the provisions of this chapter. Such records shall be retained in
the official records for the period required for retention of public records.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.026 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation
to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Notice of violation. The Code Official or his or her designee shall
serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with §
153.027 of this chapter.
   (C)   Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice
of violation or order served in accordance with §
153.027 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or civil
infraction or violation as determined by the city or the city’s Code
Enforcement Board, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability
offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the Code Official or
his or her designee shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to, the issuance of a citation, to restrain,
correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of
the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this
chapter or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by
the city on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which
the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
   (D)   Violation penalties. Any person, who shall violate a provision of this
chapter, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof,
shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   (E)   Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the City Attorney from instituting appropriate
action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal
occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act,
conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.027 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   (A)   Notice to person responsible. Whenever the Code Official or his or her
designee determines that there has been a violation of this chapter or has
grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the
manner prescribed in divisions (B) and (C) below to the owner or person
responsible for the violation as specified in this chapter. Records by the
county’s Property Valuation Administrator may be relied upon to determine the
identity and address of said owner. Notices for condemnation procedures shall
also comply with §
153.097 of this chapter.
   (B)   Form. Such notice prescribed in division (A) above shall be in
accordance with all of the following:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification (address);
      (3)   Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the
notice is being issued;
      (4)   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure or
premises into compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and
      (5)   Include a statement of the city’s right to issue a citation or to
file a lien in accordance with §
153.026(C) of this chapter.
   (C)   Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
if a copy thereof is:
      (1)   Delivered personally;
      (2)   Sent by electronic email;
      (3)   Sent by regular, first-class mail addressed to the owner of record
at the last known address as noted in division (A) above; or
      (4)   Posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure or premises
affected by such notice and then mailing a copy by regular, first-class mail to
the owner of record at the last known address as noted in division (A) above.
   (D)   Unauthorized tampering. Notices, signs, tags or seals posted or
affixed by the Code Official or his or her designee shall not be mutilated,
destroyed or tampered with, or removed without authorization from the Code
Official or his or her designee.
   (E)   Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure or premises who has received a compliance order or
upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage,
lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure or premises to
another owner until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of
violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the
grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or
notice of violation issued by the Code Official or his or her designee or the
city’s Code Enforcement Board and shall furnish to the Code Official or his or
her designee a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or
notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition
for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or
notice of violation.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
APPROVALS
§ 153.040 MODIFICATIONS.
   Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter, the Code Official or his or her designee shall have
the authority to grant modifications for individual cases upon application of
the owner or owner’s representative; provided, the Code Official or his or her
designee shall find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of
this chapter impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent
and purpose of this chapter and that such modification does not lessen health,
life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications
shall be recorded and entered in the Department files.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.041 ALTERNATIVE MATERIALS, METHODS AND EQUIPMENT.
   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the installation
of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically
prescribed by this chapter; provided that, any such alternative has been
approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved
where the Code Official or his or her designee finds that the proposed design
is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this chapter,
and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at
least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.042 REQUIRED TESTING.
   (A)   General. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or method does not
conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims
for alternative materials or methods, the Code Official or his or her designee
shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance
at no expense to the city.
   (B)   Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter or by
other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the Code Official or his or her designee shall be permitted to approve
appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency.
   (C)   Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the Code Official
or his or her designee for the period required for retention of public records.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.043 USED MATERIAL AND EQUIPMENT.
   The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this chapter for
materials is permitted. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused
unless such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested
when necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and approved by the
Code Official or his or her designee.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.044 APPROVED MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
   Materials, equipment and devices approved by the Code Official or his or her
designee shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.045 RESEARCH REPORTS.
   Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or
assemblies not specifically provided for in this chapter, shall consist of
valid research reports from approved sources.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
MEANS OF APPEALS
§ 153.060 APPLICATION FOR APPEAL.
   Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Official or his or
her designee or a notice or order or citation issued under this chapter shall
have the right to appeal to the city’s Code Enforcement Board, after the
issuance of a citation. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim
that the true intent of this chapter or the rules legally adopted thereunder
have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this chapter do not fully
apply, or the requirements of this chapter are adequately satisfied by other
means.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.061 MEMBERSHIP OF CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.
   The city’s Code Enforcement Board shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject
to approval of the City Council, pursuant to Ord. 09-2003, as amended, and in
conformance with applicable state statutes.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.062 NOTICE OF MEETING.
   The Board shall meet as established by city ordinance.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.063 OPEN HEARING.
   All hearings before the Board shall be open to the public. The appellant,
the appellant’s representative, the Code Official or his or her designee and
any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be
heard.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.064 PROCEDURE.
   The Board shall adopt and make available to the public procedures under
which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance
with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information
be received. Decisions and procedures of the city’s Code Enforcement Board
shall be governed by Ord. 09-2003 and applicable state statutes.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.065 ABATEMENT BY OWNER.
   In the event that the city’s Code Enforcement Board finds that a violation
does exist, the same may be abated by causing the removal, eradication, repair,
termination or possession, or other remedy to take place so the violation is
abated promptly in a manner prescribed in the order of the city’s Code
Enforcement Board.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.066 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   In the event the violation is not abated as ordered by the city’s Code
Enforcement Board, then the city’s Code Enforcement Board may include in its
order for the city or the Code Official to take the necessary steps to abate
the violation and assess the cost of same against the violator, including any
fine amount, attorney’s fees, administrative costs, abatement costs or other
penalties and the same may be levied against the property and a lien for the
necessary amounts to abate said violation shall be filed in the office of the
Clerk of the County Court until the fines, fees, costs and other amount are
fully paid. Pursuant to city ordinance and the applicable state statutes, if
the owner does not appeal a citation issued for a violation under this chapter,
the city make take the necessary steps as noted in the section to abate the
violation when the citation is deemed a final order.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
STOP-WORK ORDERS
§ 153.080 AUTHORITY.
   Whenever the Code Official or his or her designee finds any work regulated
by this chapter or any referenced code being performed in a manner contrary to
the provisions of this chapter or any referenced code or in a dangerous or
unsafe manner, the Code Official or his or her designee is authorized to issue
a stop work order.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.081 ISSUANCE.
   A stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the
property, to the owner’s agent or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance
of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work
order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the
cited work is authorized to resume.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.082 EMERGENCIES.
   Where an emergency exists, the Code Official or his or her designee shall
not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.083 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, may be subject to a fine as established by local
ordinance.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
§ 153.095 GENERAL.
   When a structure or equipment is found by the Code Official or his or her
designee to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy,
or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be
dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or
warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe
equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of
such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete
collapse is possible.
   (B)   Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating
equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, hot water
heater, kitchen appliance, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on
the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition
that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the
public or occupants of the premises or structure.
   (C)   Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human
occupancy whenever the Code Official or his or her designee finds that such
structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure
is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested,
contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary
or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this chapter, or
because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of
the structure or to the public.
   (D)   Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in
part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this chapter, or was
erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.
   (E)   Dangerous structure or premises. For the purpose of this chapter, any
structure or premises that have any or all of the conditions or defects
described below shall be considered dangerous:
      (1)   Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of
egress that does not conform to the approved Building or Fire Code of the city
as related to the requirements for existing buildings;
      (2)   The walking surface of any aisle, sidewalk, passageway, stairway,
exit or other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise
unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of egress;
      (3)   Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance that has been
damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment,
vandalism or by any other cause to such an extent that it is likely to
partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged;
      (4)   Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof that is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of one and one-half the
original designed value;
      (5)   The building or structure, or part of the building or structure,
because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal
or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for any
other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of
the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail
or give way;
      (6)   The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is clearly
unsafe for its use and occupancy;
      (7)   The building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated,
unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to children who
might play in the building or structure to their danger, becomes a harbor for
vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the
building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful act;
      (8)   Any building or structure that has been constructed, exists or is
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable
to such building or structure provided by the approved Building or Fire Code of
the city, or of any law or ordinance to such an extent as to present either a
substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and
safety;
      (9)   Any building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage,
faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical
or plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the Code Official or his or
her designee to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a
condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease;
      (10)   Any building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or
proper fire-resistance-rated construction, fire protection systems, electrical
system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing system or other cause, is
determined by the Code Official or his or her designee to be a threat to life
or health; and
      (11)   Any portion of a building that remains on a site after the
demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building
or structure is abandoned so as to constitute such building or portion thereof
as an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.096 CLOSING VACANT STRUCTURES.
   If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and
is not in danger of structural collapse, the Code Official or his or her
designee is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and
order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon
failure of the owner to close up the structure within the time specified in the
order, the Code Official or his or her designee shall cause the structure to be
closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or
arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against
the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon
such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource.
   (A)   Authority to disconnect service utilities. The Code Official or his or
her designee shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility
service to the building, structure or system regulated by this chapter and the
referenced codes and standards set forth in §
153.004(C) of this chapter in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an
immediate hazard to life or property or when such structure is vacant or
abandoned or when such utility connection has been made without approval. The
Code Official or his or her designee shall notify the serving utility and,
whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service
system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not
notified prior to disconnection, the owner or occupant of the building
structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical
thereafter.
   (B)   Vacant and abandoned structures. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the property to maintain vacant and/or abandoned structure(s) so it
does not deteriorate and/or become a blighting issue or safety hazard.
   (C)   Demolition of vacant and abandoned structures. Structure(s) that have
been vacant or abandoned for a period of more than three years and are in a
state of deterioration to the point that it becomes a blighting issue or safety
hazard may be removed after a hearing before the city’s Code Enforcement Board.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.097 NOTICE.
   Whenever the Code Official or his or her designee has condemned a structure
or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served
on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or
equipment in accordance with §
153.027(A) and (C) of this chapter. If the notice pertains to equipment, it
shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the
form prescribed in §
153.027(B) of this chapter.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.098 PLACARDING.
   (A)   General. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply
with the notice provisions within the time given, the Code Official or his or
her designee shall post on the structure or premises or on defective equipment
a placard bearing the word “condemned” and a statement of the penalties
provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the
placard.
   (B)   Placard removal. The Code Official or his or her designee shall remove
the condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated or
corrected. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the
approval of the Code Official or his or her designee shall be subject to the
penalties provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.099 PROHIBITED OCCUPANCY.
   Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the Code Official or his
or her designee shall be vacated as ordered by the Code Official or his or her
designee. Any person who shall occupy a placarded structure or premises or
shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for
the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded structure or premises or
operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by this
chapter.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.100 ABATEMENT METHODS.
   The owner, operator or occupant of a building, premises or equipment deemed
unsafe by the Code Official or his or her designee shall abate or cause to be
abated or corrected such unsafe conditions either by repair, rehabilitation,
demolition or other approved corrective action.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.101 RECORD.
   The Code Official or his or her designee shall cause a report to be filed on
an unsafe condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and
the nature of the unsafe condition.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
EMERGENCY MEASURES
§ 153.115 IMMINENT DANGER; EMERGENCY ACTION.
   (A)   When, in the opinion of the Code Official or his or her designee,
there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure
which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen
and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is
actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity
of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the
presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or
dangerous equipment, the Code Official or his or her designee is hereby
authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the
premises. The Code Official or his or her designee shall cause to be posted at
each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: “This Structure Is
Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Code Official”. It shall be
unlawful for any person to enter such structure, except for the purpose of
securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous
condition or of demolishing the same.
   (B)   When, in the opinion of the Code Official or his or her designee,
there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure
which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen
and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is
actual or potential danger to persons in the proximity of any such structure,
the Code Official or his or her designee is hereby authorized and empowered to
order and require the structure to be removed without notice and without a
hearing before the city’s Code Enforcement Board or a court order.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.116 TEMPORARY SAFEGUARDS.
   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, whenever, in the opinion
of the Code Official or his or her designee, there is imminent danger due to an
unsafe condition, the Code Official or his or her designee shall order the
necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render
such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein
described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as
the Code Official or his or her designee deems necessary to meet such
emergency.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.117 CLOSING STREETS.
   When necessary for public safety, the Code Official or his or her designee
shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the city or other agency
having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places
adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.118 EMERGENCY REPAIRS; COSTS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the Code Official or his or her
designee may employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required
work as expeditiously as possible when it has been determined that emergency
actions are necessary to secure a structure from imminent collapse.
   (B)   Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by
the city. The City Attorney shall institute appropriate action against the
owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the
recovery of such costs.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.119 HEARING.
   Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order
forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the
city’s Code Enforcement Board, be afforded a hearing as described in this
chapter.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
DEMOLITION
§ 153.130 GENERAL.
   The Code Official or his or her designee shall order the owner of any
premises upon which is located any structure, which in the Code Official or his
or her designee judgment after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has
become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise
unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to
repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such
structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and
sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove
at the owner’s option; or when there has been a cessation of normal
construction of any structure for a period of more than two years the Code
Official or his or her designee shall order the owner to demolish and remove
such structure or board up until future repair. Boarding the structure up for
future repair shall not extend beyond two years, unless approved by the Code
Official.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.131 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   All notices and orders shall comply with §
153.027 of this chapter.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.132 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   If the owner of a structure fails to comply with a demolition order within
the time prescribed, the Code Official or his or her designee, after a hearing
conducted by the city’s Code Enforcement Board, may cause the structure to be
demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by
contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition
and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure
is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.133 SALVAGE MATERIALS.
   When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the city shall
have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price
obtainable.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
GENERAL PROPERTY REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.145 SCOPE; RESPONSIBILITY; VACANT STRUCTURES AND LAND.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures,
equipment and exterior property.
   (B)   Responsibility.
      (1)   The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and
exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise
provided for in this chapter. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or
permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe
condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this subchapter.
      (2)   Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are
responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of
the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they
occupy and control.
   (C)   Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof
or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary
condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or
adversely affect the public health or safety.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.146 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
   (A)   Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in
a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the
exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and
sanitary condition.
   (B)   Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water
thereon, or within any structure located thereon. Exception: approved
detention/retention areas, basins and reservoirs.
      (1)   Removal of vegetation: replacement. Any person removing vegetation
from any real estate in the city shall reseed, re-sod or re-vegetate the same
within three months from the date of removal unless a building/construction
permit or erosion prevention and sediment control permit is received from the
appropriate city department. Exception: customary use of real estate for
agricultural and/or horticultural use.
      (2)   Discharge of runoff or groundwater to sanitary sewer. No person
shall make connection of roof drains, exterior fountain drains, area-way
drains, other sources of runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building
drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary
sewer.
      (3)   Drainage way maintenance. The owner of the premises shall maintain
all drainage ways on the premises. This includes mowing and trimming of the
drainage way and keeping the drainage way free from all obstructions.
Obstructions shall include, but is not limited to, grass clippings, tree limbs
or rubbish of any kind that alters, restricts or prohibits the drainage way
from functioning in a proper manner.
   (C)   Sidewalks, public ways and driveways.
      (1)   General. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking
spaces, public ways and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair
and maintained free from hazardous conditions, including, but not limited to,
periodically renewing, repaving or otherwise maintaining a smooth surface. The
accumulation of snow and ice shall be considered a hazardous condition and
should be removed in a timely manner as prescribed by other city ordinances.
      (2)   Obstructions. The owner or occupant shall keep all sidewalks,
streets, alleys, driveways, public highway, public ways or railroad crossing
clear and free of all obstructions. This shall include the placing, planting or
locating of any planted material or changing the grade of the land that
obstructs the view of oncoming traffic.
   (D)   Weeds and grass.
      (1)   General. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained
free from grass, weeds or plant growth in excess of ten inches in height. This
includes maintaining to the pavement or to the curb edge of any street, alley
or roadway. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. WEEDS shall be defined as
all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs;
provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers, ornamental
grasses and gardens.
      (2)   Exceptions.
         (a)   A premises that is in excess of two acres and does not contain a
dwelling unit then the grass, weeds and plant growth shall be maintained to a
height not to exceed 36 inches;
         (b)   A premises that is used for agricultural purposes shall be
maintained to a height commensurate with customary practice for agricultural
uses; and
         (c)   A premises that is predominantly woodlands and trees and the
same dominates the land and no crop or agricultural use is made at the
premises.
   (E)   Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept
free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall
be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to
human health. After pest elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to
eliminate rodent harborage and prevent infestation.
   (F)   Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not
discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous
or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private
property or that of another tenant.
   (G)   Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, sheds, gazebos, decks, fences and walls, shall be maintained
structurally sound and in good repair.
   (H)   Inoperable vehicles. No vehicle shall be parked on any property or
premises in the city which can be viewed from a public highway or street or
from an adjoining property, which vehicle remains for a period of one week in
the same relative location and which for mechanical or other reasons cannot be
moved under its own power or which cannot be operated legally upon a public
highway or street or which is unreasonably unsightly or which is not currently
registered or which is an inoperable vehicle as defined in this chapter.
      (1)   Exception.
         (a)   A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul,
including body work; provided that, such work is performed inside a structure
or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes; and
         (b)   A vehicle stored at the premises of a legally approved vehicle
repair or salvage operation, that is a business enterprise in compliance with
applicable zoning ordinance standards and in possession of a current city
business license.
      (2)   Parking in a yard. The parking, locating or storing of a motorized
or non-motorized vehicle shall not be allowed in any yard unless it is on a
paved or gravel area designated for such use and in a safe manner. Exception:
any type vehicle that is placed within an approved and fully enclosed
structure.
   (I)   Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage,
mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any
private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an
approved state of maintenance and repair.
   (J)   Animals, fowl or reptiles. It shall a violation for any person to own,
keep, harbor or possess any domestic or other animal of any nature, any fowl or
reptile which becomes a public nuisance.
      (1)   Animal nuisance. For the purposes of this section, PUBLIC NUISANCE
shall be defined as:
         (a)   Any dog, cat or other animal, fowl or reptile which barks,
howls, whines, meows, screeches, hisses or makes any other unreasonable noise
which becomes a disturbance to neighbors;
         (b)   Any dog, cat or other animal, fowl or reptile running at large;
and
         (c)   Any dog, cat or other animal, fowl or reptile which damages or
destroys any public or private, personal or real property.
      (2)   License. Any dog, cat or other animal, fowl or reptile must have a
license as required by state law.
      (3)   Infectious disease. Any dog, cat or other animal, fowl or reptile
shall have the appropriate rabies or other inoculation to prevent the dog, cat
or other animal, fowl or reptile from contracting or spreading hydrophobia or
other infectious disease.
      (4)   Slaughtering. It shall be prohibited to conduct or maintain any
slaughter house or other premises or area for the slaughtering of animals, fowl
or reptiles, or to render the byproducts of the same.
   (K)   Fire hydrant. The owner shall maintain the area around and adjacent to
any fire hydrants on the premises and keep the area unobstructed for a minimum
of three feet from the hydrant.
   (L)   Diseased or dead tree. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to
remove any diseased or dead tree or portion thereof, which poses a hazard to
life or property; or a tree which harbors insects that have caused decay of the
tree and causes the tree to pose a hazard to life or property.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.147 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS.
   (A)   Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition and in good repair.
   (B)   Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing
water more than 24 inches in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or
barrier at least 48 inches in height above the finished ground level measured
on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers
shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is a
minimum of 54 inches above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall
be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates
shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when
released from an open position of six inches from the gatepost. No existing
pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces
its effectiveness as a safety barrier.
   (C)   Exception. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with
ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.148 EXTERIOR STRUCTURES.
   (A)   General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare.
      (1)   Unsafe conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as
unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced:
         (a)   The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by
nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;
         (b)   The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of
walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads
or load effects;
         (c)   Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit
state;
         (d)   Siding and masonry joints including joints between the building
envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights that are not
maintained, weather-resistant or water- tight;
         (e)   Structural members that have evidence of deterioration or that
are not capable of safely supporting all nominal loads and load effects;
         (f)   Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings,
are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored
or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects;
         (g)   Exterior walls that are not anchored to supporting and supported
elements or are not plumb and free of holes, cracks or breaks and loose or
rotting materials, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting
all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
         (h)   Roofing or roofing components that have defects that admit rain,
roof surfaces with inadequate drainage, or any portion of the roof framing that
is not in good repair with signs of deterioration, fatigue or without proper
anchorage and incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects;
         (i)   Flooring and flooring components with defects that affect
serviceability or flooring components that show signs of deterioration or
fatigue, are not properly anchored or are incapable of supporting all nominal
loads and resisting all load effects;
         (j)   Veneer, cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings and
similar decorative features not properly anchored or that are anchored with
connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects;
         (k)   Overhang extensions or projections including, but not limited
to, trash chutes, canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, fire escapes, standpipes
and exhaust ducts not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections
not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
         (l)   Exterior stairs, decks, porches, balconies and all similar
appurtenances attached thereto, including guards and handrails, are not
structurally sound, not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections
not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; or
         (m)   Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances
not structurally sound or not properly anchored, or that are anchored with
connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects.
      (2)   Exceptions.
         (a)   When substantiated otherwise by an approved method; and
         (b)   Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved
by the Code Official or his or her designee.
   (B)   Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including, but not
limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood
surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment.
Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted.
All siding and masonry joints, as well as those between the building envelope
and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights, shall be maintained weather-
resistant and water-tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion
shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion, and all surfaces with rust
or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and
corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces
designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
   (C)   Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers
placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road
fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background.
Address numbers shall be plain block Arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches in height for residential properties
or six inches in height for commercial properties with a minimum stroke width
of one-half inch.
   (D)   Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead
and live loads.
   (E)   Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
   (F)   Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks
and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weather-proof and properly
surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.
   (G)   Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and
not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure.
Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free
from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates
a public nuisance or adversely impacts an adjoining premises.
   (H)   Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta
trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good
repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
   (I)   Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not
limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes
and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored
so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
   (J)   Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway,
deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and
capable of supporting the imposed loads.
   (K)   Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in
good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
   (L)   Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
   (M)   Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and
frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather-tight.
      (1)   Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks
and holes.
      (2)   Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be
easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.
   (N)   Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required
for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas
or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied
with approved tightly-fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch and every
screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good
working condition. Exception: screens shall not be required where other
approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
   (O)   Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies, operator systems, if
provided, and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all
entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door.
Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with §
153.221(C) of this chapter.
   (P)   Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to
prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
   (Q)   Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable
shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved
protection against the entry of rodents.
   (R)   Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units,
rooming units or housekeeping units shall be provided with locking devices
designed to provide security for the occupants and property within.
      (1)   Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a lock
designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made
without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have a minimum
lock throw of one inch. Such locks shall be installed according to the
manufacturer’s specifications and maintained in good working order. For the
purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable
lock.
      (2)   Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within six
feet above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let
shall be equipped with a window sash locking device.
      (3)   Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let
shall be equipped with locking devices that secure the units from unauthorized
entry.
   (S)   Gates. All exterior gates, gate assemblies, operator systems if
provided, and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Latches at all
entrances shall tightly secure the gates.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.149 INTERIOR STRUCTURES.
   (A)   General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.
Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in
a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming
house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or
two or more non-residential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and
sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior
property.
      (1)   Unsafe conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as
unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced:
         (a)   The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by
nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;
         (b)   The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of
walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads
or load effects;
         (c)   Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit
state;
         (d)   Structural members are incapable of supporting nominal loads and
load effects;
         (e)   Stairs, landings, balconies and all similar walking surfaces,
including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly
anchored or are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal
loads and resisting all load effects; and
         (f)   Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings are
not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or
are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.
      (2)   Exceptions.
         (a)   When substantiated otherwise by an approved method; and
         (b)   Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved
by the Code Official or his or her designee.
   (B)   Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained
structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.
   (C)   Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors,
shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping,
flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or
loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be
corrected.
   (D)   Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony,
porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and
good repair.
   (E)   Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
   (F)   Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within
its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and
securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer
of the attachment hardware.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.150 COMPONENT SERVICEABILITY.
   (A)   General. The components of a structure and equipment therein shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.
   (B)   Unsafe conditions. Where any of the following conditions cause the
component or system to be beyond its limit state, the component or system shall
be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced:
      (1)   Soils that have been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         (a)   Collapse of footing or foundation system;
         (b)   Damage to footing, foundation, concrete or other structural
element due to soil expansion;
         (c)   Adverse effects to the design strength of footing, foundation,
concrete or other structural element due to a chemical reaction from the soil;
         (d)   Inadequate soil as determined by a geotechnical investigation;
         (e)   Where the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is in doubt; or
         (f)   Adverse effects to the footing, foundation, concrete or other
structural element due to the ground water table.
      (2)   Concrete that has been subjected to any of the following
conditions:
         (a)   Deterioration;
         (b)   Ultimate deformation;
         (c)   Fractures;
         (d)   Fissures;
         (e)   Spalling;
         (f)   Exposed reinforcement; or
         (g)   Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
      (3)   Aluminum that has been subjected to any of the following
conditions:
         (a)   Deterioration;
         (b)   Corrosion;
         (c)   Elastic deformation;
         (d)   Ultimate deformation;
         (e)   Stress or strain cracks;
         (f)   Joint fatigue; or
         (g)   Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
      (4)   Masonry that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         (a)   Deterioration;
         (b)   Ultimate deformation;
         (c)   Fractures in masonry or mortar joints;
         (d)   Fissures in masonry or mortar joints;
         (e)   Spalling;
         (f)   Exposed reinforcement; or
         (g)   Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
      (5)   Steel that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         (a)   Deterioration;
         (b)   Elastic deformation;
         (c)   Ultimate deformation;
         (d)   Metal fatigue; or
         (e)   Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
      (6)   Wood that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         (a)   Ultimate deformation;
         (b)   Deterioration;
         (c)   Damage from insects, rodents and other vermin;
         (d)   Fire damage beyond charring;
         (e)   Significant splits and checks;
         (f)   Horizontal shear cracks;
         (g)   Vertical shear cracks;
         (h)   Inadequate support;
         (i)   Detached, dislodged or failing connections; or
         (j)   Excessive cutting and notching.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   When substantiated otherwise by an approved method; and
      (2)   Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by
the Code Official or his and her designee.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.151 HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS.
   (A)   General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than
four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open
portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking
surface which is more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall have
guards. Handrails shall not be less than 34 inches in height or more than 38
inches in height measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the
finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less
than 36 inches in height above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck
or ramp or other walking surface.
   (B)   Exception. Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted
Building Code.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.152 RUBBISH AND GARBAGE.
   (A)   Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and
premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
   (B)   Disposal of rubbish or garbage.
      (1)   General. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish
or garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish or garbage in
approved containers. All rubbish or garbage shall be disposed of at least once
a week.
      (2)   Burning. The burning of brush, trees or tree limbs shall only be
allowed when approved and permitted by the city’s Fire Department. The burning
of rubbish or garbage shall not be allowed.
   (C)   Rubbish and garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall
supply leak-proof and tightly-covered container(s) for the removal of rubbish
and garbage.
      (1)   Construction sites. All construction sites shall have a minimum of
one container of appropriate size on site for the removal of rubbish and
garbage.
      (2)   Exception. In residential subdivisions, one container of
appropriate size may be allowed in a central location if multiple lots are
being developed concurrently.
   (D)   Appliances. Refrigerators, appliances and similar equipment shall not
be discarded, abandoned or stored outside a structure.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.153 PEST ELIMINATION.
   (A)   Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be
promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human
health. After pest elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
infestation.
   (B)   Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for pest
elimination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
   (C)   Single occupant. The occupant of a single-family dwelling or of a
single-tenant non- residential structure shall be responsible for pest
elimination on the premises.
   (D)   Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more
dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a non-residential
structure shall be responsible for pest elimination in the public or shared
areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by
failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the
occupant and owner shall be responsible for pest elimination.
   (E)   Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the
continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure. Exception: where the
infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be
responsible for pest elimination.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY
§ 153.165 SCOPE; RESPONSIBILITY; ALTERNATIVE DEVICES.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a
structure.
   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements.
A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to
occupy, any premises that does not comply with the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (C)   Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and
ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation
complying with the applicable referenced codes as listed in §
153.006 of this chapter shall be permitted.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.166 LIGHT.
   (A)   Habitable spaces.
      (1)   Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved
size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed
area for every habitable space shall be 8% of the floor area of such room.
      (2)   Exception: where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior
glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening
to the adjoining room shall be at least 8% of the floor area of the interior
room or space, but a minimum of 20 square feet. The exterior glazing area shall
be based on the total floor area being served.
   (B)   Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in
residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be
lighted at all times with at least a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb
or equivalent for each 200 square feet of floor area or equivalent
illumination; provided that, the spacing between lights shall not be greater
than 30 feet. In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including
exterior means of egress, stairways shall be illuminated at all times the
building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of one
footcandle at floors, landings and treads.
   (C)   Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or
artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions,
and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances,
equipment and fixtures.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.167 VENTILATION.
   (A)   Habitable spaces.
      (1)   Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window. The
total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least 45%
of the minimum glazed area required in §
153.166(A) of this chapter.
      (2)   Exception: where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors
are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the
adjoining room shall be at least 8% of the floor area of the interior room or
space, but a minimum of 20 square feet. The ventilation openings to the
outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated.
   (B)   Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall
comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by
division (A) above; except that, a window shall not be required in such spaces
equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical
ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the
outdoors and shall not be recirculated.
   (C)   Cooking facilities.
      (1)   Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall
not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility
or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in the rooming unit or
dormitory unit.
      (2)   Exceptions:
         (a)   Where specifically approved in writing by the Code Official in
concurrence with the Fire Marshal or his or her designee; and
         (b)   Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be
considered cooking appliances.
   (D)   Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious
fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system
shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be
exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
   (E)   Clothes dryer exhaust.
      (1)   Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other
systems and shall be exhausted outside the structure in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions or per the applicable Building Code.
      (2)   Exception: listed and labeled condensing (ductless) clothes dryers.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.168 OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming
units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate
from other adjoining spaces.
   (B)   Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall be
a minimum of seven feet in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a minimum
clear passageway of three feet between counter fronts and appliances or counter
fronts and walls.
   (C)   Minimum ceiling heights.
      (1)   Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms,
toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a minimum clear ceiling
height of seven feet.
      (2)   Exceptions:
         (a)   In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced a
minimum of four feet on center and projecting a maximum of six inches below the
required ceiling height;
         (b)   Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied
exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a minimum ceiling
height of six feet eight inches with a minimum clear height of six feet four
inches under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions; and
         (c)   Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar
purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a
minimum clear ceiling height of seven feet over a minimum of one-third of the
required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only
those portions of the floor area with a minimum clear ceiling height of five
feet shall be included.
   (D)   Bedroom and living room requirements. Every bedroom and living room
shall comply with the requirements of divisions (D)(1) through (D)(5) below.
      (1)   Room area. Every living room shall contain at least 120 square feet
and every bedroom shall contain a minimum of 70 square feet and every bedroom
occupied by more than one person shall contain a minimum of 50 square feet of
floor area for each occupant thereof.
      (2)   Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means
of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only
means of egress from other habitable spaces. Exception: units that contain
fewer than two bedrooms.
      (3)   Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at
least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another
bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one
water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an
adjacent story.
      (4)   Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and non-habitable spaces shall not
be used for sleeping purposes.
      (5)   Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable
provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to, the light,
ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this
chapter; the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities requirements of
§§
153.180 through
153.186 of this chapter; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle
requirements of §§
153.200 through
153.206 of this chapter; and the smoke detector and emergency escape
requirements of §§
153.220 through
153.223 of this chapter.
   (E)   Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants
than permitted by the minimum area requirements of the following table:
 
Minimum Area Requirements
Space              Minimum Area in Square Feet
                   1—2 Occupants3—5 Occupant6 or More Occupants
Bedrooms           Shall comply with §
                   153.168(D)(4)
Dining room (a, b) No requirement 80            100
Living room (a, b) 120            120           150
NOTES TO TABLE:
a. See §
153.168(E)(2) of this chapter for combined living room/dining room spaces
b. See §
153.168(E)(1) of this chapter for limitations on determining the minimum
occupancy area for sleeping purposes
 
      (1)   Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by the table
shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy
area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with division (D)
above.
      (2)   Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall
comply with the requirements of the table above if the total area is equal to
that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function
as a combination living room/dining room.
   (F)   Efficiency unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency
living unit from meeting the following requirements.
      (1)   A unit occupied by not more than one occupant shall have a minimum
clear floor area of 120 square feet. A unit occupied by not more than two
occupants shall have a minimum clear floor area of 220 square feet. A unit
occupied by three occupants shall have a minimum clear floor area of 320 square
feet. These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by
divisions (F)(2) and (F)(3) below.
      (2)   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance
and refrigeration facilities, each having a minimum clear working space of 30
inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this chapter shall be
provided.
      (3)   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a
water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
      (4)   The maximum number of occupants shall be three.
   (G)   Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation
purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve
foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for
the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for
temporary storage.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.180 SCOPE; RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum
plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.
   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with the
requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.181 REQUIRED FACILITIES.
   (A)   Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or
shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a
sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room
as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly
into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not
be used as a substitute for the required lavatory.
   (B)   Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units.
   (C)   Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not
provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having
access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten occupants.
   (D)   Employees’ facilities. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and
one drinking facility shall be available to employees. Drinking facilities
shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable
cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be
located in toilet rooms or bathrooms.
   (E)   Public toilet facilities.
      (1)   General. Public toilet facilities shall be maintained in a safe
sanitary and working condition in accordance with the state’s Plumbing Code.
Except for periodic maintenance or cleaning, public access and use shall be
provided to the toilet facilities at all times during occupancy of the
premises.
      (2)   Construction sites. A portable toilet shall be supplied and
maintained in a safe, sanitary condition. The path of travel shall not exceed a
distance of 500 feet.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.182 TOILET ROOMS.
   (A)   Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall
not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space or to the exterior.
A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared
bathrooms and toilet rooms.
   (B)   Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming
units or dormitory units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing
a maximum of one flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or
passageway.
   (C)   Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have
access from within the employees’ working area. The required toilet facilities
shall be located a maximum of one story above or below the employees’ working
area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of
500 feet. Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined
employee and public facilities. Exception: facilities that are required for
employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent
structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a
travel distance of 500 feet from the employees’ regular working area to the
facilities.
   (D)   Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor
shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, non-absorbent surface to permit such
floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.183 PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES.
   (A)   General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and
maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks
and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing
fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe,
sanitary and functional condition.
   (B)   Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances
for usage and cleaning.
   (C)   Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a
structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of
inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross-connection, back siphoning,
improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the Code
Official or his or her designee shall require the defects to be corrected to
eliminate the hazard.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.184 WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,
water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a
public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks,
lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot
or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the state’s Plumbing
Code.
   (B)   Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located
above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink
faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in
place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an
approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
   (C)   Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to
provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in
sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function
properly, safely and free from defects and leaks.
   (D)   Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly
installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to
be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility
at a minimum temperature of 110°F. A gas-burning water heater shall not be
located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally
kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved
combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge
pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.185 SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a
public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
   (B)   Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall
function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
   (C)   Grease interceptors. Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal
devices shall be maintained in accordance with this chapter and the
manufacturer’s installation instructions. Grease interceptors and automatic
grease removal devices shall be regularly serviced and cleaned to prevent the
discharge of oil, grease and other substances harmful or hazardous to the
building drainage system, the public sewer, the private sewage disposal system
or the sewage treatment plant or processes. All records of maintenance,
cleaning and repairs shall be available for inspection by the Code Official or
his or her designee.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.186 STORM DRAINAGE.
   Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts and other open areas on
the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public
nuisance. Drainage should be discharged to dedicated drainage easements.
Complaints of illicit discharges shall be investigated by the city’s Storm
Water Department, pursuant to City Ord. 21-2008, as amended.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.200 SCOPE; RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the requirements of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.201 HEATING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in
structures as required by this section.
   (B)   Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality indicated in the applicable codes as listed in §
153.006 of this chapter. Cooking appliances shall not be used, nor shall
portable unvented fuel-burning space heaters be used, as a means to provide
required heating.
   (C)   Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either
expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply
heat to maintain a minimum temperature of 68°F in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and toilet rooms. The controls for the operation of the heating
equipment shall be located in the dwelling unit or sleeping unit. Exceptions:
when the outdoor temperature is below 10°F, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating
at its full design capacity.
   (D)   Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be
supplied with heat to maintain a minimum temperature of 65°F during the period
the spaces are occupied. Exceptions:
      (1)   Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions; and
      (2)   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
   (E)   Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be
measured three feet above the floor near the center of the room and two feet
inward from the center of each exterior wall.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.202 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid
fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall
be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be
capable of performing the intended function.
   (B)   Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and
appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent. Exception: Fuel-
burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation.
   (C)   Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be
maintained.
   (D)   Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall
be maintained in effective operation.
   (E)   Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel
and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be
provided for the fuel-burning equipment.
   (F)   Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel
consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line
thereto or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed
unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.203 ELECTRICAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an
electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and §
153.204 of this chapter.
   (B)   Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as
a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with
NFPA 70. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-
phase electrical service having a minimum rating of 100 amperes.
   (C)   Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical
system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacles and
lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or
for similar reasons, the Code Official or his or her designee shall require the
defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
      (1)   Abatement of electrical hazards associated with water exposure. The
provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of
electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to water.
         (a)   Electrical equipment. Electrical distribution equipment, motor
circuits, power equipment, transformers, wire, cable, flexible cords, wiring
devices, ground fault circuit interrupters, surge protectors, molded case
circuit breakers, low-voltage fuses, luminaires, ballasts, motors and
electronic control, signaling and communication equipment that have been
exposed to water shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of NFPA
70.
         (b)   Exception. The following equipment shall be allowed to be
repaired where an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved
manufacturer’s representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained
damage that requires replacement:
            1.   Enclosed switches, rated a maximum of 600 volts or less;
            2.   Busway, rated a maximum of 600 volts;
            3.   Panelboards, rated a maximum of 600 volts;
            4.   Switchboards, rated a maximum of 600 volts;
            5.   Fire pump controllers, rated a maximum of 600 volts;
            6.   Manual and magnetic motor controllers;
            7.   Motor control centers;
            8.   Alternating current high-voltage circuit breakers;
            9.   Low-voltage power circuit breakers;
            10.   Protective relays, meters and current transformers;
            11.   Low- and medium-voltage switchgear;
            12.   Liquid-filled transformers;
            13.   Cast-resin transformers;
            14.   Wire or cable that is suitable for wet locations and whose
ends have not been exposed to water;
            15.   Wire or cable, not containing fillers, that is suitable for
wet locations and whose ends have not been exposed to water;
            16.   Luminaires that are listed as submersible;
            17.   Motors; and
            18.   Electronic control, signaling and communication equipment.
      (2)   Abatement of electrical hazards associated with fire exposure. The
provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of
electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to fire.
         (a)   Electrical equipment. Electrical switches, receptacles and
fixtures, including furnace, water heating, security system and power
distribution circuits that have been exposed to fire, shall be replaced in
accordance with the provisions of NFPA 70.
         (b)   Exception. Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures that
shall be allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from the equipment
manufacturer or approved manufacturer’s representative indicates that the
equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.204 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be
properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
   (B)   Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at
least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall
contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground
fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one
receptacle. Any bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit
interrupter protection. All receptacle outlets shall have the appropriate
faceplate cover for the location.
   (C)   Luminaires. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room,
kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at
least one electric luminaire. Pool and spa luminaries over 15 V shall have
ground fault circuit interrupter protection.
   (D)   Wiring. Flexible cords shall not be used for permanent wiring, or for
running through doors, windows or cabinets, or concealed within walls, floors
or ceilings.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.205 ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS.
   (A)   General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in
compliance with ASME A17.1. The most current certificate of inspection shall be
on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or
dumbwaiter, be available for public inspection in the office of the building
operator or be posted in a publicly conspicuous location approved by the Code
Official or his or her designee. The inspection and tests shall be performed at
not less than the periodic intervals listed in ASME A17.1, Appendix N, except
where otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction.
   (B)   Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least
one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is
occupied. Exception: buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be
permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or
servicing.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.206 DUCT SYSTEMS.
   Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable
of performing the required function.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
FIRE SAFETY
§ 153.220 SCOPE; RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior
premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided.
   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain
such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.221 MEANS OF EGRESS.
   (A)   General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be
provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of
egress shall comply with the applicable codes.
   (B)   Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the applicable
code as listed in §
153.006 of this chapter shall be unobstructed.
   (C)   Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from
the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special
knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted
by the applicable codes.
   (D)   Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be
maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction,
and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be
operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars,
grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency
escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies
with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices
shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool
or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape
and rescue opening.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.222 FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS.
   (A)   Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating
of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and
floors shall be maintained.
   (B)   Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained
in an operative condition. All fire and smoke stop doors shall be maintained in
operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or
obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.223 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire,
actuate an alarm or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall
be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the
applicable codes.
      (2)   Automatic sprinkler systems. Inspection, testing and maintenance of
automatic sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 25.
   (B)   Smoke alarms.
      (1)   Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and
maintained in Group R or I-1 occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of
the following locations:
         (a)   On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in
the immediate vicinity of bedrooms;
         (b)   In each room used for sleeping purposes; and
         (c)   In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and
cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings
or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the
adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for
the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full
story below the upper level.
      (2)   Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in
other groups in accordance with the applicable codes.
   (C)   Power source. In Group R or I-1 occupancies, single-station smoke
alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring provided that
such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a
battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low.
Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as
required for overcurrent protection. Exception: smoke alarms are permitted to
be solely battery operated in buildings where no construction is taking place,
buildings that are not served from a commercial power source and in existing
areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the
removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless
there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access
for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes.
   (D)   Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be
installed within an individual dwelling unit in Group R or I-1 occupancies, the
smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of
one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. Physical
interconnection of smoke alarms shall not be required where listed wireless
alarms are installed and all alarms sound upon activation of one alarm. The
alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels
with all intervening doors closed. Exceptions:
      (1)   Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not
undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind; and
      (2)   Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be
interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of
interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an
attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for
interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   Penalties for non-compliance with orders and notices and citations shall be
as set forth as listed in the city’s Code Enforcement Board ordinance enacted
by Ord. 09-2003 as amended or as set forth in any other duly enacted ordinance
adopted by the City Council relating to fines and penalties for violations.
(Ord. 04-2017, passed 5-15-2017)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING CODE
Section
Introduction, General Provisions
   
154.001   Preamble
   
154.002   Adoption
   
154.003   Short title
   
154.004   Purpose
   
154.005   Interpretation
   
154.006   Conflict of ordinance
   
154.007   Plans and construction in progress
   
154.008   Separability
   
154.009   Definitions
   
154.010   Administration
   
154.011   Permits required
   
154.012   Compliance with other codes, statutes and regulations
   
154.013   Certificate of occupancy
   
154.014   Authorized use
   
154.015   Complaints regarding violations
   
154.016   Planning Commission
   
154.017   Board of Zoning Adjustment
   
154.018   Map amendment procedures
   
154.019   Zoning text amendments
   
154.020   Zoning district for annexed territory
Zoning Regulations
   
154.035   Zoning map
   
154.036   Map amendment identification
   
154.037   Interpretation of zoning district boundaries
   
154.038   Application of zoning district regulations
   
154.039   Conversion of dwelling structures
   
154.040   Agricultural land use exemption
   
154.041   Governmental land use exemption
   
154.042   Zoning districts
Zone Descriptions and Permitted Use
   
154.055   R-1 Suburban Residential-1
   
154.056   R-2 Suburban Residential-2
   
154.057   R-3 Urban Residential-3
   
154.058   R-4 Urban Residential-4 General
   
154.059   R-5 Urban Residential Mixed
   
154.060   R-6 High Density Residential
   
154.061   C-1 Neighborhood Office
   
154.062   C-2 Neighborhood Commercial
   
154.063   C-3 Regional Commercial
   
154.064   C-4 General Service Commercial
   
154.065   C-5 Downtown Mixed Use
   
154.066   I-1 General Industrial
   
154.067   I-2 Regional Industrial
   
154.068   PDD Planned Development District
   
154.069   PNR-1 Planned Neighborhood Residential-1
   
154.070   PNR-2 Planned Neighborhood Residential-2
   
154.071   PNC Planned Neighborhood Commercial
   
154.072   WCD-1, WCD-2 Woodland Corridor District
   
154.073   MAZ Municipal Airport Zone
   
154.074   AGB Agri-Business
   
154.075   FDH Future Development Holding
   
154.076   Use-specific standards
   
154.077   Conditional use standards
   
154.078   Conservation development
   
154.079   Cottage court development
   
154.080   Townhouse development
Overzones
   
154.085   Interstate Highway Service Business (IHSB)
   
154.086   Floodplain Overzone
   
154.087   Freeman Lake Overzone
   
154.088   National Register Historic District Overlay Zone
   
154.089   Commercial Transition Overzone
   
154.090   Prohibited uses
   
154.091   Cellular antenna tower regulations
Development Plan
   
154.105   Intent and purpose
   
154.106   Development plan required
   
154.107   Development plan procedures
   
154.108   Certification of approval
   
154.109   Construction commencement
   
154.110   Approval of development plan before building permit
   
154.111   Completion of site improvements before occupancy
   
154.112   Content of development plan
   
154.113   Content of conceptual development plan
   
154.114   Amendments to development plans
   
154.115   Master plan, planned district
   
154.116   Substitution of subdivision plat for development plan
Commercial Design Guidelines
   
154.130   Intent and purpose
   
154.131   Definitions
   
154.132   Applicability
   
154.133   Required plan submission
   
154.134   Design guidelines, buildings
   
154.135   Design guidelines, site design
   
154.136   Waiver procedure
General Landscape Standards
   
154.150   Intent and purpose
   
154.151   Sites affected
   
154.152   Change in use
   
154.153   Landscaping requirements
   
154.154   Waiver for development projects
   
154.155   Planting locations
   
154.156   Pervious areas
   
154.157   Encroachments
   
154.158   Existing trees/landscaping
   
154.159   Perimeter landscaping requirements
   
154.160   Interior and vehicular use area (VUA) landscaping
   
154.161   Plan submission
   
154.162   Planting manual and plant materials list
   
154.163   Screening requirements (service structures, basins and satellite
dishes)
   
154.164   Landscape tables
General Parking Standards
   
154.175   Intent and purpose
   
154.176   Parking/loading established prior to adoption of chapter
   
154.177   Parking requirements for change in principal use
   
154.178   Special access, surface and location requirements
   
154.179   Stacking areas
   
154.180   Location and distribution of parking
   
154.181   Minimum design and maintenance requirements
   
154.182   Parking area design standards
   
154.183   Single parking areas for multiple uses
   
154.184   Joint use of parking areas
   
154.185   Parking, loading and unloading, residential zones
   
154.186   Parking, loading and unloading, non-residential zones
   
154.187   Loading and unloading spaces
   
154.188   Vehicular storage areas
   
154.189   Waiver of parking standards
   
154.190   Large vehicle parking in IHSB Overzone
   
154.191   Bicycle parking
   
154.192   Accessible parking space requirement
   
154.193   Parking tables and diagrams
General Sign Standards
   
154.205   Intent and purpose
   
154.206   Sign permit procedures
   
154.207   General provisions
   
154.208   Signs exempt from permit
   
154.209   Prohibited signs, all zones
   
154.210   Permitted signs, all zones
   
154.211   Temporary banner signs
   
154.212   Scenic parkway signage
   
154.213   Interstate off-premises signs
   
154.214   Construction and maintenance
   
154.215   Non-conforming signs
   
154.216   Discontinuation, non-conforming signs
   
154.217   Sign types
Fence and Wall Regulations
   
154.230   Intent and purpose
   
154.231   Fences and walls
   
154.232   Subdivision identification sign/signature entrance
General Development Regulations
   
154.245   Intent and purpose
   
154.246   Minimum lot area
   
154.247   Yards
   
154.248   Height of structures
   
154.249   Environmentally sensitive and geologic hazard areas
   
154.250   Public facilities
   
154.251   Sight triangle
   
154.252   Entrance standards
   
154.253   Right-of-way width
   
154.254   Connectivity standards
Accessory Structures/Building Projections
   
154.265   Accessory structure location requirements
   
154.266   Porches, stairways and terraces
   
154.267   Chimneys, eaves, ornamental features and the like
   
154.268   Handicap ramps
   
154.269   Canopies
   
154.270   Temporary structure setbacks
   
154.271   Neighborhood structures
Non-conforming Uses, Structures and Lots
   
154.285   Non-conforming use provisions
   
154.286   Kentucky Revised Statutes requirements
   
154.287   Regulation of non-conforming uses
   
154.288   Regulation of non-conforming structures
   
154.289   Regulation of non-conforming lots
   
154.290   Conditional uses are not non-conforming uses
   
154.291   Procedure for determination of non-conforming
 
   
154.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Plant materials list
INTRODUCTION, GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 PREAMBLE.
   By adoption of this chapter, the city wishes to exercise all its power and
confer upon the Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Adjustment, all
authority allowed under the United States and Kentucky Constitutions and KRS
Chapter 100.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.0)
§ 154.002 ADOPTION.
   This zoning code is enacted by the city is confirmed, adopted and reads as
herein after set out.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.1)
§ 154.003 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Elizabethtown Zoning Ordinance” and may
be cited as the “zoning code”.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.2)
§ 154.004 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the zoning code is to implement the adopted comprehensive
plan and other plans of the city; to promote the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare; to facilitate orderly and harmonious development in the
visual and historic character of the city; to regulate the density of
population and intensity of land use in order to provide for adequate light and
air; to provide for vehicle parking and loading space; to improve the
appearance of vehicular use areas and property abutting public rights-of-way;
to require buffering between non-compatible land uses; to protect, preserve and
promote the aesthetic appeal, character and value of the city’s neighborhoods;
to promote public health and safety through the reduction of noise pollution,
air pollution, visual pollution, air temperature and artificial light glare; to
facilitate fire and police protection; to prevent the overcrowding of land,
blight and congestion in the circulation of people and commodities; to prevent
the loss of life, health or property from fire, flood or other dangers; to
protect airports, highways and other transportation facilities, public
facilities, including schools and public grounds, historic districts, the
central business district, natural resources and other areas of the city which
need special protection; to encourage the development of residential,
commercial and industrial subdivisions according to recognized standards which
provide for sound, efficient and economic development; to coordinate land
development to ensure that future growth will be orderly and conducive to the
provision of a minimum outlay of public and private expenditures in providing
services to developing areas; and to provide sound and efficient guidelines for
the overall development of the areas in which these regulations shall be
enforced. Implementation is to be by the Department of Planning and
Development, hereinafter referred to as the “Department” or its designated
agent.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.3)
§ 154.005 INTERPRETATION.
   The provisions herein shall be interpreted broadly and liberally so as to
implement and protect the purposes for which they are enacted. In the
interpretation and application of the zoning code, the provisions herein shall
be held to be the minimum or maximum requirements (as stated), adopted for the
promotion of the health, safety, morals, comfort prosperity and general
welfare. It is not intended by the zoning code to repeal, abdicate, annul or in
any way impair or interfere with any private restrictions placed upon property
such as covenants, deeds or recorded plats; provided, however, where this
zoning code imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or
premises, or upon the height of buildings, or requires greater lot areas,
larger yards or other open spaces, than are imposed by such private
restrictions, the provisions of the zoning code shall control.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.4)
§ 154.006 CONFLICT OF ORDINANCE.
   Whenever the zoning code, or subdivision plats or development plans approved
in conformance with these regulations, are in conflict with applicable Kentucky
Revised Statutes, or other local ordinances, regulations or laws, the more
restrictive statute, ordinance, regulation, plat or plan shall govern and shall
be enforced by the appropriate agency. When subdivision and development plans
approved by the Commission or its appointed representative, contain setbacks or
other features in excess of the minimum zoning code requirements, such features
as shown on the approved plan shall govern and be enforced by the Department.
Private deed restrictions or private covenants for a subdivision do not fall
within the jurisdiction of enforcement by any local agency and cannot be
enforced by the city.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.5)
§ 154.007 PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION IN PROGRESS.
   (A)   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in the zoning code shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building
or premises on which an application for a development plan or construction
permit was filed with the Department prior to the date of adoption of the
zoning code or amendment thereto, provided that the application meets all
zoning and other requirements in effect on the date of said application. The
development plan approval or construction permit issued pursuant to
applications made before the date of adoption of the zoning code, which is 7-1-
2008, shall be valid only if it is exercised within one year of the date of the
effective date of the ordinance.
   (B)   EXERCISED, as set forth in this section, shall mean that a binding
contract for the construction of the main building or other main improvements
is executed, or that prerequisite conditions involving substantial investments
shall be under contract, in development or completed, including, but not
limited to, applications for financing, posting of a surety with the
appropriate agencies for the improvements or that the main building(s) are
under construction.
   (C)   Additional period of time to “exercise” approval may be granted under
the following conditions.
      (1)   Setbacks. The Department is authorized to issue construction
permits conforming to building setbacks established for lots of record created
by preliminary subdivision plats and record plats approved between 1-1-2004 and
the effective date of the zoning code.
      (2)   Multi-family phase projects. The Department is authorized to issue
construction permits for multi-family projects that are being developed in
phases conforming to the density established on any development plan approved
between 1-1-2006 and the effective date of the zoning code. Any construction
permit issued under this authority must be issued prior to 7-1-2012.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.6; Ord. 14-2008, passed 11-17-2008; Ord.
05-2009, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 154.008 SEPARABILITY.
   If any clause, sentence, subdivision, paragraph, section or part of the
zoning code be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, subdivision,
paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in
which said judgment shall have been rendered.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.7)
§ 154.009 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of the zoning code, certain terms are herein defined.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the singular number include the plural, words in the
plural number include the singular; the word “person” includes association,
firm, partnership, trust, governmental body, corporation, organization, as well
as an individual; the word “structure” includes building; the word “occupied”
includes arranged, designed or intended to be used; the word “shall” is always
mandatory and not merely directive; the word “may” is permissive; and the word
“lot” includes plat or parcel. For words or terms not defined in the following
list, the following documents, or subsequent editions are hereby adopted by
reference and may be used:
      (1)   The New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions, by Harvey S.
Moskowitz and Carl G. Lindbloom; and
      (2)   A Glossary of Zoning, Development and Planning Terms, edited by
Michael Davidson & Fay Dolnick, Planning Advisory Service Report Number 491-
492.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABANDONMENT. To stop the use of property intentionally. When the use of
the property has ceased and the property has been vacant for 12 months,
ABANDONMENT will be presumed unless the owner can show a diligent effort has
been made to sell, rent or use the property for a legally permissible use.
      ABUTTING. Having a common border with, or being separated from such a
common border by a right-of-way, alley or easement.
      ACCESS MANAGEMENT. The process of providing and managing access to land
development while preserving the flow of traffic in terms of safety, capacity
and speed.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A subordinate structure, detached from, but located
on the same lot as a principal building. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES include garages,
decks and similar structures.
      ACCESSORY USE. A use of land or building or portion thereof customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and
located on the same lot with the principal use.
      ADULT DAY CARE FACILITY. A facility providing care for elderly and/or
functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for a portion of a 24-hour
day.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT.
         (a)   Forms of entertainment, including, but not limited to, the
following uses: adult book stores; adult motion picture theaters; and adult
dancing establishments.
         (b)   These uses are hereby more specifically defined.
            1.   ADULT BOOK STORE. An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, video tapes,
motion pictures or audio tapes and other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
            2.   ADULT DANCING ESTABLISHMENT. A public or private
establishment, which is licensed to serve food and/or beverages, which feature
topless or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainers where
specified anatomical areas are visible.
            3.   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building or open
area used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
            4.   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Less than completely and opaquely
covered:
               a.   Human genitals, pubic region;
               b.   Buttock;
               c.   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
               d.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
            5.   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Human genitals in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse
or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
      AGRICULTURAL MARKET. The seasonal selling or offering for sale, at
retail, of homegrown vegetables, produce or fruit, dairy products and other
consumables, occurring in a designated area, outside of a public right-of-way,
where the vendors are generally individuals who have raised the produce or
accepted the same on consignment for retail sale.
      AGRICULTURAL USE.
         (a)   The use of:
            1.   A tract of land of at least five contiguous acres for the
production of agricultural or horticultural crops, including, but not limited
to, livestock, livestock products, poultry, poultry products, grain, hay,
pastures, soybeans, tobacco, timber, orchard fruits, vegetables, flowers or
ornamental plants, wineries, including provisions for dwellings for persons and
their families who are engaged in the above agricultural use on the tract, but
not including residential building development for sale or lease to the public.
            2.   Regardless of the size of the tract of land used, small
wineries licensed under KRS 243.155;
            3.   A tract of at least five contiguous acres used for the
following activities involving horses:
               a.   Riding lessons;
               b.   Rides;
               c.   Training;
               d.   Projects for educational purposes;
               e.   Boarding and related care; or
               f.   Shows, competitions, sporting events and similar activities
that are associated with youth and amateur programs, none of which are
regulated by KRS Chapter 230, involving 70 or less participants. Shows,
competitions, sporting events, and similar activities that are associated with
youth and amateur programs, none of which are regulated by KRS Chapter 230,
involving more than 70 participants shall be subject to local applicable zoning
regulations.
            4.   A tract of land used for the following activities involving
horses:
               a.   Riding lessons;
               b.   Rides;
               c.   Training;
               d.   Projects for educational purposes;
               e.   Boarding and related care; or
               f.   Shows, competitions, sporting events and similar activities
that are associated with youth and amateur programs, none of which are
regulated by KRS Chapter 230, involving 70 or less participants. Shows,
competitions, sporting events, and similar activities that are associated with
youth and amateur programs, none of which are regulated by KRS Chapter 230,
involving more than 70 participants shall be subject to local applicable zoning
regulations.
         (b)   This definition shall only apply to acreage that was being used
for these activities before the effective date of this chapter (7-13-2004).
         (c)   AGRICULTURAL USE shall also include the keeping or breeding of
any animal for the purpose of human consumption.
      AIRPORT. A place where aircraft can land and take off, usually equipped
with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair and various accommodations
for passengers.
      ALLEY. A public or private vehicular way which affords a means of access
to the rear or side of properties adjacent to it and not intended for general
traffic circulation.
      AQUACULTURE. The hatching, raising and breeding of fish or other aquatic
plants or animals for sale or personal use.
      ARTISAN WORKSHOP. An establishment for the preparation, display and sale
of individually crafted artwork, jewelry, furniture, sculpture, pottery,
leather craft, hand woven articles and related items.
      ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A structure or structures with sleeping rooms
for unrelated individuals, requiring minimal medical supervision, usually with
communal living space and kitchen. Where cooking equipment or provisions for
the same are included in a sleeping room, such rooms shall be deemed a dwelling
unit. Facilities may also include office and sleeping rooms for staff members.
      AVERAGE SETBACK. The mean setback from a property line to building(s) on
a lot. The average setback is determined by measuring the setbacks of all
principal structures within a specified distance, as set out elsewhere in this
chapter, of the site.
      BANNER. Any sign applied to cloth, paper, flexible plastic or fabric of
any kind, with only such material as a backing and containing no framework
other than any supporting pole or poles.
      BASEMENT. The portion of a building, between the floor and the ceiling,
which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that the vertical distance
from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from
the average grade to the ceiling. A BASEMENT shall not be counted as a story.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cfa1911bfa0ab5e9746785b7ab63422cfaa1ec4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1805.png]
 
      BED AND BREAKFAST. An establishment providing lodging and meals in a
residential setting for not more than six overnight guests. Employees shall be
limited to residents of the structure.
      BERM. A mound of earth, a minimum of two feet in height, used to shield,
screen and buffer undesirable views and to separate incompatible land uses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cfa1911bfa0ab5e9746785b7ab63422cfaa1ec4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1807.png]
 
      BIKEWAY. A pathway, often paved and separated from streets and sidewalks,
designed to be used by bicyclists.
      BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling unit or part thereof in which, for
compensation, lodging and meals are provided; personal and financial services
may be offered as well.
      BREWERY. Any place or premises where malt beverages are manufactured for
sale, including all offices, granaries, mash rooms, cooling rooms, vaults,
yards and storerooms connected with the premises; or where any part of the
process of the manufacture of malt beverages is carried on; or where any
apparatus connected with the manufacture is kept or used; or where any of the
products of brewing or fermentation are stored or kept.
      BUFFER AREA. A strip of land which is located along the perimeter of a
piece of property and is a minimum of five feet wide and contains all perimeter
landscaping as specified in this zoning code.
      BUILDING. A structure having a roof, affixed to the land intended to be
used for sheltering people, animals, property or business activity.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from finished grade to the top of
the highest roof beams on a flat or shed roof, the deck level on a mansard
roof, and the average distance between the eaves and the ridge level for gable,
hip and gambrel roofs.
      BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line in the interior of a lot, which is
generally parallel to, and a specified distance from, the street right-of-way
line or property lines. No building shall then be placed in the space between
the BUILDING SETBACK LINE and right-of-way.
      BULLETIN BOARD. A sign which allows the manual or electronic changing of
the copy material and is used to notify the public of non-commercial events or
occurrences such as church services, political rallies, civic meetings or
similar events.
      BUSINESS, TECHNOLOGY AND RESEARCH CENTER. A working environment for
research and development institutions, offices and certain specialized
production and assembly establishments along with other specialized uses, all
of a non-nuisance type.
      CAMPGROUND. Any area or tract of land designed or used to accommodate two
or more camping parties including tents, camping trailers, recreational
vehicles or other camping outfits and meeting the following provisions:
         (a)   It shall have a minimum area of five acres;
         (b)   Entrances and exits to campgrounds shall be designed for safe
and convenient movement of traffic into and out of the property and to minimize
friction with free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. No parking, loading
or maneuvering of vehicles utilizing the campground may occur on a public
street or right-of-way. An entrance station, office, or check-in station shall
be provided at least 100 feet off any public right-of-way. The entrance access
shall consist of two travel lanes at least 12 feet wide each and one parallel
parking area at least 12 feet wide for temporary parking of vehicles;
         (c)   Internal access roads shall have a hard surface such as asphalt
or concrete and have a minimum width of 12 feet for one-way traffic or 24 feet
for two-way traffic. No parking shall be allowed on access roads. The radii of
curbs and pavement at intersections shall facilitate easy turning movements for
vehicles with trailers attached. The radii are subject to the approval of the
City Engineering and Fire Departments;
         (d)   No mobile or manufactured homes shall be permitted for any
purpose. One permanent, site-built dwelling shall be permitted for housing an
employee of the campground;
         (e)   Spaces shall be rented by the day or week only and an occupant
of a space shall not remain in the same campground more than three months in
any 12-month period. The only exception is one space that may be occupied
continuously by an employee of the campground;
         (f)   Accessory uses such as a management office, recreational
facilities, coin operated laundry facilities and shower/washroom facilities are
permitted provided they are for the exclusive use of visitors to the campground
and clearly incidental to the campground;
         (g)   Prior to any development activity, a development plan must be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. Site planning and
improvements shall provide for:
            1.   Facilities and amenities appropriate to the needs of the
occupants; and
            2.   Safe, comfortable, convenient and sanitary uses by occupants
under all weather conditions to be expected during periods of occupancy. The
development plan is subject to the approval of all city departments and utility
providers.
         (h)   Individual camping spaces must have a minimum area of 1,000
square feet. Only one RV, camper or tent is permitted in each camping space.
Multiple tents are permitted in an area that is permanently designated for tent
camping only;
         (i)   Camping spaces on the periphery of the development shall
maintain the same distance from the property lines as the minimum setback
requirement for the underlying zoning district;
         (j)   All utilities must be placed underground. Fire hydrants must be
provided within the campground as required by the Fire Department;
         (k)   At least one dump station must be provided. Vehicles using the
dump station cannot block other vehicles entering or exiting the campground.
Ground disposal of drain water or wastewater is prohibited at all times.
Temporary restroom facilities are not permitted at any time;
         (l)   At least one dumpster or other suitable trash/garbage collection
system must be provided within a reasonable distance of all campground users.
It must be within an enclosure that provides screening from adjacent properties
and public rights-of-way. Individual containers may be provided at each camp
site. Containers cannot be allowed to overflow; and
         (m)   The Planning Commission may waive any of these requirements if a
suitable alternative is provided.
      CANDLEPOWER. Luminous intensity expressed in candelas.
      CANOPY. A roof-like structure intended to temporarily protect automobiles
and their occupants while pumping gasoline or entering and exiting a building.
      CEMETERY. Land used for the burial of the dead, including mausoleums,
necessary sales buildings and maintenance facilities.
      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A document issued by the Department allowing
the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has
been constructed or will be used in compliance with applicable codes and
ordinances.
      CHILDCARE CENTER. A facility providing regular shelter, care, activity
and supervision (with or without academic instruction) for minor children in
compliance with state law. Facilities are classified by type as follows:
         (a)   TYPE 1.
            1.   A building other than a dwelling unit which regularly receives
four or more children; or
            2.   Including a dwelling unit, which regularly provides care for
13 or more children.
         (b)   TYPE 2.
            1.   A dwelling unit that is the full time residence of the
licensee; and
            2.   Regularly provides care apart from the parents for seven, but
not more than 12 children.
      CHILDCARE, IN HOME. A private dwelling unit, that is the full time
residence of the provider, in which not more than six minor children are given
care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day. Exception:
children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or
adoption.
      CHURCH. A building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious
worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to
sustain public worship, together with all accessory uses and buildings such as
multi-purpose centers, childcare centers, customarily associated with the
primary purpose. CHURCH includes synagogues, temples, mosques, sanctuaries or
other such places for worship and religious activities.
      CLUB, PRIVATE. Buildings and facilities, the purpose of which is to
render a social, educational or recreational service to members and their
guests and not primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a
business or to render a profit. PRIVATE CLUB shall include country club.
PRIVATE CLUBS must supply an approved copy of articles of incorporation, by-
laws and other appropriate documentation to the Department.
      COFFEE HOUSE. An informal restaurant primarily offering coffee, tea and
other beverages, and where light refreshments and limited menu meals may also
be sold.
      COMMERCIAL WAREHOUSE. A building or portion thereof, used for storage of
any property not permitted in a residential storage warehouse. This shall not
be deemed to include the storage area in connection with a purely retail
business when located on the same property.
      COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A building or part thereof, with sleeping rooms
available for more than six unrelated individuals, with or without
compensation. Where cooking equipment or provisions for the same are included
in a sleeping room, such room shall be deemed a dwelling unit. Halfway houses
are not to be considered as COMMUNITY RESIDENCES.
      CONDOMINIUM. The ownership of individual dwelling units located on a lot
or lots which are owned in common by individual unit owners, or any division of
the interest in real property, including easements, that have the effect of
permitting more than one dwelling unit on a lot without the division of the fee
simple interest in said lot.
      CORRECTIONAL FACILITY. A facility providing custodial care and treatment
in a protective living environment for persons residing voluntarily or by court
placement, including, without limitation, correctional and post correctional
facilities, juvenile detention facilities and temporary detention facilities.
      COVENANT, PRIVATE. An agreement binding and restricting the land of
present owners and subsequent purchasers. They are enforced only by the
landowners involved and not by the city or other public agency.
      DATA PROCESSING FACILITY. A facility where electronic data is processed
by employees, including, without limitation, data entry, storage, conversion or
analysis, subscription and credit card transaction processing, telephone sales
and order collection, mail order and catalog sales and mailing list
preparation.
      DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per acre.
      DENSITY BONUS. The granting of the allowance of additional density in a
development in exchange for the provision, by the developer, of other desirable
amenities from a public perspective (e.g., public open spaces, plazas, art,
landscaping, parks, walkways and similar amenities).
      DENSITY, GROSS. The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number
of dwelling units in a development by the area within the boundaries of a
particular development, excluding nothing.
      DENSITY, NET. The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number
of dwelling units in a development by the area of the actual tract of land (in
acres) upon which the dwelling units are proposed to be located not including
common open space, other land uses and associated recreational facilities
within the area; the result being the number of dwelling units per net
residential acre of land. Net density calculations exclude rights-of-way of
publicly dedicated streets and private streets.
      DEPARTMENT. The Department of Planning and Development for the City of
Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
      DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A drawing containing written and graphic material for
the provision of a development, including any or all of the following: location
and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use, density of
development, streets, driveways, parking facilities, signs, drainage or surface
water, access points, a plan for screening or buffering, utilities, existing
human-made and natural conditions, and all other conditions agreed to by the
applicant.
      DEVELOPMENT, CONSERVATION. A development type consisting of smaller lots
than conventional development that are clustered together to provide for common
civic and open spaces. The common open space may be set-aside for resource
features such as private parks, recreation areas, woodlands, creeks, streams,
and their riparian areas, floodplains, and similar features. Cluster
development may be used to preserve environmental resources by clustering lots
on the buildable portions of the property.
      DEVELOPMENT, CONVENTIONAL. A development using the standard dimensional
requirements of the zoning district for lot size and setbacks. CONVENTIONAL
DEVELOPMENTS do not include conservation developments, cottage court
developments, or townhouse developments when used to obtained smaller lot
sizes.
      DEVELOPMENT, COTTAGE COURT. A type of development where COTTAGE COURT
DWELLINGS are clustered around a shared pedestrian courtyard.
      DISTILLERY. Any place or premises where distilled spirits are
manufactured for sale, and which are registered in the office of any collector
of internal revenue for the United States. It includes any United States
government bonded warehouse.
      DORMITORY. A building used as group living quarters for a student body or
religious order as an accessory use for a college, university, boarding school,
convent, monastery or other similar institutional use.
      DUMPSTER. A container that has a hooking or similar mechanism that
permits it to be raised and the contents deposited into a waste hauling
vehicle.
      DWELLING, DUPLEX. A residential building containing two dwelling units,
under one roof, totally separated from each other by an un-pierced wall
extending from ground to roof, or an un-pierced floor in the case of stacked
units and located on one parcel.
      DWELLING, MULTI-UNIT. A building or buildings containing three or more
units, including units that are located adjacent to or one over the other and
on the same parcel.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-UNIT ATTACHED. A building containing two or more single
dwelling units, under one roof, totally separated from each other by an un-
pierced wall extending from ground to roof, and each being located on a
separate parcel.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-UNIT DETACHED. A residential use designed as a single
residential dwelling unit located on its own lot and not attached to any other
dwelling. This definition does not include a patio home, manufactured home, or
mobile home. Detached single-unit dwellings may be constructed off-site (e.g.
modular home or manufactured home).
      DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. A residential use divided into a series of units
that are attached horizontally in a linear arrangement under a common roof with
a common exterior wall and separated from one another by single partition walls
without openings from basement to roof. Each unit of a townhouse includes a
separate walk-up access from the street or common open space. This definition
includes rowhouses. For the purposes of this Code, a single-unit attached
dwelling is not considered a townhouse.
      DWELLING UNIT. A room or rooms, connected together, constituting a
separate, independent housekeeping establishment for a family (for owner
occupancy or rental, lease or other occupancy on weekly or longer terms),
physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units that may be in the
same structure and containing its own independent kitchen and sleeping
facilities.
      DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY. A dwelling unit established on a parcel with a
primary dwelling unit, but clearly subordinate to the primary dwelling unit.
Accessory dwelling units do not count toward the maximum density requirements
allowed within the applicable zoning district.
      EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner to the use of land by the public, a
corporation or persons, for specific purposes such as the construction of
utilities, drainage ways and roadways.
      EASEMENT, ACCESS. An easement created for the purpose of providing
vehicular or pedestrian access to or across a property.
      EASEMENT, CONSERVATION. The grant of a property right stipulating that
the described land will remain in its natural state and precluding future or
additional development.
      ENCROACHMENT. Any obstruction or illegal or unauthorized intrusion in a
delineated floodway, right-of-way or on adjacent land.
      ENTERTAINMENT DESTINATION. Any large facility of at least 40 acres of
combined properties that provide entertainment to the public, including golf
courses, music venues, sports complexes, or other similar uses as determined by
the Planning Director.
      EVENTS CENTER. The use of a property for the conduct of special events of
a limited size and number. SPECIAL EVENTS are defined as wedding receptions,
luncheons, meetings, fundraising proceedings for not-for-profit organizations
or similar activities.
      FEEDLOT. A lot or building or combination of lots, and buildings,
intended for the confined breeding, raising or holding of animals and
specifically designed as a confinement area in which manure may accumulate, or
where the concentration of animals is such that a vegetative cover cannot be
maintained within the enclosure. For purposes of this chapter, open lots used
for the feeding and rearing of poultry (poultry ranges) shall be considered to
be animal feedlots. Pastures shall not be considered animal feedlots under
these rules. Manure storage areas on or off the site of the feedlot will be
considered as a FEEDLOT.
      FENCE. A continuous barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion or to
mark a boundary, but not including hedges, shrubs, trees or other natural
growth.
      FLEA MARKET. An outdoor commercial activity, not including shopping
centers, individual retail operations or sales conducted by a nonprofit or
charitable organization, that is open to the general public and composed of
semi-enclosed or outdoor stalls, rooms, stands or spaces used for the purpose
of display and sale, exchange or barter of merchandise.
      FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from
the centerline of wall separating two buildings, but not including:
         (a)   Attic space providing headroom of less than seven feet; and
         (b)   Basement space.
      GARAGE, PRIVATE. A space or structure, including a carport, on the same
lot with or in the building to which it is accessory, primarily for the storage
of automobiles of the residents of the premises.
      GOLF COURSE. A facility other than a miniature golf course for the
playing of golf at which there may be a clubhouse including restrooms, locker
rooms and a pro shop. A GOLF COURSE may provide additional services customarily
furnished such as swimming, outdoor recreation and golf related retail sales
that may include a restaurant and lounge if approved as a part of the
development.
      GOLF COURSE, MINIATURE. A theme oriented recreational facility, typically
comprised of nine or 18 putting greens, each with a cup or a hole, where
patrons pay a fee to play.
      GOLF DRIVING RANGE. A limited area on which golf players do not walk, but
onto which they drive golf balls from a central tee area.
      GROCERY. Food markets or combination food markets and department stores
greater than 5,000 square feet in floor area.
      HALFWAY HOUSE. A facility, licensed or unlicensed, for persons on release
from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such
more restrictive custodial confinement, where supervision, rehabilitation and
counseling are provided to mainstream said persons back into society, enabling
them to live independently.
      HEALTH CLUB. An establishment that provides facilities for aerobic and
anaerobic exercises, running and jogging, exercise equipment, game courts,
swimming facilities, saunas, showers, massage rooms and lockers and other
similar services.
      HEIGHT. The vertical distance of a structure measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade surrounding the structure to the highest point
of the structure.
      HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or professional service operated from a
dwelling unit, or an accessory building, which use is accessory, incidental,
and secondary to the use of the building for dwelling purposes and does not
change the essential residential character or appearance of the building.
      HOMELESS SHELTER. A facility providing temporary housing to indigent,
needy, homeless or transient persons; may also provide ancillary services such
as counseling, vocational training and similar services.
      HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION. A community association, other than a condominium
association, that is organized in a development in which individual owners
share common interests and responsibilities for costs and upkeep of common open
space or facilities.
      HOSPITAL. An institution where sick or injured persons are provided
medical care and in the course of the same are housed overnight and provided
nursing and related services. This definition shall not include drug
rehabilitation facilities, halfway houses, convalescent or nursing homes,
institutions for mentally ill individuals or other similar facilities.
      HOTEL. A building or structure where sleeping accommodations are kept,
used, maintained, advertised or held out to and are furnished to the public for
transient lodging and which has a registration desk. This term includes motels,
and similar establishments, but does not include bed and breakfast
establishments, short-term rentals, boarding houses, community residences,
nursing homes or assisted living facilities.
      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any hard surfaced, human-made area that does not
readily absorb or retain water, including, but not limited to, building roofs,
parking and driveway areas, graveled areas, sidewalks and other paved areas.
      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO. All impervious surfaces such as buildings,
roads, parking areas and patios that increase storm water runoff divided by
total lot area.
 
(I.S.R. ) = Total Impervious Surface Area
            Total Lot Area
 
      INCIDENTAL USE. Subordinate and minor in significance and bearing a
reasonable relationship with the primary use.
      INSTITUTIONAL USE. A nonprofit, religious, or public use, such as a
church, library, public or private school, hospital or government owned or
operated building, structure or land used for public purpose.
      JUVENILE DETENTION FACILITY. A public facility or institution exclusively
for the incarceration of non-adults awaiting trial or sentencing or serving a
court imposed sentence.
      KENNEL. An establishment for the commercial breeding and/or boarding of
six or more domestic animals for profit. DOMESTIC ANIMALS include dogs, cats,
rabbits and the like. Animals commonly defined as livestock, horses, cattle,
goats, pigs and the like are not defined as domestic animals. The
establishments may consist of indoor or outdoor facilities including, but not
limited to, pens, runs and fenced areas.
      KRS. Kentucky Revised Statues, Chapter 100 is the state enabling
legislation relating to Planning Commissions, Board of Zoning Adjustments,
zoning ordinances and subdivision regulations.
      LAUNDRY. A facility where clothing and similar textiles are washed, dried
or dry cleaned.
      LAUNDRY, SELF SERVICE. A facility where patrons wash and dry clothing or
other textiles in machines operated by the patron.
      LIBRARY. A public facility for the use, but not sale, of literary,
musical, artistic or reference materials.
      LIVESTOCK.
         (a)   All cattle or animals of the bovine species;
         (b)   All horses, mules, burros and asses or animals of the equine
species;
         (c)   All goats or animals of the caprine species;
         (d)   All swine or animals of the porcine species; and
         (e)   All sheep or animals of the ovine species.
      LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
transfer of ownership or for building development. Generally LOTS are the basic
unit of a subdivision plan, i.e., the smallest division of a plan designed to
be owned by one person.
      LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more streets or abutting upon two
adjoining and deflected lines of the same street and thereby forming an
interior angle of less than 135 degrees. CORNER LOTS shall be construed to have
front yards along each abutting street, one rear yard and one side yard.
      LOT, DEPTH. The average horizontal distance between the front and rear
property line of a lot.
      LOT LINE. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. The property line dividing a lot from a street.
      LOT LINE, REAR. The line opposite the front lot line.
      LOT LINE, SECONDARY FRONT. The property line on a corner lot dividing the
side exposure of a principal structure from a street or the rear of the
principal structure in the case of a lot with three front yards.
      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line, other than a front or a rear lot line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cfa1911bfa0ab5e9746785b7ab63422cfaa1ec4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1809.png]
      LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as
distinguished from a corner lot.
      LOT WIDTH. Generally, the distance, measured along the building setback
line, between the two side property lines of a lot; although, at times the
measurement will be along the right-of-way or rear property line.
      MANUFACTURED HOUSING. A factory built, single-unit structure that is
manufactured under the authority of 42 U.S.C. § 5401, the National Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, is transportable in one or more
sections, is built on a permanent chassis, and is used as a place of human
habitation; but which is not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device
allowing transport of the unit other than for the purpose of delivery to a
permanent site, and which does not have wheels or axles permanently attached to
its body or frame. MANUFACTURED HOUSING is further divided into two sub types:
         (a)   TYPE 1. Structures meeting the above definition of manufactured
housing.
         (b)   TYPE 2. A transportable structure suitable for year round
single-unit occupancy and having water, electrical and sewage connections
similar to those of conventional dwellings and having a permanent hitch and
axle integral to the chassis structure. The removal of the hitch and axle does
not render the structure a Type 1 structure.
      MANUFACTURED HOUSING DEVELOPMENT. A parcel of land, containing spaces
with required improvements and utilities for the long term placement of Type 2
manufactured housing for non-transient use that may include services and
facilities for the residents. The spaces may be rented, owned individually or
sold as condominiums. Recreational vehicles, campers and trailers are not
permitted to be used as housing.
      MASTER SITE PLAN. A conceptual site plan indicating the physical and
functional interrelationships between uses and facilities on a site for those
projects, series of projects, phased developments or developments occurring
over a period of years, or which are of such a size or complexity or duration
so as to make independent site plan review lead to segmented and inconsistent
conditions or approvals.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATOR. As defined in KRS 218B.010, a cultivator
license authorizes its holder to grow medical cannabis (also known as raw plant
material) in an enclosed, locked facility and sell medical cannabis to a
licensed medical cannabis processor, producer, or dispensary in Kentucky.
Cultivators grow, harvest, and trim the cannabis plants used to make safe,
accessible medical cannabis products in Kentucky. Cultivators are separated
into four tiers based on size of operations:
         (a)   Tier 1: not to exceed 2,500 square feet of canopy.
         (b)   Tier 2: not to exceed 10,000 square feet of canopy.
         (c)   Tier 3: not to exceed 25,000 square feet of canopy.
         (d)   Tier 4: not to exceed 50,000 square feet of canopy.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY. As defined in KRS 218B.010, a dispensary is
a retail location where medical cannabis products are sold.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS PROCESSOR. As defined in KRS 218B.010, a processor is a
business that prepares, manufactures, and packages medical cannabis products.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS PRODUCER. As defined in KRS 218B.010, a producer is a
cannabis business that is both a cultivator and a processor.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY. As defined in KRS 218B.010,
a safety compliance facility is responsible for testing medical cannabis
products produced in Kentucky to ensure those products are safe for consumption
and use.
      MICROBREWERY. Any place or premises where malt beverages are manufactured
for sale, either on premises or off premises, in quantities not to exceed
25,000 barrels in one year.
      MURAL. A graphic displayed on the exterior of a building or other
structure, fence or wall, generally for the purposes of decoration or artistic
expression, including, but not limited to, paintings, frescos or mosaics.
      MUSEUM. A building having public significance by reason of its
architecture or former use or occupancy or a building serving as a repository
for a collection of natural, scientific or literary curiosities or objects of
interest, or works of art, arranged, intended and designed to be used by member
of the public for viewing, with or without an admission charge, and which may
include as an accessory use the sale of goods to the public as gifts or for
their own use.
      NEIGHBORHOOD CENTER. A structure where people living in the same
subdivision development may carry on cultural, recreational or social
activities. The CENTER may contain private pools, tennis courts or similar
features. It may not be rented out to non-residents.
      NON-CONFORMING LOT. A lot, the area, dimensions, or location of which was
lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning regulations
but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to
the present requirements of the zoning district.
      NON-CONFORMING SIGN. Any sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning regulations but that fails by
reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present
requirements of this chapter or amendment thereto.
      NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure or building, the size, dimensions
or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment to
the zoning regulations but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district.
      NON-CONFORMING USE. An activity which lawfully existed before the
adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning regulations, but that fails by
reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present
requirements of the zoning district.
      NURSING HOME. A facility established for profit or nonprofit, which
provides nursing care and related medical services on a 24-hour per day basis
to two or more individuals because of illness, disease, physical or mental
infirmity; provides care for those persons not in need of hospital care.
      OFFICE. A building whose use is for businesses, professional
associations, governmental agencies, civic, social and fraternal groups,
political, religious and charitable organizations, medical, dental, veterinary
practices and similar uses.
      OFFICE BUILDING. A building used primarily for offices that may include
ancillary services for office workers, such as a restaurant, coffee shop,
newspaper or food service area.
      OFFICE PARK. A development that contains a number of separate office
buildings, supporting uses and open space designed, planned, constructed and
managed on an integrated and coordinated basis.
      OPEN SPACE. Any land or area, the preservation of which in its present
use would:
         (a)   Conserve and enhance natural or scenic resources;
         (b)   Protect streams or water supply;
         (c)   Promote conservation of soils, wetlands, woodlands or forested
areas;
         (d)   Enhance the value to the public of abutting or neighboring
parks, forests, wildlife preserves, nature reservations or sanctuaries; and
         (e)   Enhance recreation opportunities.
      OUT PARCEL. A parcel reserved for the development of a freestanding
commercial use that shares parking, ingress/egress and/or other business
activities with a shopping center or regional enclosed shopping center (mall).
      OUTDOOR DISPLAY AREA. The placement of goods for sale or advertisement,
outside of the building or structure, including, but not limited to, vehicles,
garden supplies, gas, tires, motor oil, food, beverages, boats, farm equipment,
motor homes and clothing.
      PARK. A non-commercial, not for profit facility designed to serve the
recreation needs of the residents of the community. Facilities include
subdivision recreation facilities (neighborhood parks), community parks,
regional parks and special use facilities. Such facilities may also include,
but are not limited to, school and religious institution facilities such as
playgrounds, softball fields, baseball fields, football fields, soccer field
and similar uses.
      PARKING LOT/AREA. An off-street area used for the parking of any type of
vehicle, including, but not limited to, parking lots, loading and unloading
areas and service areas. Driveways, access ways, aisles and maneuvering areas
are also considered a part of the PARKING LOTS OR AREAS.
      PARKING SPACE. A space on private land, accessible from a street or
alley, not less than nine feet wide and 18 feet long, exclusive of passageways.
      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY. A person with a physical, emotional or mental
disability including, but not limited to, mental retardation, cerebral palsy,
epilepsy, autism, deafness or hard of hearing, sight impairments and orthopedic
impairments, but not including, convicted felons or misdemeanors on probation
or parole or receiving supervision or rehabilitation services as a result of
their prior conviction, or mentally ill persons who have pled guilty but
mentally ill to a crime or not guilty by reason of insanity to a crime. PERSON
WITH A DISABILITY does not include persons with current illegal use of or
addiction to alcohol or any controlled substance as regulated under KRS Chapter
219A.
      PERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface that presents an opportunity for
precipitation to infiltrate into the ground.
      PORCH. A covered but unenclosed projection from the wall of a building
that may or may not use columns or other ground supports for structural
purposes. Screening does not constitute enclosure.
      PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. A building in which is conducted a principal or
conditional use. In any residential zone, any structure containing a dwelling
unit shall be deemed a PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE on the lot on which the same is
located. Where a non-conforming use is the primary use on the property, the
building in which it is located shall be deemed a PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE.
      PROFESSIONAL SERVICE. An occupation that provides technical information,
managerial or financial assistance, secretarial and similar or other related
office work.
      QUARRY. An open pit from which building stone, sand, gravel, mineral or
fill is taken to be processed for commercial purposes.
      RECOVERY RESIDENCE. Any premises, place, or building that:
         (a)   Holds itself out as a recovery residence, recovery home, sober
living residence, alcohol, illicit drug, and other intoxicating substance-free
home for unrelated individuals, or any other similarly named or identified
residence that promotes substance use disorder recovery through abstinence from
intoxicating substances;
         (b)   Provides a housing arrangement for a group of unrelated
individuals who are recovering from substance use disorders or to a group of
parents who are recovering from a substance use disorder and their children,
including peer-to-peer supervision models; and
         (c)   Is not licensed or otherwise approved by the Cabinet or any
other agency of state government to provide any medical, clinical, behavioral
health, or substance use treatment service for which a license or other
approval is required under state law.
      RECREATION, ACTIVE. Recreation requiring some constructed facilities and
organized activities.
      RECREATION, PASSIVE. Recreation that involves existing natural resources
and has a minimal impact on the environment.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) PARK. A commercial use providing space and
facilities for two or more motor homes or other recreational vehicles for
recreational use or transient lodging.
      RECYCLING CENTER. A lot or parcel of land, with or without buildings,
upon which used materials are separated and processed for shipment for eventual
reuse in new products.
      RECYCLING COLLECTION POINT. An enclosed structure, container or trailer,
used for the collection, storage and preparation for shipping, but not the
processing of aluminum, glass, paper, plastic and other similar items. The
collection, storage or processing in any manner or form of inoperable vehicles
is strictly prohibited under the terms and intent of this definition. All
storage and preparation of collected materials shall be within the enclosed
structure, container or trailer.
      REGIONAL ENCLOSED SHOPPING CENTER (MALL). A structure that when entered
shall provide access to all retail establishments within while not requiring
exiting the structure.
      RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY. A residence operated and maintained by a
sponsoring private or governmental agency to provide “services” in a homelike
setting for persons with disabilities. SERVICES means, but is not limited to,
supervision, shelter, protection, rehabilitation, personal development and
attendant care.
      RESIDENTIAL STORAGE FACILITY. A building or portion thereof, designed or
used exclusively for storing the excess personal property of an individual or
family when such is not located on the lot with their residence, such as
passenger motor vehicles, house trailers, motorcycles, boats, campers and other
items of personal property generally stored in residential accessory
structures. This shall not include the storage of any merchandise, stock
furnishings or vehicles of a business of any kind.
      RETAIL DRINK LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment used primarily for
the serving of alcoholic beverages by the drink to the general public and where
food or packaged alcoholic beverages may be served or sold only as accessory to
the primary use.
      RETAIL MALT BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any place or premises where malt
beverages are sold to consumers for consumption on premises or off premises.
      RETAIL PACKAGE LIQUOR SALES. Any place or premises where brewed,
fermented or distilled spirits in their original containers are sold to
consumers for consumption off premises and not for consumption on site.
      SALVAGE YARD. A facility or area for storing, keeping, selling,
dismantling, shredding, compressing or salvaging scrap or discarded material or
equipment.
      SECURITY HOUSE. A structure used as pedestrian or vehicular control
points for a private development and occupied by watchman, caretakers or
mechanical devices. The location of the structure may be determined by the
Board of Adjustment, but under no conditions shall the structure or any
appurtenance be located within or projecting into the public right-of-way.
      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult entertainment business, adult
arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret,
adult motel, adult motion picture theater, escort agency, nude model studio or
sexual encounter center. Further definition of these terms can be found in the
Chapter 118 of this code of ordinances.
      SHOPPING CENTER. A group of commercial establishments planned,
constructed and managed as a total entity, with customer and employee parking
provided on site, and signage in accordance with an approved plan. SHOPPING
CENTERS are separated into the following categories.
         (a)   COMMUNITY SHOPPING CENTER. Contains retail and service
establishments, has one or more anchor tenants and contains between 50,000 to
250,000 square feet of lease space, including out parcel spaces.
         (b)   CONVENIENCE CENTER. Contains light retail and service
establishments offering goods necessary to meet daily needs of the immediate
area and contains 15,000 square feet or less of lease space, including out
parcel spaces.
         (c)   NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER. Contains light retail and service
establishments offering goods necessary to meet daily needs and contains
between 15,000 to 50,000 square feet or less of lease space, including out
parcel spaces.
         (d)   REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER. Contains a wide range of retail and
service establishments, has one or more anchor tenants and contains more than
250,000 square feet of lease space, including out parcel spaces.
      SHORT-TERM RENTAL, OWNER OCCUPIED. A residential dwelling unit, or
portion thereof, that is owner occupied and is rented, leased or otherwise
assigned for a tenancy of less than 30 consecutive days at one time to a guest
or group of guests and where no meals are served. This term does not include
hotel, motel, bed and breakfast establishments, boarding houses or community
residences.
      SHORT-TERM RENTAL, NON-OWNER OCCUPIED. A residential dwelling unit, or
portion thereof, that is not owner occupied and is rented, leased or otherwise
assigned for a tenancy of less than 30 consecutive days at one time to a guest
or group of guests and where no meals are served. This term does not include
hotel, motel, bed and breakfast establishments, boarding houses or community
residences.
      SIGHT TRIANGLE. A triangular shaped portion of land established at street
intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow
in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists
entering or leaving the intersection. Triangle dimensions are based street
classifications.
      SIGN. Any writing, pictorial representation, form, emblem, trademark,
flag, banner, decoration (including material used to differentiate the sign
copy from the background) or any figure which is written, printed, projected,
painted, constructed or otherwise displayed upon or designed into a building,
board, plate, canopy, awning, window, vehicle or upon any object or device
which by reason of form, color, wording, symbol, design, illumination, motion
or other characteristic or designed to attract attention to the subject thereof
or is used as a means of identification, advertisement, announcement or of
illustrating products.
      SIGN, ABANDONED. A sign, the use for which it represents having been
discontinued for a period of 30 consecutive days.
      SIGN, AREA OF. The total area of the sign face, when faces are placed
back to back or in a “V” configuration and only one face is visible to
passersby at any time, which is used to display a message or attract attention,
not including its supporting structures. Should a sign contain three or four
faces the area is determined by summing the area of all sides of the sign face
and dividing by two.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cfa1911bfa0ab5e9746785b7ab63422cfaa1ec4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1811.png]
 
      SIGN, AUCTION. A sign announcing the sale of property (real estate) and
may be located upon the premises of the property for which the sale will be
conducted or may be located off premises of the sale. If located off premises,
the signs may not be erected more than 30 days prior to the sale and must be
removed within three days after the sale.
      SIGN, COMMERCIAL. Signs, whose language is intended to advertise goods,
products or services located on the premises where the sign is installed.
      SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. A sign identifying the project name, architect,
engineer, contractor, financing company, material supplier or others engaged in
work on the construction site on which the sign is located. Leasing
information, renderings and similar copy shall also be permitted.
      SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A non-commercial sign of an instructional nature, such
as “parking”, “exit” or “entrance”, displayed solely for the convenience of the
public. Such signs shall contain no business advertising, product trade name
identification of listing of any product sold or offered on the premises. Signs
may include a logo.
      SIGN, HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the highest point of
the sign including the frame and any embellishments and the established grade
at the sign or the adjacent street, whichever is greater.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cfa1911bfa0ab5e9746785b7ab63422cfaa1ec4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1813.png]
 
      SIGN, INCIDENTAL.
         (a)   A small sign, limited to information and directions related to
the permitted use on the lot or building on which the sign is located and
containing no direct illumination.
         (b)   Examples of incidental signs would include “no smoking”,
“restroom”, “no solicitors”, “no trespassing”, “self-service”, “vacancy”,
credit card acceptance signs, signs attached to gasoline pumps, A-frame and
similar signs when located no closer than 20 feet from any public right-of-way
and no further than ten feet from the building or occupied space to which the
advertising pertains, signs designed into or placed on vending devices, signs
indicating hours of business and similar information.
      SIGN, INFORMATIONAL. A sign for which changing copy gives such
information as time, temperature and other information through an electronic
message display system.
      SIGN, MESSAGE BOARD. A sign with a fixed or changing display/message.
Display area may be both manual change copy or electronic.
      SIGN, MOBILE. A sign which is affixed to a frame having wheels or capable
of being moved, or otherwise portable, which does not have a permanent
foundation. The mere removal of wheels or temporary securing of a sign to a
surface of real estate shall not prevent its being a mobile sign within this
definition.
      SIGN, MONUMENT. A freestanding sign with a base width of at least 80% of
the width of the sign cabinet or sign face.
      SIGN, NON-COMMERCIAL. Any sign whose language is not intended to
advertise goods, products or services.
      SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. A sign that advertises goods, products, services or
facilities or directs persons to a different location from where the sign is
installed.
      SIGN, OFF-SITE DIRECTIONAL. A sign displayed at the intersection of a
major arterial roadway intended to advertise and direct travelers to an
entertainment destination, as defined in the Elizabethtown Zoning Ordinance,
which is located on a side street from that major arterial roadway. Off-site
directional signs shall count toward the total allowable signs permitted on a
lot.
      SIGN, OFF-SITE REAL ESTATE. A readily removable sign announcing the
proposed sale or rental of property other than the property upon which the sign
is located and providing directions to the subject property.
      SIGN, ON-PREMISES. Any sign identifying or advertising a business,
person, activity, goods, products or services located on the premises where the
sign is installed and maintained.
      SIGN, ON-SITE REAL ESTATE. A sign announcing the sale or rental of the
property upon which the sign is located.
      SIGN, POLE. A freestanding sign that is affixed, attached or erected on a
pole that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or
structure.
      SIGN, PORTABLE. A sign capable of being moved and not permanently
attached to the ground, building or similar structure.
      SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign attached to and projecting out from a building
face or wall, generally at right angles to the building.
      SIGN, ROOF. A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or that is
wholly dependent upon a building for support and that projects above the top
wall or edge of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a
gambrel, gable or hip roof, or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof.
      SIGN, SPECIAL EVENT. A sign advertising or announcing a special
community-wide event or activity conducted by, or sponsored by, or on behalf of
a unit of local government, a charitable organization, or a not-for-profit
corporation. A special community-wide event or activity is one that occurs not
more than twice in any 12-month period and seeks to attract donations,
participants or customers throughout the city.
      SIGN, TAG. An on- or off-premises sign, temporary in nature, used to
direct persons to a business location, special sale or commercial event.
      SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign, pennant, tag, inflatable or flag, used as
advertising display for a limited time period and not permanently affixed to
any structure or the ground. Exception: banner signs as identified in §
154.211.
      SIGN, TRACT. A sign advertising the original sale of property in a
subdivision.
      SIGN, TRAVELERS’ DIRECTIONAL. A sign directing travelers to commercial or
other locations within the corporate limits of the city. The sign will be
erected by the city with the applicant purchasing spaces on the sign structure.
The city will have control over locations and design standards.
      SIGN, VEHICLE. A sign on a vehicle customarily and regularly used to
transport persons, product or property in the normal operation of the business.
      SIGN, WALL. A sign fastened to the wall of a building or structure in
such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the
background surface of the sign, and that does not project more than 18 inches
from the building or structure.
      SPECIALTY RETAIL. Retail operations that specialize in one type or line
of merchandise. Such stores may include, but are not limited to, apparel
stores, jewelry stores, bookstores, shoe stores, stationary stores, antique
stores and similar establishments. These stores may be no larger than 5,000
square feet in area.
      STREET. Any public vehicular way; a general term used to describe right-
of-way which provides a channel for vehicular and pedestrian movement between
certain points in the community, which may provide for vehicular and pedestrian
access to properties adjacent to it, and which may also provide space for the
location of under or above ground utilities.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent
location to the ground or attached to something having permanent location on
the ground.
      SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or
parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease or
building development, or if a new street is involved, any subdivision of a
parcel of land; provided that a division of land for agricultural use and not
involving a new street shall not be deemed a subdivision. The term includes re-
subdivision and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of
subdivision or to the land subdivided; any division or re-division of land into
parcels of less than one acre occurring within 12 months following a division
of the same land shall be deemed a subdivision within the meaning of this
section.
      SWIMMING POOL. A structure, public or private, whether above or below
grade level, designed to hold in depth, 18 inches or more of water and used for
recreational purposes.
      TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. A structure without any foundation or footings that
is removed when the designated time period, activity or use, for which the
temporary structure was erected has ceased.
      TEMPORARY USE. A use established for a limited duration with the intent
to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period. These uses
include but are not limited to fireworks stands, tent sales, special promotion
sales and similar uses.
      USE, PRINCIPAL. The primary use of any lot or parcel.
      VARIANCE. A departure from the terms of the zoning regulations pertaining
to height or width of structures and size of yards and open spaces. VARIANCES
are granted in conformance with KRS Chapter 100.
      VEHICULAR USE AREA. A vehicular use area (VUA) is any open or enclosed
area containing more than 1,800 square feet of area and/or used by five or more
of any type vehicle, whether moving or at rest, including but not limited to,
parking lots, loading and unloading areas, mobile home parks and sales and
service areas. Driveways, when associated with uses other than single-family
and two-family, are considered to be vehicular use areas.
      WALL. One of the sides of a room or building connecting the floor and
ceiling or foundation and roof.
      WETLAND. Those areas that are inundated and saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal
circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar
areas.
      WINERY. Any place or premises in which wine is manufactured from any
fruit, or brandies are distilled as a by-product of wine or other fruit, or
cordials are compounded.
      WINERY, SMALL FARM. A winery producing wines, in an amount not to exceed
50,000 gallons in a calendar year.
      YARD, FRONT. An open space extending the full width of the lot between a
principal structure and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from
the ground upward. The depth of a FRONT YARD is the shortest distance measured
perpendicularly between any part of a building and the front lot line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cfa1911bfa0ab5e9746785b7ab63422cfaa1ec4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1815.png]
 
      YARD, REAR. An open space extending the full width of a lot between a
principal structure and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward. The depth of a REAR YARD is the shortest distance measured
perpendicularly between any part of a building and the rear lot line.
      YARD, SECONDARY FRONT. An open space extending the full width of the lot
between a principal structure and the secondary front lot line of a corner lot,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. The secondary front yard
will be that front yard that is parallel to the side exposure of the principal
structure or the rear exposure of the principal structure in the case of a lot
with three front yards. The depth of the secondary front yard is the shortest
distance measured perpendicularly between any part of a building and the
nearest lot line.
      YARD, SIDE. An open space extending the full width of a lot between a
principal structure and the side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward. The depth of a SIDE YARD is the shortest distance measured
perpendicularly between any part of a building and any side lot line.
      ZONING. The division of the city, by legislative regulations, into areas
or zones, which specify allowable uses for real property and size restrictions
for buildings within these areas. ZONING is also a program that implements
policies of the comprehensive plan.
      ZONING MAP. The map, adopted as part of an ordinance by the legislative
body that delineates the extent of each district or zone established in the
zoning regulations.
      ZONING ORDINANCE. The city’s zoning ordinance, as codified in this
Chapter 155 of this code of ordinances. The laws and regulations as set forth
and adopted by the city.
      ZOO. An area, building or structures which contain wild animals on
exhibition for viewing by the public.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.8; Ord. 14-2008, passed 11-17-2008; Ord.
08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord. 05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 20-2011, passed
10-17-2011; Ord. 26-2011, passed 11-21-2011; Ord. 27-2012, passed 12-3-2012;
Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 28-2014, passed 12-15-2014; Ord. 05-2015,
passed 5-4-2015; Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 04-2020, passed 4-20-2020;
Ord. 09-2020, passed 8-3-2020; Ord. 24-2024, passed 11-18-2024; Ord. 25-2024,
passed 11-18-2024; Ord. 17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.010 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Director of the Department and his or her authorized designee
shall administer and enforce the zoning regulations.
   (B)   The Director or his or her authorized designee shall promptly
investigate all complaints of violation and report all findings and action in
the official records which shall be available in the office of the Department.
If the Director or his or her authorized designee finds any of the provisions
of the zoning regulations are being violated, the Director or his or her
authorized designee may cite the violator, may seek a restraining order or
injunctive relief or may order the action necessary to correct the violation
and to enforce the provisions of the zoning regulations.
   (C)   The Director or his or her authorized designee shall make records of
all official actions relating to the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of the zoning regulations available to the public, including, but
not limited to, written records of all complaints and actions taken with regard
thereto, all violations discovered with actions thereto and the final
disposition of such matters.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.9)
§ 154.011 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permits shall be required for the following activities and shall be
issued by the Department in conformance with the provisions of the zoning
regulations.
   (B)   Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is
suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time of commencing
the work.
      (1)    Construction permit. No building or other structure shall be
erected, moved, added to or structurally altered, nor shall said activities be
commenced without a construction permit.
      (2)   Demolition permit. No building or other structure shall be razed,
demolished or removed, either entirely or in part, nor shall any of said
activities be commenced without a demolition permit.
      (3)   Sign permit. No sign shall be created, erected, moved, added to or
structurally altered except in accordance with standards contained in the
zoning regulations, nor shall any of said activities be commenced without a
permit.
      (4)   Permits authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment. The
Department shall issue permits in conformance with the written direction and
authorization of the Board of Zoning Adjustment concerning administrative
review appeals, conditional use permits, variances or other actions as
authorized in the zoning regulations.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.10)
§ 154.012 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER CODES, STATUTES AND REGULATIONS.
   Nothing in this subchapter or other sections of the zoning chapter shall be
construed to exempt any applicant for a permit from compliance with all local,
state and federal codes, statutes and regulations.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.11)
§ 154.013 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Generally. No person shall use or permit the use of any structure or
premises or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted,
enlarged or moved, wholly or partly, until a certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the Department. Such certificate shall show that the structure or
use, or both, or the premises, or the affected part thereof, are in conformance
with the provisions of the zoning regulations. It shall be the duty of the
Department to issue such certificates if it is found that all provisions of the
zoning regulations have been met, and to withhold such certificate unless the
requirements of the zoning regulations have been met.
   (B)   No occupancy permit. No person shall allow occupancy of any building
until the Department has been notified by the appropriate agencies that the
private details of water, electricity and where applicable, sanitary sewer and
natural gas are completed in such a fashion that such private utilities are
available for use on the property in question.
   (C)   Temporary certificate of occupancy. Temporary certificate(s) of
occupancy may be issued by the Department for a period not exceeding six months
during alteration or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion in
accordance with general rules and regulations concerning such temporary
certificate and with such additional conditions or safeguards as are necessary
in the circumstances of the case to protect the safety of the general public.
   (D)   Certificate of occupancy for existing uses or structures. Upon request
from the owner or tenant, and upon inspection, the Department shall issue a
certificate of occupancy for any building, premises or use that is in
conformity with the provisions of the zoning regulations or that a legal non-
conformity exists as specified in the certificate.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.12)
§ 154.014 AUTHORIZED USE.
   Construction permits or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of
plans and applications approved by the Department authorize only the use, or
arrangement and construction set forth in such permits, plans and certificates
and no other. The use, arrangement or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of the zoning regulations.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.13)
§ 154.015 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.
   Any person may file a written complaint alleging violation of the provisions
of the zoning regulations. Such complaint shall state fully the cause and basis
thereof and shall be filed with the Director of the Department. The Director or
his or her agent shall properly record such complaint and investigate and take
action thereon as provided by the zoning regulations to cite the violator to
the appropriate jurisdiction.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.14)
§ 154.016 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Generally. The Planning Commission (hereinafter referred to as
“Commission”) as constituted at the time of the zoning regulations shall
continue in power. There shall be five members appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the City Council for four-year terms ending on June 20 of the
designated year. Terms shall be staggered so that the terms of no more than two
members expire in a year. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in
accordance with KRS Chapter 100.
   (B)   Staff. The staff of the Commission shall be the Department. The
Commission office shall be located at the Department’s office location and all
records, minutes, proceedings, regulations, transactions, findings and
determinations shall be filed there. The Director of the Department shall act
as the Secretary for the Commission.
   (C)   Proceedings. The Commission shall conduct regular meetings in
accordance with the rules and regulations of its by-laws and KRS Chapter 100.
   (D)   General powers. The Commission shall have all the powers as allowed
under the United States and Kentucky Constitutions and KRS Chapter 100,
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   The right to employ or contract with planners or other persons as
it deems necessary to accomplish its assigned duties;
      (2)   To receive, hold and spend funds which shall serve as a guide for
public and private actions in decisions to assure the development of public and
private property in the most appropriate relationships;
      (3)   To prepare the text and map of all zoning regulations which shall
divide the city into zones on an interim or permanent basis;
      (4)   To promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the city, to facilitate orderly and harmonious development in the visual or
historic character of the unit, to regulate the density of population and
intensity of land use in order to provide for adequate light and air;
      (5)   To adopt regulations for the subdivision of land within the city’s
boundaries;
      (6)   To review proposals for amendments to the zoning regulations; and
      (7)   To hear applications for conditional uses or variances when part of
a map amendment request.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.16)
§ 154.017 BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Generally. The Board of Zoning Adjustment (hereinafter referred to as
“Board”) as constituted at the time of the adoption of the zoning regulations
shall continue in power. There shall be five members appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the City Council for four-year terms ending on December 31
of the designated year. The terms shall be staggered so that the terms of no
more than two members expire in any year. Vacancies on the Board shall be
filled in accordance with KRS Chapter 100.
   (B)   Staff. The staff of the Board shall be the Department. The Board
office shall be located at the Department’s office location and all records,
minutes, proceedings, regulations, transactions, findings and determinations
shall be filed there. The Director of the Department shall act as the Secretary
for the Board.
   (C)   Proceedings. The Board shall conduct regular meetings in accordance
with the rules and regulations of its by-laws and KRS Chapter 100.
   (D)   General powers. The Board shall have all the powers as allowed under
the United States and Kentucky Constitutions and KRS Chapter 100, including,
but not limited to:
      (1)   The right to employ or contract with planners or other persons as
it deems necessary to accomplish its assigned duties;
      (2)   To receive, hold and spend funds which it may legally receive from
any and every source in and out of the state;
      (3)   To issue subpoenas, and to hear and decide applications for
conditional use permits, variances and non-conforming uses; and
      (4)   To review administrative action in enforcement of the zoning
regulations.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.17)
§ 154.018 MAP AMENDMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Generally. A proposal for amendment to the zoning map may originate
with the Commission, the City Council, the owner of the subject property or a
person having written authorization from the owner of the subject property.
Regardless of the origin of the proposed amendment, an application must be
filed with the Department for the proposed amendment, accompanied by
information as required by KRS Chapter 100, the zoning regulations and the by-
laws of the Commission. At the time of filing an application for zoning map
amendment, a non-refundable filing fee shall be paid as set forth by city
ordinances; however, there shall be no filing fee for an amendment requested by
the City Council, Commission or any other governmental body. If the hearing
procedure is initiated by a party other than the owner, the Department shall
promptly notify the owner of the subject property as required by KRS Chapter
100.
   (B)   Pre-application conference. Prior to filing an application for a
zoning map amendment, the applicant shall meet with the Department to discuss
the proposed amendment. The purpose of this conference is to discuss, at the
earliest stages, the requirements, procedures and issues related to the
proposed amendment request. It is intended that this conference will help to
alleviate possible conflicts by early recognition of existing conditions,
necessary facilities, recommendations of the adopted comprehensive plan and
other issues related to the proposed amendment. The Department shall arrange
the conference which shall be held not less than five working days nor greater
than three months prior to the filing date. The Department shall keep a record
of the conference date and include the information in the record of the map
amendment application. The Department shall not accept an application for a map
amendment for which a pre-application conference has not been held.
   (C)   Commission procedure. Upon the filing of an application for an
amendment to the zoning map, the Department shall review the application, make
whatever studies the Commission deems necessary and report its findings at a
public hearing. In addition, the Commission may require the applicant to submit
further information subsequent to the filing of an application as provided by
KRS Chapter 100 and the by-laws of the Commission.
   (D)   Notice of public hearing. Notice of the time, place and reason for
holding a public hearing shall be given by one publication of the newspaper of
general circulation in the county, not earlier than 21 days or later than 14
days before the public hearing.
   (E)   Posting subject property. The Department shall post a sign as defined
in KRS Chapter 100 on the property of a map amendment request at least 14 days
prior to the hearing date. The sign shall be located in a conspicuous location.
   (F)   Public hearing. Upon receipt of a completed application, receipt of
the required fee, notice of map amendment on the subject property and
notification of interested parties, the Commission shall hold a public hearing
on the proposed amendment.
   (G)   Recommendation of Commission for zoning map amendment. Before making
recommendations to the City Council on a proposed map amendment, the Commission
shall make findings as required in KRS Chapter 100. The findings of fact made
by the Commission shall be recorded in the minutes and records of the
Commission. After voting to recommend that an application for an amendment to
the zoning map be granted or denied, the Commission shall forward its findings
of fact and recommendation in writing to the City Council.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.18)
§ 154.019 ZONING TEXT AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to the text of the zoning regulations shall be handled in the
same manner as adoption of the original zoning ordinance and in conformance
with KRS Chapter 100.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.19)
§ 154.020 ZONING DISTRICT FOR ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   After the City Council has established territory to be annexed, and has
published an ordinance of intent to annex, or prior to adoption of an
annexation by consent ordinance, the Commission shall hold a public hearing to
determine the applicable zoning district(s) for the territory to be annexed.
The Commission shall transmit its report containing the findings of fact,
summary of evidence and recommendation for zoning district classification(s) to
the City Council for inclusion in the ordinance of annexation.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.20)
ZONING REGULATIONS
§ 154.035 ZONING MAP.
   The city is hereby divided into zones and districts as provided herein and
as shown on the zoning map dated July 1, 2008, which together with all
explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of the zoning regulations. The zoning map shall be the official record of
zoning status of all land in the city and be kept on file in the office of the
Department and shall be known herein as the “zoning map”.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.0)
§ 154.036 MAP AMENDMENT IDENTIFICATION.
   Amendments to the zoning map shall be promptly posted by the Department.
Each amendment shall be identified on the map by a numerical designation
referring to the Commission record of the amendment proceedings.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.1)
§ 154.037 INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zones and districts as
shown on the zoning map, the following rules apply.
   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerline.
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lines.
   (C)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
follow the centerline of the railroad right-of-way.
   (D)   Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to
follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line, shall be
construed as moving with the actual shore line.
   (E)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of
streams, rivers or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
centerlines.
   (F)   Should a centerline of a street, highway, alley, stream, river or
other body of water move, the zoning line shall be construed as moving with the
actual centerline.
   (G)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to the above features shall be
construed to follow such centerlines.
   (H)   Boundaries indicated as an extension of the above features shall be
construed as an extension of such features.
   (I)   Where the zone boundaries in question are a result of a map amendment
request, the plat and legal description filed in conjunction with the map
amendment request as approved by the City Council shall be deemed the official
boundaries of the zone.
   (J)   When the above stated rules do not indicate the exact location of the
zone or district boundaries, then said boundaries shall be determined by appeal
before the Board as provided by the zoning regulations.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.2)
§ 154.038 APPLICATION OF ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set by the zoning regulations within each zone shall be the
minimum or maximum limitations as appropriate to the case and shall apply
uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter
provided.
   (A)   No building, structure or land shall hereinafter be used or occupied,
and no building or structure or part thereof, shall hereinafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity
with all of the regulations herein specified for the zone and district in which
it is located unless otherwise specifically permitted in the zoning
regulations.
   (B)   No building or structure shall hereinafter be erected or altered:
      (1)   To exceed the height, bulk or floor area ratio;
      (2)   To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
      (3)   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area;
      (4)   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or
other open spaces, unless specifically authorized or permitted in the zoning
regulations; and
      (5)   To have less perimeter and interior lot landscaping for vehicular
use area and non-compatible land uses than herein required, or in any other
manner contrary to the provisions of these zoning regulations.
   (C)   No part of a yard, open space, off-street parking, loading space or
other special use area required about or in conjunction with any building or
land for the purpose of complying with the zoning regulations shall be included
as a part of a yard, open space, off-street parking, loading space or other
special use area similarly required for any other building or land use unless
otherwise specifically permitted in the zoning regulations.
   (D)   No yard or lot existing at the time of the adoption of the zoning
regulations shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum
requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the adoption of
these zoning regulations shall meet at least the minimum requirements
established by the zoning regulations unless specifically permitted.
   (E)   Except as hereinafter permitted, there shall be no more than one
principal structure on any lot or parcel of land unless a development plan is
approved by the Commission as provided in §§
154.105 through
154.116.
   (F)   Only those uses specifically named as principal, accessory or
conditional uses or substantially similar to principal, accessory or
conditional uses are permitted in each zone or district and all uses not
specifically permitted or substantially similar to permitted uses are
prohibited. Prohibited uses shall include, but not be limited to, those
specifically named as prohibited.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.3)
§ 154.039 CONVERSION OF DWELLING STRUCTURES.
   The conversion of any structure or structures either residential or non-
residential so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or
families, or another permitted use, shall be permitted only within the zone in
which a new building for similar occupancy would be permitted under the zoning
regulations. The resulting occupancy shall comply with all requirements
governing new construction in such zone including, but not limited to, floor
area, dimension of yards, open space, landscaping and off-street parking. The
aforesaid requirements with respect to yards and other open spaces shall not
apply if the conversion involves no exterior structural changes to a principal
building but shall apply if any accessory building is converted to a principal
building.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.4)
§ 154.040 AGRICULTURAL LAND USE EXEMPTION.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of the zoning regulations, land which
is used solely for agricultural use as defined herein shall be regulated in
conformance with KRS Chapter 100.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.5)
§ 154.041 GOVERNMENTAL LAND USE EXEMPTION.
   Notwithstanding any other requirements of KRS Chapter 100, the commonwealth
and its political subdivisions shall be exempt from complying with any and all
requirements of the zoning regulations.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.6)
§ 154.042 ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Generally. This section divides the city into the districts set forth
in Table 154.042-1, Zoning Districts, below. The purpose statements and
development type combination, as applicable, are included within each zoning
district:
Residential Zones
Suburban Residential, Limited                    R-1
Suburban Residential, General                    R-2
Urban Residential, Limited                       R-3
Urban Residential, General                       R-4
Urban Residential, Mixed                         R-5
High Density Residential                         R-6
 Commercial Zones
Neighborhood Office                              C-1
Neighborhood Commercial                          C-2
Regional Commercial                              C-3
General Service Commercial                       C-4
Downtown Mixed Use                               C-5
Industrial Zones
General Industrial                               I-1
Regional Industrial                              I-2
Specialized Use Zones
Planned Development                              PDD
Planned Neighborhood Residential 1               PNR-1
Planned Neighborhood Residential 2               PNR-2
Planned Neighborhood Commercial                  PNC
Woodland Corridor District                       WCD
Municipal Airport Zone                           MAZ
Agri-Business                                    AGB
Future Development Holding                       FDH
 Overzones
Interstate Highway Service and Business Overzone IHSB
Floodplain Overzone                              FP
Freeman Lake Overzone                            FLO
National Register Historic District              NRHD
Commercial Transition Overzone                   CTO
 
   (B)   The boundaries of each zone are located on the zoning map. All
development within these zones shall be planned and constructed in accordance
with the requirements of the zoning regulations.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.7; Ord. 23-2009, passed 11-16-2009; Ord.
27-2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 14-2018, passed
6-4-2018; Ord. 17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
ZONE DESCRIPTIONS AND PERMITTED USE
§ 154.055 R-1 SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL-1.
   (A)   Generally. This district is composed of single-unit low density, up to
two dwelling units per acre. This district should be limited in scope of
implementation to those areas that are environmentally sensitive, have areas of
substantial slope or by the absence of adequate infrastructure should be
developed at the lowest density possible. This zone is primarily applied to
areas away from the town center and open space areas.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted, in light of the purposes of this zoning district and
the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Churches and associated facilities; and
         (b)   Neighborhood center.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Golf course;
         (b)   Government operated parks;
         (c)   Communications towers/poles or collocations of equipment for the
same, when erected by or on property owned by a public entity or public
utility; and
         (d)   Community garden. See §
154.076(B) for standards specific to community gardens.
      (3)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Agricultural uses excluding open or enclosed commercial feedlot
operations;
         (b)   Residential care facility;
         (c)   Dwelling, single-unit detached;
         (d)   Conservation development, subject to the provisions of §
154.078; and
         (e)   Recovery residence.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly
incidental and subordinate to principal uses.
      (2)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Childcare centers, in home. Centers shall comply with all
requirements as regulated by the commonwealth’s Department of Families and
Children;
         (b)   Home occupations, see §
154.076(C) for standards specific to home occupations;
         (c)   Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking
areas;
         (d)   Private swimming pools and tennis courts, private non-commercial
parks and open spaces;
         (e)   Short-term rental, owner occupied, see §
154.076(D) for standards specific to owner-occupied short-term rentals; and
         (f)   Dwelling unit, accessory (ADU). See §
154.076(A) for standards specific to ADUs.
   (D)   Conditional uses. Uses permitted only with Board approval after
consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration
of the guidelines in the comprehensive plan. Subject to the conditional use
standards in §
154.077.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Private club; and
         (b)   Events center.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Cemetery;
         (b)   Outdoor commercial recreation facilities such as zoos, riding
stables, fishing lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts and campgrounds;
         (c)   Resort hotels and restaurants when associated with a golf
course; and
         (d)   Temporary real estate sales office for the sale of lots located
only within the subdivision, to be removed or converted to a principal use when
all lots are sold, but not for use as a general real estate sales or rentals.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   More than one principal structure per lot or parcel of land shall
not be permitted.
      (2)   When new construction is undertaken or additions are made to an
existing structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with
setbacks the same as other similar residential structures on parcels within 500
feet.
      (3)   Structures are encouraged to place the front facade of the building
facing the primary street frontage.
      (4)   No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot
fronting on a right-of-way of less than 30 feet in width shall be permitted.
      (5)   The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum
lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of
the lot.
      (6)   EVENTS CENTERS are defined as a restricted use of a residential
property for the conduct of special events of a limited size and number.
SPECIAL EVENTS are defined as wedding receptions, luncheons, meetings,
fundraising proceedings for not-for-profit organizations or similar activities.
The space utilized in a residential dwelling unit shall not exceed 3,500 square
feet. The number of events held may not exceed 75 per year. To qualify as an
event center use, the residential dwelling unit must be located within the
Downtown Neighborhood Sub-Area as identified in the comprehensive plan.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
 Residential              Assembly and Commercial
 Single-Unit Conservation
                          Residential                   Assembly and Commercial
                          Single-Unit    Conservation
Maximum Density           2 du/acre      2 du/acre      N/A
Minimum Lot Area          21,780 sq. ft. 10,000 sq. ft. 21,780 ft.
Minimum Lot Width         150 ft.        75 ft.         150 ft.
Minimum Front Yard        40 ft.         25 ft.         40 ft.
Setback
Minimum Side Yard Setback 15 ft.         10 ft.         30 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 25 ft.         25 ft.         30 ft.
Maximum Building Height   35 ft.         35 ft.         75 ft.
Maximum Impervious        N/A            N/A            0.70
Surface Ratio (I.S.R.)
Note: conservation developments are subject to the standards of §
154.078
 
   (G)   Signs, R-1 Zone. Additional information and standards for signs as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
 
R-1 Signs
                  Maximu m Maximu m Sign Maximu m Location Lighting Additional
Use Allowed Types Number   Area          Height   Require- Allowed  Require-
                                                  ments             ments
R-1 Signs
            Allowed   Maximu m Maximu m  Maximu m Location  Lighting Additional
Use         Types     Number   Sign Area Height   Require-  Allowed  Require-
                                                  ments              ments
                                                                     Wall sign:
                                                                     15% or 32
            Wall      Wall: 1/ Wall: 15%                            sq. ft.,
Assembly              wall                        10 ft.             whichever
Use                                               off paved Yes      is
                                                 surface            greater
            Monument  Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 100 Mon.: 8                      
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.
            Pole      Pole: 1/ Pole: 50  Pole: 8                      
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.
                                                                     Wall sign
                                                                     15%
                      Wall:    Wall: 15%                            or 32 sq.
            Wall      1/wall                                       ft.,
Commercial                                       10 ft.             whichever
Use                                               off paved Yes      is
                                                  surface            greater
            Monument  Mon.: 1  Mon.: 50  Mon.: 8                      
                               sq. ft.   ft.
            Pole      Pole: 1  Pole: 36  Pole: 8                      
                               sq. ft.   ft.
            Wall      Wall: 1  Wall: 5%                             One wall
                                                  10 ft.             only
Residential Monume nt Mon.: 1  Mon.: 4   Mon.: 4  off paved External  
Use                            sq. ft.   ft.      surface
            Pole      Pole: 1  Pole: 4   Pole: 4                      
                               sq. ft.   ft.
Use Groups
   Assembly Uses: Churches
   Commercial Uses: Cemetery; golf course; outdoor commercial; parks; resort
hotel; temporary real estate office
   Residential Uses: Agricultural uses; child care; home occupation; keeping of
roomers; living quarters; private garages; private pools; residential care
facility; single-family
Special Provisions
1.   Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and
pole sign size by a factor of 2
2.   Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable
copy, when located along local or residential collector streets
 
   (H)   Parking, R-1 Zone. Additional information and standards for parking as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
R-1 Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
R-1 Parking Standards
Land Use                  Parking Required      Notes
Agricultural use          1 space/employee       
Cemetery                  1 space/employee      1 space/each vehicle owned by
                                                the facility
Childcare, in home        N/A                   Provide on-site area for drop
                                                off/pick up, wholly on site
Church                    1 space/3 seats       Based on seating in main
                                                sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces
Events center             1 space/400 sq. ft.    
Golf course               3 spaces/hole         Additional parking required
                                                if other uses present
                                                No on street parking allowed
Home occupation           N/A                   for commercial vehicles owned
                                                by the use
Neighborhood center       5 spaces               
Outdoor commercial        5 spaces + 1/employee Lakes; campgrounds; zoos;
                                                riding stables; batting cages
Parks                     1 space/acre          Other uses present require
                                                parking based on use
Private club              1 space/200 sq. ft.    
Real estate office,       1 space/400 sq. ft.    
temporary
Residential care facility 1 space/3 beds         
Residential, single-unit  2 spaces/D.U.         1 additional space for an
                                                accessory dwelling unit
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.1; Ord. 05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord.
20-2011, passed 10-17-2011; Ord. 26-2011, passed 11-21-2011; Ord. 27-2012,
passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 05-2015, passed 5-4-2015;
Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 04-2020,
passed 4-20-2020; Ord. 17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.056 R-2 SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL-2.
   (A)   Generally. This district is composed of single-unit, with a maximum
density of six dwelling units per acre. This zone is primarily applied to areas
away from the town center.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted, in light of the purposes of this zoning district and
the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Churches and associated facilities;
         (b)   Neighborhood center; and
         (c)   Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Golf course;
         (b)   Government operated parks;
         (c)   Communications towers/poles or collocations of equipment for the
same, when erected by or on property owned by a public entity or public
utility; and
         (d)   Community garden. See §
154.076(B) for standards specific to community gardens.
      (3)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Agricultural uses excluding open or enclosed commercial feedlot
operations;
         (b)   Residential care facility;
         (c)   Dwelling, single-unit detached;
         (d)   Conservation development, subject to the provisions of §
154.078; and
         (e)   Recovery residence.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Uses which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and
subordinate to principal uses.
      (2)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Childcare centers, in home. Centers shall comply with all
requirements as regulated by the commonwealth’s Department of Families and
Children;
         (b)   Home occupations, see §
154.076(C) for standards specific to home occupations;
         (c)   Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking
areas;
         (d)   Private swimming pools and tennis courts, private non-commercial
parks and open spaces; and
         (e)   Short-term rental, owner occupied, see §
154.076(D) for standards specific to owner-occupied short-term rentals; and
         (f)   Dwelling unit, accessory (ADU). See §
154.076(A) for standards specific to ADUs.
   (D)   Conditional uses. Uses permitted only with Board approval after
consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration
of the guidelines as detailed in the comprehensive plan. Subject to the
conditional use standards in §
154.077.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Private club; and
         (b)   Events center.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Cemetery;
         (b)   Outdoor commercial recreation facilities such as zoos, riding
stables, fishing lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts and campgrounds;
         (c)   Resort hotels and restaurants when associated with a golf
course; and
         (d)   Temporary real estate sales office for the sale of lots located
only within the subdivision, to be removed or converted to a principal use when
all lots are sold, but not for use as a general real estate sales or rentals.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   More than one principal structure per lot or parcel of land shall
not be permitted.
      (2)   When new construction or additions are made to an existing
structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks
the same as other similar residential structures on parcels within 500 feet.
      (3)   Structures are encouraged to place the front facade of the building
facing the primary street frontage.
      (4)   No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot
fronting on a right-of-way of less than 30 feet in width shall be permitted.
      (5)   The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum
lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of
the lot.
      (6)   EVENTS CENTERS are defined as a restricted use of a residential
property for the conduct of special events of a limited size and number.
SPECIAL EVENTS are defined as wedding receptions, luncheons, meetings,
fundraising proceedings for not-for-profit organizations or similar activities.
The space utilized in a residential dwelling unit shall not exceed 3,500 square
feet. The number of events held may not exceed 75 per year. To qualify as an
event center use, the residential dwelling unit must be located within the
Downtown Neighborhood Sub-Area as identified in the comprehensive plan.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
 Residential              Assembly and Commercial
 Single-Unit Conservation
                           Residential                 Assembly and Commercial
                           Single-Unit   Conservation
Maximum Density            6 du/acre     6 du/acre     N/A
Minimum Lot Area           7,260 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft. 7,260 sq. ft.
Single-Unit                Conservation
Minimum Lot Width          75 ft.        50 ft.        75 ft.
Minimum Front Yard Setback 30 ft.        25 ft.        40 ft.
Minimum Side Yard Setback  10 ft.        5 ft.         10 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard Setback  25 ft.        25 ft.        30 ft.
Maximum Building Height    35 ft.        35 ft.        75 ft.
Maximum Impervious Surface N/A           N/A           0.70
Ratio (I.S.R.)
Note: conservation developments are subject to the standards of §
154.078
 
   (G)   Signs, R-2 Zone. Additional information and standards for signs as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
 
R-2 Signs
                  Maximu m Maximu m Sign Maximu m Location Lighting Additional
Use Allowed Types Number   Area          Height   Require- Allowed  Require-
                                                  ments             ments
R-2 Signs
            Allowed   Maximu m Maximu m  Maximu m Location  Lighting Additional
Use         Types     Number   Sign Area Height   Require-  Allowed  Require-
                                                  ments              ments
                                                                     Wall sign:
                      Wall: 1/                                       15% or 32
            Wall      wall     Wall: 15%                            sq. ft.,
Assembly                                          10 ft.             whichever
Use                                               off paved Yes      is greater
            Monume nt Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 100 Mon.: 8  surface             
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.
            Pole      Pole: 1/ Pole: 50  Pole: 8                      
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.
                                                                     Wall sign
                      Wall:    Wall: 15%                            15% or 32
Commercial  Wall      1/wall                    10 ft.             sq. ft.,
Use                                              off paved Yes      whichever
                                                  surface            is greater
            Monume nt Mon.: 1  Mon.: 50  Mon.: 8                      
                               sq. ft.   ft.
           Pole      Pole: 1  Pole: 36  Pole: 8                    
                               sq. ft.   ft.
            Wall      Wall: 1  Wall: 5%                             One wall
                                                  10 ft.             only
Residential Monume nt Mon.: 1  Mon.: 4   Mon.: 4  off paved External  
Use                            sq. ft.   ft.      surface
            Pole      Pole: 1  Pole: 4   Pole: 4                      
                               sq. ft.   ft.
Use Groups
   Assembly Uses: Churches; schools
   Commercial Uses: Cemetery; golf course; outdoor commercial; parks; resort
hotel; temporary real estate office
   Residential Uses: Agricultural uses; child care; home occupation; keeping of
roomers; living quarters; private garages; private pools; residential care
facility; single-family
Special Provisions
1.   Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and
pole sign size by a factor of 2
2.   Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable
copy, when located along local or residential collector streets
 
   (H)   Parking, R-2 Zone. Additional information and standards for parking as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
R-2 Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
R-2 Parking Standards
Land Use         Parking Required Notes
Agricultural use 1 space/employee  
Cemetery         1 space/employee 1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility
Childcare, in    N/A              Provide on-site area for drop off/pick up,
home                              wholly on site
Church           1 space/3 seats  Based on seating in main sanctuary, min. of 5
                                  spaces
Events center    1 space/400 sq.   
                 ft.
Golf course      3 spaces/hole    Additional parking required if other uses
                                  present
                                  No on street parking allowed for commercial
Home occupation  N/A              vehicles owned by the use2025 S-6   Zoning
                                  Code   157
Neighborhood     5 spaces          
center
Outdoor          5 spaces + 1/    Lakes; campgrounds; zoos; riding stables;
commercial       employee         batting cages
Parks            1 space/acre     Other uses present require parking based on
                                  use.
Private club     1 space/200 sq.   
                 ft.
Real estate      1 space/400 sq.
office,          ft.               
temporary
Residential care 1 space/3 beds    
facility
Residential,     2 spaces/D.U.    1 additional space for an accessory dwelling
single-unit                       unit
                 1 space/
School, K - 8    classroom and    If gymnasium or auditorium on site an
                 office + 10      additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided
                 visitor spaces
                 1 space/
                 classroom and
School, 9 - 12   office + 1       If gymnasium or auditorium on site an
                 space/ 5 seats   additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided
                 in each
                 classroom
                 1 space/
                 classroom and
School, post-    office + 1       If gymnasium or auditorium on site an
secondary        space/ 2 seats   additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided
                 in each
                 classroom
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.2; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-2011; Ord. 26-2011, passed
11-21-2011; Ord. 27-2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord.
05-2015, passed 5-4-2015; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 05-2017, passed
6-5-2017; Ord. 04-2020, passed 4-20-2020; Ord. 17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.057 R-3 URBAN RESIDENTIAL-3.
   (A)   Generally. This zone is composed of primarily residential uses with a
maximum density of eight dwelling units per acre. This zone is encouraged in
areas closer to the city core.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted, in light of the purposes of this zoning district and
the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Churches and associated facilities;
         (b)   Neighborhood center; and
         (c)   Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Government operated parks;
         (b)   Communications towers/poles or collocations of equipment for the
same, when erected by or on property owned by a public entity or public
utility; and
         (c)   Community garden. See §
154.076(B) for standards specific to community gardens.
      (3)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Agricultural uses excluding open or enclosed commercial feedlot
operations;
         (b)   Residential care facility;
         (c)   Dwelling, single-unit attached;
         (d)   Dwelling, single-unit detached;
         (e)   Dwelling, duplex;
         (f)   Cottage court development, subject to the standards of §
154.079; and
         (g)   Recovery residence.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Uses which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and
subordinate to principal uses.
      (2)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Childcare centers, in home. Centers shall comply with all
requirements as regulated by the commonwealth’s Department of Families and
Children;
         (b)   Home occupations, see §
154.076(C) for standards specific to home occupations;
         (c)   Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking
areas;
         (d)   Private swimming pools and tennis courts, private non-commercial
parks and open spaces;
         (e)   Short-term rental, owner occupied, see §
154.076(D) for standards specific to owner-occupied short-term rentals; and
         (f)   Dwelling unit, accessory (ADU). See §
154.076(A) for standards specific to ADUs.
   (D)   Conditional uses. Uses permitted only with Board approval after
consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration
of the guidelines as detailed in the comprehensive plan. Subject to the
conditional use standards in §
154.077.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Community centers (YMCA, YWCA, senior center);
         (b)   Private club; and
         (c)   Events center.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Cemetery;
         (b)   Outdoor commercial recreation facilities such as zoos, riding
stables, fishing lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts and campgrounds;
         (c)   Temporary real estate sales office for the sale of lots located
only within the subdivision, to be removed or converted to a principal use when
all lots are sold, but not for use as a general real estate sales or rentals;
and
         (d)   Short-term rental, non-owner occupied. Subject to the standards
of §
154.077(E) specific to non-owner occupied short-term rentals.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   More than one principal structure per lot or parcel of land shall
not be permitted, except that an attached duplex dwelling may be located on one
lot along with an accessory dwelling unit.
      (2)   When new construction or additions are made to an existing
structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks
the same as other similar residential structures on parcels within 500 feet.
      (3)   Structures are encouraged to place the front facade of the building
facing the primary street frontage.
      (4)   No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot
fronting on a right-of-way of less than 30 feet in width shall be permitted.
      (5)   Single-family detached zero lot line developments are required to
designate on the subdivision plat which side yard will have zero-foot setback.
All single-family detached zero lot line developments shall have maintenance/
access/use easements and when necessary, drainage easements, provided on
adjacent lots and at a width of not less than ten feet. Adjacent lots shall not
place any building within this easement.
      (6)   The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum
lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of
the lot.
      (7)   EVENTS CENTERS are defined as a restricted use of a residential
property for the conduct of special events of a limited size and number.
SPECIAL EVENTS are defined as wedding receptions, luncheons, meetings,
fundraising proceedings for not-for-profit organizations or similar activities.
The space utilized in a residential dwelling unit shall not exceed 3,500 square
feet. The number of events held may not exceed 75 per year. To qualify as an
event center use, the residential dwelling unit must be located within the
Downtown Neighborhood Sub-Area as identified in the comprehensive plan.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
 Residential                           Assembly and Commercial
 Single-Unit and Duplex Cottage Court2
                       Residential                           Assembly and
                                                             Commercial
                       Single-Unit and Duplex Cottage Court2
Maximum Density        8 du/acre              8 du/acre      N/A
Minimum Lot Area       5,445 sq. ft.          None           5,445 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width      60 ft. or 40 ft. for   None           100 ft.
                       single-unit attached
Minimum Front Yard     25 ft.                 25 ft.1        40 ft.
Setback
Minimum Side Yard      5 ft.                  25 ft.1        30 ft.
Setback
Minimum Side Yard      0 ft.                  0 ft.          N/A
Setback, Common Wall
Minimum Rear Yard      15 ft.                 25 ft.1        30 ft.
Setback
Maximum Building       35 ft.                 35 ft.         75 ft.
Height
Maximum Impervious     N/A                    N/A            0.70
Surface Ratio (I.S.R.)
Notes:
1.   Cottage court development setbacks for front, side and rear yards are
relative to the perimeter of the development site, but not common wall side
setbacks.
2.   Cottage court developments are subject to the standards of §
154.079
 
   (G)   Signs, R-3 Zone. Additional information and standards for signs as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
R-3 Signs
                  Maximum Maximum Sign Maximum Location Lighting Additional
Use Allowed Types Number  Area         Height  Require- Allowed  Require- ments
                                               ments
R-3 Signs
               Allowed  Maximum  Maximum Maximum Location    Lighting Additional
Use            Types    Number   Sign    Height  Require-    Allowed  Require-
                                 Area            ments                ments
                                                                      Wall sign:
                                                                      15% or 32
               Wall     Wall: 1/ W.M.:                               sq. ft.,
                        wall     15%                                  whichever
                                                 10 ft. off           is
Assembly Use                                     paved       Yes      greater
                       Mon.: 1/ Mon.:   Mon.: 8 surface
               Monument street   100     ft.                           
                                 sq. ft.
                        Pole: 1/ Pole:   Pole: 8
               Pole     street   50      ft.                           
                                 sq. ft.
                                                                      Wall sign
                                                                      15%
                        Wall:    Wall:                               or 32 sq.
               Wall     1/wall   15%                                 ft.,
                                                                    whichever
Commercial                                       10 ft. off           is
Use                                              paved       Yes      greater
                                 Mon.:   Mon.: 8 surface
               Monument Mon.: 1  50 sq.  ft.                           
                                 ft.
                                 Pole:   Pole: 8
               Pole     Pole: 1  36 sq.  ft.                           
                                 ft.
                                                                      Walls and
                                                                      fences
                                                                      permitted
Single- Family                                   To be                as part of
Attached, two- Monument 2/       32 sq.          approved by          overall
family         Pole     entrance ft.     10 ft.  Engineering External sign
identification                                   Department           design;
                                                                      Pole must
                                                                      contain
                                                                      multiple
                                                                      poles
               Wall     Wall: 1  Wall:                               One wall
                                 5%              10 ft. off           only
Residential    Monume   Mon.: 1  Mon.: 4 Mon.: 4 paved       External  
Use            nt                sq. ft. ft.     surface
               Pole     Pole: 1  Pole: 4 Pole: 4                       
                                 sq. ft. ft.
Use Groups
   Assembly Uses: Churches; schools
   Commercial Uses: Cemetery; outdoor commercial; parks; resort hotel; temporary
real estate office
   Residential Uses: Agricultural uses; child care; home occupation; keeping of
roomers; living quarters; private garages; private pools; residential care
facility; single-family; two-family
Special Provisions
1.   Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and
pole sign size by a factor of 2
2.   Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable
copy, when located along local or residential collector streets
 
   (H)   Parking, R-3 Zone. Additional information and standards for parking as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
R-3 Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
R-3 Parking Standards
Land Use                  Parking Required           Notes
Agricultural use          1 space/employee            
Cemetery                  1 space/employee           1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                     by the facility
                                                     Provide on-site area for
Childcare, in home        N/A                        drop off/pick up, wholly
                                                     on site
                                                     Based on seating in main
Church                    1 space/3 seats            sanctuary, min. of 5
                                                     spaces
Community center          1 space/600 sq. ft.        1 bus parking space/25
                                                     required spaces
Events center             1 space/400 sq. ft.         
                                                     No on street parking
Home occupation           N/A                        allowed for commercial
                                                     vehicles owned by the use
Neighborhood center       5 spaces                    
                                                     Lakes; campgrounds; zoos;
Outdoor commercial        5 spaces + 1/employee      riding stables; batting
                                                     cages
Parks                     1 space/acre               Other uses present require
                                                     parking based on use
Private club              1 space/200 sq. ft.         
Real estate office,       1 space/400 sq. ft.         
temporary
Residential care facility 1 space/3 beds              
Residential, single-unit  2 spaces/D.U.              1 additional space for an
                                                     accessory dwelling unit
Residential, two-unit     2 spaces/D.U.              1 additional space for an
                                                     accessory dwelling unit
                                                     If gymnasium or auditorium
School, K - 8             1 space/classroom and      on site an additional 1
                          office + 10 visitor spaces space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, 9 - 12            office + 1 space/ 5 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, post-secondary    office + 1 space/ 2 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
 
   (I)   Landscaping, R-3 Zone. Additional information and standards for
vehicular use area (VUA) landscaping as well as specific requirements are found
in §§
154.150 through
154.164.
 
R-3 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area
Landscape Buffer Area Width Options (In Feet) Planting Density Multiplier
Category
                      5 ft.                   1.5
Category A            10 ft.                  1.33
                      15 ft.                  1
 
R-3 Buffering Requirements
Landscape Buffer Area Category Buffering Use Classification
                               Buffered Use Buffering Use
                                            R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 assembly and
Category A                     R-1, R-2     commercial uses
                                            cottage court developments
 
Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) or Fraction Thereof
Planting Density Requirement Categories
A                   B                   C                   D
2 large trees or 1  2 large trees or 1  3 large trees or 2  3 large trees or 2
medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small
trees + 3 ft.       trees + 4 ft.       trees + 5 ft.       trees + 6 ft.
screening/80 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of
linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary
(OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.3; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. passed 6-18-2011; Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-
2011; Ord. 26-2011, passed 11-21-2011; Ord. 27-2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 10-
2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 05-2015, passed 5-4-2015; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-
19-2016; Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 04-2020, passed 4-20-2020; Ord.
17- 2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.058 R-4 URBAN RESIDENTIAL-4 GENERAL.
   (A)   Generally. This zone is composed of primarily residential uses with a
maximum density of ten dwelling units per acre. This district is primarily
encouraged in areas closer to the city core.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this
zoning district and the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Churches and associated facilities;
         (b)   Neighborhood center;
         (c)   Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities; and
         (d)   Community garden. See §
154.076(B) for standards specific to community gardens.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Assisted living facilities when located in an existing building;
         (b)   Government operated parks; and
         (c)   Communications towers/poles or collocations of equipment for the
same, when erected by or on property owned by a public entity or public
utility.
      (3)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Agricultural uses excluding open or enclosed feedlot operations;
         (b)   Residential care facility;
         (c)   Dwelling, single-unit detached;
         (d)   Dwelling, single-unit attached;
         (e)   Dwelling, duplex;
         (f)   Cottage court developments, subject to the standards of §
154.079;
         (g)   Townhouse developments subject to the standards of §
154.080; and
         (h)   Recovery residence.
   (C)   Accessory uses. Uses which are customarily accessory, clearly
incidental and subordinate to principal uses.
      (1)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Childcare centers, in home. Centers shall comply with all
requirements as regulated by the commonwealth’s Department of Families and
Children;
         (b)   Home occupations, see §
154.076(C) for standards specific to home occupations;
         (c)   Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking
areas;
         (d)   Private swimming pools and tennis courts, private non-commercial
parks and open spaces;
         (e)   Short-term rental, owner occupied, see §
154.076(D) for standards specific to owner-occupied short-term rentals; and
         (f)   Dwelling unit, accessory (ADU). See §
154.076(A) for standards specific to ADUs.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Assisted living facility café and food service facilities open
to the public no more than eight hours per day and containing seating for less
than 100 persons and no alcohol sales permitted; and
         (b)   Office when located within the building of a permitted
commercial use and containing no greater than 400 square feet and no separate
entrance is provided.
   (D)   Conditional uses. Uses permitted only with Board approval after
consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration
of the guidelines as detailed in the comprehensive plan. Subject to the
conditional use standards in §
154.077.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)    Community centers (YMCA, YWCA, senior center);
         (b)   Private club; and
         (c)   Events center.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Cemetery;
         (b)    Outdoor commercial recreation facilities such as zoos, riding
stables, fishing lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts and campgrounds;
         (c)   Temporary real estate sales office for the sale of lots located
only within the subdivision, to be removed or converted to a principal use when
all lots are sold, but not for use as a general real estate sales or rentals;
and
         (d)   Short-term rental, non-owner occupied. Subject to the standards
of §
154.077(E) specific to non-owner occupied short-term rentals.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   When new construction or additions are made to an existing
structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks
the same as other similar residential structures on parcels within 500 feet.
      (2)   Structures are encouraged to place the front facade of the building
facing the primary street frontage.
      (3)   Single-unit detached zero lot line developments are required to
designate on the subdivision plat which side yard will have zero-foot setback.
All single-unit detached zero lot line developments shall have maintenance/
access/use easements and when necessary, drainage easements, provided on
adjacent lots and at a width of not less than ten feet. Adjacent lots shall not
place any building within this easement.
      (4)   The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum
lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of
the lot.
      (5)   EVENTS CENTERS are defined as a restricted use of a residential
property for the conduct of special events of a limited size and number.
SPECIAL EVENTS are defined as wedding receptions, luncheons, meetings,
fundraising proceedings for not-for-profit organizations or similar activities.
The space utilized in a residential dwelling unit shall not exceed 3,500 square
feet. The number of events held may not exceed 75 per year. To qualify as an
event center use, the residential dwelling unit must be located within the
Downtown Neighborhood Sub-Area as identified in the comprehensive plan.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
 Residential                                      Assembly and Commercial
 Single-Unit and Duplex Cottage Court4 Townhouse5
                   Residential                                    Assembly and
                                                                  Commercial
                   Single-Unit and      Cottage Court4 Townhouse5
                   Duplex
Maximum Density    10 du/acre           10 du/acre     10 du/acre N/A
Minimum Lot Area   4,356 sq. ft.        None           None       4,356 sq. ft.
                   50 ft. or 40 ft. for
Minimum Lot Width  single-unit          None           None       100 ft.
                   attached1
Minimum Front Yard 25 ft.2              25 ft.3        15 ft.     40 ft.
Setback
Minimum Side Yard  5 ft.                25 ft.3        10 ft.     30 ft.
Setback
Minimum Side Yard
Setback, Common    0 ft.                0 ft.          0 ft.      N/A
Wall
Minimum Rear Yard  15 ft.               25 ft.3        25 ft.     30 ft.
Setback
Maximum Building   35 ft.               35 ft.         35 ft.     75 ft.
Height
Maximum Impervious
Surface Ratio      N/A                  N/A            N/A        0.70
(I.S.R.)
Notes:
1.   Minimum lot width for single-unit detached and single-unit attached may be
reduced to 30 feet in width if driveway access is provided from a rear alley,
and the primary façade is facing the public street.
2.   Minimum front yard setbacks for single-unit detached and single-unit
attached may be reduced to 15 feet if driveway access is provided from a rear
alley, and the primary façade is facing the public street.
3.   Cottage court development setbacks for front, side and rear yards are
relative to the perimeter of the development site, but not common wall side
setbacks.
4.   Cottage court developments are subject to the standards of §
154.079.
5.   Townhouse developments are subject to the standards of §
154.080.
 
   (G)   Residential signs, R-4 Zone. Additional information and standards for
signs as well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
R-4 Signs
                  Maximum Maximum Sign Maximum Location Lighting Additional
Use Allowed Types Number  Area         Height  Require- Allowed  Requirements
                                               ments
R-4 Signs
             Allowed  Maximum  Maximum Maximum Location    Lighting Additional
Use          Types    Number   Sign    Height  Require-    Allowed  Requirements
                               Area            ments
                                                                    Wall sign:
                      Wall: 1/ Wall:                                15% or 32
             Wall     wall     15%                                 sq. ft.,
                                                                    whichever is
                                               10 ft. off           greater
Assembly Use          Mon.: 1/ Mon.:   Mon.: 8 paved       Yes
             Monument street   100     ft.     surface               
                               sq. ft.
                      Pole: 1/ Pole:   Pole: 8
             Pole     street   50      ft.                           
                               sq. ft.
                                                                    Wall sign
                                                                    15%
             Wall     Wall:    Wall:                               or 32 sq.
                      1/wall   15%                                  ft.,
                                               10 ft. off           whichever is
Commercial                                     paved       Yes      greater
Use                            Mon.:   Mon.: 8 surface
             Monument Mon.: 1  50 sq.  ft.                           
                               ft.
                               Pole:   Pole: 8
             Pole     Pole: 1  36 sq.  ft.                           
                               ft.
                                                                    Walls and
Single-                                                             fences
Family                                         To be                permitted as
Attached,    Monument 2/       32 sq.          approved by          part of
two-family   Pole     entrance ft.     10 ft.  Engineering External overall sign
identificati                                   Department           design; pole
on                                                                  must contain
                                                                    multiple
                                                                    poles
             Wall     Wall: 1  Wall:                               One wall
                               5%              10 ft. off           only
Residential  Monument Mon.: 1  Mon.: 4 Mon.: 4 paved       External  
Use                            sq. ft. ft.     surface
             Pole     Pole: 1  Pole: 4 Pole: 4                       
                               sq. ft. ft.
Use Groups
   Assembly Uses: Churches; community center; schools
   Commercial Uses: Cemetery; outdoor commercial; parks; resort hotel; temporary
real estate office
   Residential Uses: Agricultural uses; child care; home occupation; keeping of
roomers; living quarters; private garages; private pools; residential care
facility; single-family; two-family
Special Provisions
1.   Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and
pole sign size by a factor of 2
2.   Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable
copy, when located along local or residential collector streets
 
   (H)   Parking, R-4 Zone. Additional information and standards for parking as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192
.
R-4 Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
R-4 Parking Standards
Land Use                  Parking Required           Notes
Agricultural use          1 space/employee            
Assisted living facility  .5 spaces/D.U.             Additionally, 1 space for
                                                     each employee
Cemetery                  1 space/employee           1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                     by the facility
                                                     Provide on-site area for
Childcare, in home        N/A                        drop off/pick up, wholly
                                                     on site
                                                     Based on seating in main
Church                    1 space/3 seats            sanctuary, min. of 5
                                                     spaces
Community center          1 space/600 sq. ft.        1 bus parking space/25
                                                     required spaces
Events center             1 space/400 sq. ft.         
                                                     No on street parking
Home occupation           N/A                        allowed for commercial
                                                     vehicles owned by the use
Neighborhood center       5 spaces                    
                                                     Lakes; campgrounds; zoos;
Outdoor commercial        5 spaces + 1/employee      riding stables; batting
                                                     cages
Parks                     1 space/acre               Other uses present require
                                                     parking based on use
Private club              1 space/200 sq. ft.         
Real estate office,       1 space/400 sq. ft.         
temporary
Residential care facility 1 space/3 beds              
Residential, single-unit  2 spaces/D.U.              1 additional space for an
                                                     accessory dwelling unit
Residential, two-unit     2 spaces/D.U.              1 additional space for an
                                                     accessory dwelling unit
                                                     If gymnasium or auditorium
School, K - 8             1 space/classroom and      on site an additional 1
                          office + 10 visitor spaces space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, 9 - 12            office + 1 space/ 5 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, post-secondary    office + 1 space/ 2 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
 
   (I)   Landscaping, R-4 Zone. Additional information and standards for
vehicular use area (VUA) landscaping as well as specific requirements are found
in §§
154.150 through
154.164.
 
R-4 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area
Landscape Buffer Area Width Options (In Feet) Planting Density Multiplier
Category
                      5 ft.                   1.5
Category A            10 ft.                  1.33
                      15 ft.                  1
 
R-4 Buffering Requirements
Landscape Buffer Area Category Buffering Use Classification
                               Buffered Use Buffering Use
                                            R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 assembly and
Category A                     R-1, R-2     commercial uses cottage court and
                                            townhouse developments
 
Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) or Fraction Thereof
Planting Density Requirement Categories
A                   B                   C                   D
2 large trees or 1  2 large trees or 1  3 large trees or 2  3 large trees or 2
medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small
trees + 3 ft.       trees + 4 ft.       trees + 5 ft.       trees + 6 ft.
screening/80 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of
linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary
(OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.4; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-2011; Ord. 26-2011, passed
11-21-2011; Ord. 27-2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord.
05-2015, passed 5-4-2015; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 05-2017, passed
6-5-2017; Ord. 04-2020, passed 4-20-2020; Ord. 17-2023, passed 8-21-2023; Ord.
17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.059 R-5 URBAN RESIDENTIAL MIXED.
   (A)   Generally. This zone is composed of primarily residential uses with a
maximum density of 12 dwelling units per acre. This district is primarily
encouraged in area closer to the city core.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this
zoning district and the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Churches and associated facilities;
         (b)   Neighborhood center; and
         (c)   Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Assisted living facilities when located in an existing building;
         (b)   Government operated parks;
         (c)   Communications towers/poles or collocations of equipment for the
same, when erected by or on property owned by a public entity or public
utility; and
         (d)   Community garden. See §
154.076(B) for standards specific to community gardens.
      (3)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Agricultural uses excluding open or enclosed feedlot operations;
         (b)   Residential care facility;
         (c)   Dwelling, single-unit detached;
         (d)   Dwelling, single-unit attached;
         (e)   Dwelling, duplex;
         (f)   Dwelling, multi-unit;
         (g)   Cottage court development, subject to the standards of §
154.079;
         (h)   Townhouse development subject to the standards of §
154.080; and
         (i)   Recovery residence.
   (C)   Accessory uses. Uses which are customarily accessory, clearly
incidental and subordinate to principal uses.
      (1)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Childcare centers, in home. Centers shall comply with all
requirements as regulated by the commonwealth’s Department of Families and
Children;
         (b)   Home occupations, see §
154.076(C) for standards specific to home occupations;
         (c)   Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking
areas;
         (d)   Private swimming pools and tennis courts, private non-commercial
parks and open spaces;
         (e)   Short-term rental, owner occupied, see §
154.076(D) for standards specific to owner-occupied short-term rentals; and
         (f)   Dwelling unit, accessory (ADU). See §
154.076(A) for standards specific to ADUs.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Assisted living facility café and food service facilities open
to the public no more than eight hours per day and containing seating for less
than 100 persons and no alcohol sales permitted; and
         (b)   Office when located within the building of a permitted
commercial use and containing no greater than 400 square feet and no separate
entrance is provided.
   (D)   Conditional uses. Uses permitted only with Board approval after
consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration
of the guidelines as detailed in the comprehensive plan. Subject to the
conditional use standards in §
154.077.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Community centers (YMCA, YWCA, senior center);
         (b)   Private club; and
         (c)   Events center.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Cemetery;
         (b)   Outdoor commercial recreation facilities such as zoos, riding
stables, fishing lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts and campgrounds;
         (c)   Temporary real estate sales office for the sale of lots located
only within the subdivision, to be removed or converted to a principal use when
all lots are sold, but not for use as a general real estate sales or rentals;
and
         (d)   Short-term rental, non-owner occupied. Subject to the standards
of §
154.077(E) specific to non-owner occupied short-term rentals.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   When new construction or additions are made to an existing
structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks
the same as other similar residential structures on parcels within 500 feet.
      (2)   All multi-unit structures shall provide foundation plantings along
areas visible from parking areas or street rights-of-way.
      (3)   No parking for multi-unit shall be allowed in the required front
yard.
      (4)   Structures are encouraged to place the front facade of the building
facing the primary street frontage.
      (5)   No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot
fronting on a right-of-way of less than 30 feet in width shall be permitted.
      (6)   Single-unit detached zero lot line developments are required to
designate on the subdivision plat which side yard will have zero-foot setback.
All single-unit detached zero lot line developments shall have maintenance/
access/use easements and when necessary, drainage easements, provided on
adjacent lots and at a width of not less than ten feet. Adjacent lots shall not
place any building within this easement.
      (7)   If all parking and maneuvering areas are placed to the rear of the
structure the front yard setback may be decreased to 15 feet.
      (8)   EVENTS CENTERS are defined as a restricted use of a residential
property for the conduct of special events of a limited size and number.
SPECIAL EVENTS are defined as wedding receptions, luncheons, meetings,
fundraising proceedings for not-for-profit organizations or similar activities.
The  space utilized in a residential dwelling unit shall not exceed 3,500
square feet. The number of events held may not exceed 75 per year. To qualify
as an event center use, the residential dwelling unit must be located within
the Downtown Neighborhood Sub-Area as identified in the comprehensive plan.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
 Residential                                                  Assembly and
                                                              Commercial
 Single-Unit and Duplex Multi-Unit Cottage Court4 Townhous e5
              Residential                                        Assembly and
                                                                 Commercial
              Single-Unit   Multi-Unit    Cottage    Townhous e5
              and Duplex                  Court4
Maximum       12 du/acre    12 du/acre    12 du/acre 12 du/acre  N/A
Density
Minimum Lot   3.630 sq. ft. 3,630 sq. ft. None       None        3.630 sq. ft.
Area
              50 ft.1 or 40
Minimum Lot   ft for        50 ft.        None       None        50 ft.
Width         single-unit
              attached
Minimum Front 25 ft.2       25 ft.        25 ft.3    10 ft.      30 ft.
Yard Setback
Minimum Side  5 ft.         10 ft.        25 ft.3    10 ft.      20 ft.
Yard Setback
Minimum Side
Yard Setback, 0 ft.         0 ft.         0 ft.      0 ft.       N/A
Common Wall
Minimum Rear  15 ft.        25 ft.        25 ft.3    25 ft.      30 ft.
Yard Setback
Maximum
Building      35 ft.        45 ft.        35 ft.     35 ft.      75 ft.
Height
Maximum
Impervious    N/A           N/A           N/A        N/A         0.80
Surface Ratio
(I.S.R.)
Notes:
1.   Minimum lot width for single-unit and duplex may be reduced to 25 feet in
width if driveway access is provided from a rear alley, and the primary façade
is facing the public street.
2.   Minimum front yard setbacks for single-unit and duplex may be reduced to
15 feet if driveway access is provided from a rear alley, and the primary
façade is facing the public street.
3.   Cottage court development setbacks for front, side and rear yards are
relative to the perimeter of the development site, but not common wall side
setbacks.
4.   Cottage court developments are subject to the standards of § 154.079.
5.   Townhouse developments are subject to the standards of § 154.080.
 
   (G)   Signs, R-5 Zone. Additional information and standards for signs as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
R-5 Signs
                  Maximum Maximum Sign Maximum Location Lighting Additional
Use Allowed Types Number  Area         Height  Require- Allowed  Require- ments
                                               ments
R-5 Signs
             Allowed Maximum   Maximum   Maximum Location  Lighting Additional
Use          Types   Number    Sign Area Height  Require-  Allowed  Require-
                                                 ments              ments
                                                                    Wall sign:
                                                                    15% or 32
             Wall    Wall: 1/  Wall: 15%                           sq. ft.,
                     wall                        10 ft.             whichever
Assembly Use                                     off paved Yes      is
                                                surface            greater
             Monume  Mon.: 1/  Mon.: 100 Mon.: 8                     
             nt      street    sq. ft.   ft.
             Pole    Pole: 1/  Pole: 50  Pole: 8                     
                     street    sq. ft.   ft.
                                                                    Wall sign
                                                                    15%
                     Wall:     Wall: 15%                           or 32 sq.
             Wall    1/wall                    10 ft.             ft.,
Commercial                                      off paved          whichever
Use                                                        Yes      is
                                                 surface            greater
             Monume  Mon.: 1   Mon.: 50  Mon.: 8                     
             nt                sq. ft.   ft.
             Pole    Pole: 1   Pole: 36  Pole: 8                     
                               sq. ft.   ft.
                                                                    Walls and
                                                                    fences
Single-                                          To be              permitted
Family                                           approved           as part of
Attached,    Monume  2/entranc 32 sq.            by                 overall
two-family,  nt      e         ft.       10 ft.  Engineeri Yes      sign
multifamily  Pole                                ng                 design;
identificati                                     Departme           pole must
on                                               nt                 contain
                                                                    multiple
                                                                    poles
             Wall    Wall: 1   Wall: 5%                            One wall
                                                 10 ft.             only
Residential  Monume  Mon.: 1   Mon.: 4   Mon.: 4 off paved External  
Use          nt                sq. ft.   ft.     surface
             Pole    Pole: 1   Pole: 4   Pole: 4                     
                               sq. ft.   ft.
Use Groups
   Assembly Uses: Churches; community center; schools
   Commercial Uses: Cemetery; outdoor commercial; parks; resort hotel;
temporary real estate office
   Residential Uses: Agricultural uses; child care; home occupation; keeping
of roomers; living quarters; multi-family; private garages; private pools;
residential care facility; single-family; two-family
Special Provisions
1.   Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and
pole sign size by a factor of 2
2.   Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually
changeable copy, when located along local or residential collector streets
 
   (H)   Parking, R-5 Zone. Additional information and standards for parking as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
R-5 Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
R-5 Parking Standards
Land Use                  Parking Required           Notes
Agricultural use          1 space/employee            
Cemetery                  1 space/employee           1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                     by the facility
Assisted living facility  .5 spaces/D.U.             Additionally, 1 space for
                                                     each employee
                                                     Provide on-site area for
Childcare, in home        N/A                        drop off/pick up, wholly
                                                     on site
                                                     Based on seating in main
Church                    1 space/3 seats            sanctuary, min. of 5
                                                     spaces
Community center          1 space/600 sq. ft.        1 bus parking space/25
                                                     required spaces.
Community residence       1 space/3 occupants         
Events center             1 space/400 sq. ft.         
                                                     No on street parking
Home occupation           N/A                        allowed for commercial
                                                     vehicles owned by the use
Neighborhood center       5 spaces                    
                                                     Lakes; campgrounds; zoos;
Outdoor commercial        5 spaces + 1/employee      riding stables; batting
                                                     cages
Parks                     1 space/acre               Other uses present require
                                                     parking based on use
Private club              1 space/200 sq. ft.         
Real estate office,       1 space/400 sq. ft.         
temporary
Residential care facility 1 space/3 beds              
Residential, single-unit  2 spaces/D.U.              1 additional space for an
                                                     accessory dwelling unit
Residential, multi-       2 spaces/D.U.               
family, 10 or fewer units
Residential, multi-
family, more than 10      1.5 spaces/D.U.             
units
Residential, single-unit  2 spaces/D.U.              1 additional space for an
                                                     accessory dwelling unit
                                                     If gymnasium or auditorium
School, K - 8             1 space/classroom and      on site an additional 1
                          office + 10 visitor spaces space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, 9 - 12            office + 1 space/ 5 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, post-secondary    office + 1 space/ 2 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
 
   (I)   Landscaping, R-5 Zone. Additional information and standards for
vehicular use area (VUA) landscaping as well as specific requirements are found
in §§
154.150 through
154.164.
 
R-5 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area
Landscape Buffer Area Width Options (In Feet) Planting Density Multiplier
Category
                      20 ft.                  1.5
Category D            25 ft.                  1.33
                      30 ft.                  1
 
 
R-5 Buffering Requirements
Landscape Buffer Area Category Buffering Use Classification
                               Buffered Use Buffering Use
                                            R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6
Category A                     R-1, R-2     assembly, commercial, and multi-
                                            unit uses cottage court and
                                            townhouse developments
Category D                     R-1, R-2     R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6
 
 
Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof
Planting Density Requirement Categories
A                   B                   C                   D
2 large trees or 1  2 large trees or 1  3 large trees or 2  3 large trees or 2
medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small
trees + 3 ft.       trees + 4 ft.       trees + 5 ft.       trees/60 ft. of
screening/80 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of linear boundary
linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary     (OFT)* + 6 ft. high
(OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*              solid fence or
                                                            evergreen shrubs
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.5; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-2011; Ord. 26-2011, passed
11-21-2011; Ord. 27-2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord.
05-2015, passed 5-4-2015; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 05-2017, passed
6-5-2017; Ord. 04-2020, passed 4-20-2020; Ord. 17-2023, passed 8-21-2023; Ord.
17-2025, passed 8-4-2025; Ord. 18-2025, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 154.060 R-6 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Generally. This zone is composed of primarily residential uses at a
maximum density of 20 units per acre. This zone is primarily applied to areas
accessible to infrastructure, adjacent to existing similar development patterns
that can serve as transitional uses from lower density and intensity uses.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this
zoning district and the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Churches and associated facilities.
         (b)   Neighborhood center; and
         (c)   Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Assisted living facilities when located in an existing building;
         (b)   Government operated parks;
         (c)   Communications towers/poles or collocations of equipment for the
same, when erected by or on property owned by a public entity or public
utility; and
         (d)   Garden. See §
154.076(B) for standards specific to community gardens.
      (3)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Agricultural uses, excluding open or enclosed feedlot
operations;
         (b)   Community residences;
         (c)   Residential care facility;
         (d)   Dwelling, single-unit detached;
         (e)   Dwelling, single-unit attached;
         (f)   Dwelling, duplex;
         (g)   Dwelling, multi-unit;
         (h)   Cottage court development, subject to the standards of §
154.079;
         (i)   Townhouse development subject to the standards of §
154.080; and
         (j)   Recovery residence.
   (C)   Accessory uses. Uses which are customarily accessory, clearly
incidental and subordinate to principal uses.
      (1)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Childcare centers, in home. Centers shall comply with all
requirements as regulated by the commonwealth’s Department of Families and
Children;
         (b)   Home occupations, see §
154.076(C) for standards specific to home occupations;
         (c)   Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking
areas;
         (d)   Private swimming pools and tennis courts, private non-commercial
parks and open spaces;
         (e)   Short-term rental, owner occupied, see §
154.076(D) for standards specific to owner-occupied short-term rentals; and
         (f)   Dwelling unit, accessory (ADU). See §
154.076(A) for standards specific to ADUs.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Assisted living facility café and food service facilities open
to the public no more than eight hours per day and containing seating for less
than 100 persons and no alcohol sales permitted; and
         (b)   Office when located within the building of a permitted
commercial use and containing no greater than 400 square feet and no separate
entrance is provided.
   (D)   Conditional uses. Uses permitted only with Board approval after
consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration
of the guidelines as detailed in the comprehensive plan. Subject to the
conditional use standards in §
154.077.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Community centers (YMCA, YWCA, senior center);
         (b)   Private club; and
         (c)   Events center.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Cemetery;
         (b)   Outdoor commercial recreation facilities such as zoos, riding
stables, fishing lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts and campgrounds;
         (c)   Residential storage facility;
         (d)   Temporary real estate sales office for the sale of lots located
only within the subdivision, to be removed or converted to a principal use when
all lots are sold, but not for use as a general real estate sales or rentals;
and
         (e)   Short-term rental, non-owner occupied. Subject to the standards
of §
154.077(E) specific to non-owner occupied short-term rentals.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   When new construction or additions are made to an existing
structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks
the same as other similar residential structures on parcels within 500 feet.
      (2)   All multi-family buildings shall provide foundation plantings along
areas visible from parking areas or street right-of-ways.
      (3)   No parking for multi-family shall be allowed in the required front
yard.
      (4)   Buildings are encouraged to place the front facade of the building
facing the primary street frontage.
      (5)   Single-unit detached zero lot line developments are required to
designate on the subdivision plat which side yard will have zero-foot setback.
All single-unit detached zero lot line developments shall have maintenance/
access/use easements and when necessary, drainage easements, provided on
adjacent lots and at a width of not less than ten feet. Adjacent lots shall not
place any structure within this easement.
      (6)   If all parking and maneuvering areas are placed to the rear of the
structure the front yard setback may be decreased to 15 feet.
      (7)   EVENTS CENTERS are defined as a restricted use of a residential
property for the conduct of special events of a limited size and number.
SPECIAL EVENTS are defined as wedding receptions, luncheons, meetings,
fundraising proceedings for not-for-profit organizations or similar activities.
The space utilized in a residential dwelling unit shall not exceed 3,500 square
feet. The number of events held may not exceed 75 per year. To qualify as an
event center use, the residential dwelling unit must be located within the
Downtown Neighborhood Sub-Area as identified in the comprehensive plan.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
 Residential                                                  Assembly and
                                                              Commercial
 Single-Unit and Duplex Multi-Unit Cottage Court4 Townhouse 5
              Residential                                        Assembly and
                                                                 Commercial
              Single-Unit   Multi-Unit    Cottage    Townhouse 5
              and Duplex                  Court4
Maximum       20 du/acre    20 du/acre    20 du/acre 20 du/acre  N/A
Density
Minimum Lot   2,178 sq. ft. 2,178 sq. ft. None       None        2,178 sq. ft.
Area
              50 ft.1 or 40
Minimum Lot   ft for        50 ft.        None       None        50 ft.
Width         single-unit
              attached
Minimum Front 25 ft.        25 ft.        25 ft.3    10 ft.      30 ft.
Yard Setback
Minimum Side  5 ft.         10 ft.        25 ft.3    10 ft.      20 ft.
Yard Setback
Minimum Side
Yard Setback, N/A           0 ft.         0 ft.      0 ft.       N/A
Common Wall
Minimum Rear  15 ft.        25 ft.        25 ft.3    25 ft.      30 ft.
Yard Setback
Maximum
Building      35 ft.        45 ft.        35 ft.     35 ft.      75 ft.
Height
Maximum
Impervious    N/A           N/A           N/A        N/A         0,80
Surface Ratio
(I.S.R.)
Notes:
1.   Minimum lot width for single-unit and duplex may be reduced to 25 feet in
width if driveway access is provided from a rear alley, and the primary façade
is facing the public street.
2.   Minimum front yard setbacks for single-unit and duplex may be reduced to
15 feet if driveway access is provided from a rear alley, and the primary
façade is facing the public street.
3.   Cottage court development setbacks for front, side and rear are relative
to the perimeter of the development site, but not common wall side setbacks.
4.   Cottage court developments are subject to the standards of §
154.079.
5.   Townhouse developments are subject to the standards of §
154.080.
 
   (G)   Signs, R-6 Zone. Additional information and standards for signs as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
R-6 Signs
                  Maximum Maximum Sign Maximum Location Lighting Additional
Use Allowed Types Number  Area         Height  Require- Allowed  Require- ments
                                               ments
R-6 Signs
               Allowed Maximum  Maximum  Maximum Location   Lighting Additional
Use            Types   Number   Sign     Height  Require-   Allowed  Require-
                                Area             ments               ments
                                                                     Wall sign:
                                                                     15% or 32
               Wall    Wall: 1/ Wall:                               sq. ft.,
                       wall     15%                                  whichever
                                                 10 ft. off          is
Assembly Use                                     paved      Yes      greater
              Monume           Mon.:    Mon.: 8 surface
               nt      Mon.: 1  100 sq.  ft.                          
                                ft.
                       Pole: 1/ Pole: 50 Pole: 8
               Pole    street   sq. ft.  ft.                          
                       frontage
                                                                     Wall sign
                       Wall:    Wall:                                15%
               Wall    1/wall   15%                                 or 32 sq.
                                              10 ft. off          ft.,
Commercial Use                                   paved      Yes      whichever
                                                 surface             is greater
               Monume  Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 50 Mon.: 8                      
               nt      street   sq. ft.  ft.
               Pole    Pole: 1/ Pole: 36 Pole: 8                      
                       street   sq. ft.  ft.
                                                                     Walls and
                                                                     fences
                                                 To be               permitted
Single- Family                                   approved            as part of
Attached, two- Monume  2/       32 sq.           by                  overall
family,        nt      entrance ft.      10 ft.  Engineeri  Yes      sign
multifamily    Pole                              ng                  design;
identification                                   Department          pole must
                                                                     contain
                                                                     multiple
                                                                     poles
               Wall    Wall: 1  Wall: 5%                            One wall
                                                 10 ft. off          only
Residential    Monume  Mon.: 1  Mon.: 4  Mon.: 4 paved      External  
Use            nt               sq. ft.  ft.     surface
               Pole    Pole: 1  Pole: 4  Pole: 4                      
                                sq. ft.  ft.
Use Groups
   Assembly Uses: Churches; community center; schools
   Commercial Uses: Cemetery; outdoor commercial; parks; resort hotel;
temporary real estate office
   Residential Uses: Agricultural uses; child care; home occupation; keeping of
roomers; living quarters; multi-family; private garages; private pools;
residential care facility; single-family; two-family
Special Provisions
1.   Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and
pole sign size by a factor of 2
2.   Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable
copy, when located along local or residential collector streets
 
   (H)   Parking, R-6 Zone. Additional information and standards for parking as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
R-6 Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
R-6 Parking Standards
Land Use                  Parking Required           Notes
Agricultural use          1 space/employee            
Cemetery                  1 space/employee           1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                     by the facility
                                                     Provide on-site area for
Childcare, in home        N/A                        drop off/pick up, wholly
                                                     on site
                                                     Based on seating in main
Church                    1 space/3 seats            sanctuary, min. of 5
                                                     spaces
Community center          1 space/600 sq. ft.        1 bus parking space/25
                                                     required spaces
Community residence       1 space/3 occupants         
Events center             1 space/400 sq. ft.         
                                                     No on street parking
Home occupation           N/A                        allowed for commercial
                                                     vehicles owned by the use
Neighborhood center       5 spaces                    
                                                     Lakes; campgrounds; zoos;
Outdoor commercial        5 spaces + 1/employee      riding stables; batting
                                                     cages
Parks                     1 space/acre               Other uses present require
                                                     parking based on use
Private club              1 space/200 sq. ft.         
Real estate office,       1 space/400 sq. ft.         
temporary
Residential care facility 1 space/3 beds              
Residential, single-unit  2 spaces/D.U.              1 additional space for an
                                                     accessory dwelling unit
Residential storage       1 space/employee + 5       Area in and around units
facility                  spaces                     may not be counted as
                                                     parking spaces
Residential, multi-       2 spaces/D.U.               
family, 10 or fewer units
Residential, multi-
family, more than 10      1.5 spaces/D.U.             
units
Residential, two-unit     2 spaces/D.U.              1 additional space for an
                                                     accessory dwelling unit
                                                     If gymnasium or auditorium
School, K - 8             1 space/classroom and      on site an additional 1
                          office + 10 visitor spaces space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, 9 - 12            office + 1 space/ 5 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, post-secondary    office + 1 space/ 2 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
 
   (I)   Landscaping, R-6 Zone. Additional information and standards for
vehicular use area (VUA) landscaping as well as specific requirements are found
in §§
154.150 through
154.164.
 
R-6 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area
Landscape Buffer Area Width Options (In Feet) Planting Density Multiplier
Category
Category D            20 ft.                  1.5
                     25 ft.                  1.33
                     30 ft.                  1
 
R-6 Buffering Requirements
Landscape Buffer Area Category Buffering Use Classification
                               Buffered Use Buffering Use
                                            R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6
Category A                     R-1, R-2     assembly, commercial, and multi-
                                            unit uses cottage court and
                                            townhouse developments
Category D                     R-1, R-2     R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6
 
Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof
Planting Density Requirement Categories
A                   B                   C                   D
2 large trees or 1  2 large trees or 1  3 large trees or 2  3 large trees or 2
medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small
trees + 3 ft.       trees + 4 ft.       trees + 5 ft.       trees/60 ft. of
screening/80 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of linear boundary
linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary     (OFT)* + 6 ft. high
(OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*              solid fence or
                                                            evergreen shrubs
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.6; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-2011; Ord. 26-2011, passed
11-21-2011; Ord. 27-2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord.
05-2015, passed 5-4-2015; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 05-2017, passed
6-5-2017; Ord. 04-2020, passed 4-20-2020; Ord. 03-2022, passed 2-7-2022; Ord.
17-2023, passed 8-21-2023; Ord. 17-2025, passed 8-4-2025; Ord. 18-2025, passed
8-18-2025)
§ 154.061 C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD OFFICE.
   (A)   Generally. This district is primarily for professional office uses.
This district should be used to buffer more intense business districts from
residential neighborhoods. Applied to areas where transitional uses are seen as
desirable.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this
zoning district and the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Churches and associated facilities;
         (b)   Events center;
         (c)   Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities; and
         (d)   Private club.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Adult daycare;
         (b)   Art gallery;
         (c)   Assisted living facilities;
         (d)   Beauty shops, barber shops, shoe repair;
         (e)   Bed and breakfast establishments;
         (f)   Cemetery;
         (g)   Childcare centers;
         (h)   Fine arts studio;
         (i)   Funeral home;
         (j)   Library;
         (k)   Museum;
         (l)   Nursing home; and
         (m)   Offices.
      (3)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Community residence;
         (b)   Halfway house;
         (c)   Dwelling, single-unit attached;
         (d)   Dwelling, single-unit detached;
         (e)   Dwelling, duplex;
         (f)   Recovery residence.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly
incidental and subordinate to permitted uses.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Dwelling unit for owners, operators or employees of a permitted
use provided that if such dwelling unit shall be a part of the building it
shall have a separate entrance;
         (b)   Parking area; and
         (c)   Private garages and storage buildings.
      (3)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Dwelling unit, accessory (ADU) associated with a single-unit or
duplex dwelling. See §
154.076(A) for standards specific to ADUs;
         (b)   Short-term rental, owner occupied. See §
154.076(D) for standards specific to owner-occupied short-term rentals.
   (D)   (1)   Conditional uses. Uses permitted only with Board approval after
consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration
of the development guidelines as detailed in the comprehensive plan.
      (2)   Reversion of a structure originally designed and constructed as a
single family or two-family dwelling but later converted to a commercial use
may be converted back to its original use subject to all applicable zoning,
building and related code requirements for the residential use, removal of all
sign structures, and any modifications deemed appropriate by the Board.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   All permitted business uses shall confine storage and display to
principal or accessory structures.
      (2)   No single building shall be greater than 5,000 square feet in floor
area should the lot abut property in any residential zoning district.
      (3)   No single building shall be greater than 10,000 square feet in
floor area should the lot abut any zoning district other than a residential
zoning district.
      (4)   Within areas designated by the comprehensive plan as historic
neighborhoods, existing structures shall be utilized unless certified as
structurally unfit for human occupancy by the Code Official, according to the
state’s Building Code. Any remodeling, alterations or additions shall be
consistent with the exterior architectural features of the existing structure.
Any new structures erected shall be architecturally compatible with surrounding
structures in the historical neighborhood. All plans and specifications for new
structures shall be submitted to the Commission for review and approval prior
to the issuance of a building permit, commencement of building activity or
certificate of occupancy.
      (5)   When new construction or additions are made to an existing
structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks
the same as other similar commercial structures on parcels within 500 feet.
      (6)   No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot
fronting on a right-of-way of less than 30 feet in width shall be permitted.
      (7)   The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum
lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of
the lot.
      (8)   For short-term rental, owner occupied, the dwelling unit is limited
to one short-term rental contract at a time; the number of occupants in the
dwelling unit during a short-term rental shall not exceed two times the number
of bedrooms plus four individuals, notwithstanding restrictions of the
applicable building or property maintenance code; and the dwelling unit is
limited to ten short-term rental days each calendar year.
      (9)   No more than two residential units shall be permitted per lot or
parcel of land, except that an accessory dwelling unit may be permitted on a
lot with a duplex dwelling unit.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
Minimum lot frontage                  100 ft.
   Exception: Corner lots, minimum 150 ft. each street frontage
frontage
Minimum front yard setback            40 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     30 ft. when abutting all other zones
Minimum side yard setback             30 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     20 ft. when abutting all other zones
Minimum rear yard setback             30 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     20 ft. when abutting all other zones
Maximum impervious surface ratio      .85
(I.S.R.)
Maximum building height               45 ft.
Note: For the purposes of this chapter abutting shall address each lot line to
determine applicable setbacks for each yard
 
   (G)   Signs, C-1 Zone. Additional information and standards for signs as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
C-1 Signs
                  Maximum Maximum Sign Maximum Location Lighting Additional
Use Allowed Types Number  Area         Height  Require- Allowed  Require- ments
                                               ments
C-1 Signs
            Allowed   Maximum  Maximum   Maximum  Location  Lighting Additional
Use         Types     Number   Sign Area Height   Require-  Allowed  Require-
                                                  ments              ments
                                                                     Wall sign:
                                                                     15% or 32
            Wall              Wall: 15%                            sq. ft.,
                                                  10 ft.             whichever
Assembly                                          off paved Yes      is
Use                                               surface            greater
           Monume nt Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 50  Mon.: 12                     
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.
            Pole      Pole: 1/ Pole: 36  Pole: 12                     
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.
            Roof      Roof: 1  Roof: 15%                           
                                                                     Wall sign
                                                                     15%
                              Wall: 15%                            or 32 sq.
            Wall                                                  ft.,
                                                  10 ft.             whichever
Commercia l                                       off paved Yes      is
Use                                               surface            greater
            Monume nt Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 50  Mon.: 12                     
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.
            Pole      Pole: 1/ Pole: 36  Pole: 12                     
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.
            Roof      Roof: 1  Roof: 15%                           
            Wall      Wall: 1  Wall: 5%                             One wall
                                                  10 ft.             only
Residential Monume nt Mon.: 1  Mon.: 4   Mon.: 4  off paved External  
Use                            sq. ft.   ft.      surface
            Pole      Pole: 1  Pole: 4   Pole: 4                      
                               sq. ft.   ft.
Use Groups
   Assembly Uses: Churches; schools
   Commercial Uses: All other listed uses
   Residential Uses: Community residence
Special Provisions
1.   Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and
pole sign size by a factor of 2
2.   If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants) the
development name must be placed on the sign; it may be a maximum of 25% of the
overall sign face; this shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant
signs
 
   (H)   Parking, C-1 Zone. Additional information and standards for parking as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
C-1 Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
C-1 Parking Standards
Land Use                  Parking Required           Notes
                          1 space/employee + 1       Provide on-site area for
Adult day care            space/500 sq. ft.          safe drop off and pick up,
                                                     wholly on site
Art gallery/studio,       1 space/600 sq. ft.         
artisan workshop
Assisted living           .5 spaces/D.U.             Additionally, 1 space for
                                                     each employee
Barber shop, beauty shop, 2 spaces/chair              
shoe repair
Cemetery                  1 space/employee           1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                     by the facility
                          1 space/employee + 1       Provide on-site area for
Childcare                 space/400 sq. ft.          safe drop off and pick up,
                                                     wholly on site
                                                     Based on seating in main
Church                    1 space/3 seats            sanctuary, min. of 5
                                                     spaces
Events center             1 space/200 sq. ft.         
Community residence       1 space/3 occupants         
Financial institutions    1 space/200 sq. ft.         
Funeral home              1 space/3 seats            1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                     by the use
Halfway house             1 space/occupant            
                                                     Financial; legal; medical;
Office, general           1 space/250 sq. ft.        professional; veterinarian
                                                     and the like
Office, real estate       1 space/400 sq. ft.         
Office projects           1 space/400 sq. ft.        When more than one office
                                                     building on a lot
Library                   1 space/600 sq. ft.         
Museum                    1 space/600 sq. ft.         
                                                     Based on maximum employees
Nursing home              1 space/3 beds + 1 space/  on a shift, including
                          employee                   medical staff. Minimum of
                                                     5 spaces
Parks                     1 space/acre               Other uses present require
                                                     parking based on use.
Private club              1 space/200 sq. ft.         
Residential, single-unit  2 spaces/D.U.              1 additional space for an
                                                     accessory dwelling unit
Residential, duplex       2 spaces/D.U.              1 additional space for an
                                                     accessory dwelling unit
                                                     If gymnasium or auditorium
School, K - 8             1 space/classroom and      on site an additional 1
                          office + 10 visitor spaces space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, 9 - 12            office + 1 space/ 5 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, post-secondary    office + 1 space/ 2 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
 
   (I)   Landscaping, C-1 Zone. Additional information and standards for
vehicular use area (VUA) landscaping as well as specific requirements are found
in §§
154.150 through
154.164.
 
C-1 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area
Landscape Buffer Area Width Options (In Feet) Planting Density Multiplier
Category
                      10 ft.                  1.5
Category B            15 ft.                  1.33
                      20 ft.                  1
 
C-1 Buffering Requirements
Landscape Buffer Area Category Buffering Use Classification
                               Buffered Use                 Buffering Use
Category B                     R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 C-1, C-2, WCD
 
Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) or Fraction Thereof
Planting Density Requirement Categories
A                   B                   C                   D
2 large trees or 1  2 large trees or 1  3 large trees or 2  3 large trees or 2
medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small
trees + 3 ft.       trees + 4 ft.       trees + 5 ft.       trees + 6 ft.
screening/80 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of
linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary
(OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.7; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. passed 9-6-2011; Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-
2011; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 28-2014, passed 12-15-2014; Ord. 05-
2015, passed 5-4-2015; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-
5-2017; Ord. 03-2022, passed 2-7-2022; Ord. 17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.062 C-2 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Generally. This district is primarily for professional office and
limited service business uses. This district should be used for those
businesses that do not require large amounts of daily traffic.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this
zoning district and the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Business college or technical school;
         (b)   Church and associated facilities;
         (c)   Events center;
         (d)   Private club; and
         (e)   Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Adult daycare;
         (b)   Art gallery;
         (c)   Assisted living facilities;
         (d)   Beauty shops, barber shops, shoe repair shops;
         (e)   Bed and breakfast;
         (f)   Cemetery;
         (g)   Childcare centers;
         (h)   Clinic;
         (i)   Convenience stores, no less than 500 square feet and no greater
than 5,000 square feet in building area. The sale of petroleum products may be
included as part of this use;
         (j)   Data processing centers;
         (k)   Financial institutions;
         (l)   Fine arts studio;
         (m)   Laboratories;
         (n)   Laundry, self-service or pick-up stations;
         (o)   Library;
         (p)   Museum;
         (q)   Nursing home;
         (r)   Offices;
         (s)   Parking lots and structures;
         (t)   Pet (small animal) grooming and boarding;
         (u)   Pharmacy;
         (v)   Restaurant;
         (w)   Retail package liquor sales;
         (x)   Shopping center, convenience and neighborhood;
         (y)   Specialty retail shops; and
         (z)   Travel agencies.
      (3)    Residential uses:
         (a)   Community residence;
         (b)   Halfway house;
         (c)   Dwelling, single-unit attached;
         (d)   Dwelling, single-unit detached;
         (e)   Dwelling, duplex;
         (f)   Dwelling, multi-unit (maximum 12 du/acre); and
         (g)   Recovery residence.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly
incidental and subordinate to permitted uses.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Dwelling unit for owners, operators or employees of a permitted
use provided that if such dwelling unit shall be a part of the building it
shall have a separate entrance;
         (b)   Parking area;
         (c)   Private garages and storage buildings;
         (d)   Retail drink liquor establishment when accessory to a beauty
shop, barber shop or bed and breakfast;
         (e)   Temporary uses; and
         (f)    Warehousing, wholesaling and storage, excluding outdoor storage
and provided that no building for such accessory use shall have openings other
than stationary windows within 100 feet of any residential zone.
      (3)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Dwelling unit, accessory (ADU) associated with a single-unit or
duplex dwelling. See §
154.076(A) for standards specific to ADUs;
         (b)   Short-term rental, owner occupied. See §
154.076(D) for standards specific to owner-occupied short-term rentals.
   (D)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the
intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the development
guidelines as detailed in the comprehensive plan.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Drive-through or drive-in facilities when associated with any
principal use; and
         (b)   Indoor theater (this use shall be exempt from the building
square footage limitation in this zone found in special provisions.
      (3)   Residential uses. Reversion of a structure originally designed and
constructed as a single family or two-family dwelling but later converted to a
commercial use may be converted back to its original use subject to all
applicable zoning, building and related code requirements for the residential
use, removal of all sign structures, and any modifications deemed appropriate
by the Board.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   All permitted business uses shall confine storage and display to
principal or accessory structures.
      (2)   No single building shall be greater than 10,000 square feet in
floor area.
      (3)   Within areas designated by the comprehensive plan as historic
neighborhoods, existing structures shall be utilized unless certified as
structurally unfit for human occupancy by the Code Official, according to the
state’s Building Code. Any remodeling, alterations or additions shall be
consistent with the exterior architectural features of the existing structure.
Any new structures erected shall be architecturally compatible with surrounding
structures in the historical neighborhood. All plans and specifications for new
structures shall be submitted to the Commission for review and approval prior
to the issuance of a building permit, certificate of occupancy or commencement
of building activity.
      (4)   When new construction or additions are made to an existing
structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks
the same as other similar commercial structures on parcels within 500 feet.
      (5)   No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot
fronting on a right-of-way of less than 30 feet in width shall be permitted.
      (6)   The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum
lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of
the lot.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
Minimum lot frontage                  100 ft.
   Exception: Corner lots, minimum 150 ft. each street frontage
frontage
Minimum front yard setback            40 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     30 ft. when abutting all other zones.
Minimum side yard setback             30 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     20 ft. when abutting all other zones
Minimum rear yard setback             30 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     20 ft. when abutting all other zones
Maximum impervious surface ratio      .85
(I.S.R.)
Maximum building height               45 ft.
Note: For the purposes of this chapter abutting shall address each lot line to
determine applicable setbacks for each yard
 
   (G)   Signs, C-2 Zone. Additional information and standards for signs as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
C-2 Signs
                  Maximum Maximum Sign Maximum Location Lighting Additional
Use Allowed Types Number  Area         Height  Require- Allowed  Require- ments
                                               ments
C-2 Signs
            Allowed   Maximum  Maximum   Maximum  Location  Lighting Additional
Use         Types     Number   Sign Area Height   Require-  Allowed  Require-
                                                  ments              ments
                                                                     Wall sign:
                                                  10 ft.             15% or 32
            Wall              Wall: 15%         off paved          sq. ft.,
                                                  surface            whichever
                                                                     is
Assembly                                                             greater
Use         Monume nt Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 64  Mon.: 16          Yes       
                     street   sq. ft.   ft.
                                                  Pole: 20
            Pole      Pole: 1/ Pole: 48  Pole: 16 ft. off             
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
            Roof              Roof: 15%                            
                                                                     Wall sign
                                                                     15%
                              Wall: 15%                            or 32 sq.
            Wall                                                 ft.,
                                                                     whichever
                                                                     is
                                                                     greater
Commercial                                        Mon.: 10  Yes
Use         Monume nt Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 64  Mon.: 16 ft. off             
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
                                                  Pole: 20
            Pole      Pole: 1/ Pole: 48  Pole: 16 ft. off             
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
            Roof              Roof: 15%                           
            Wall      Wall: 1  Wall: 5%                             One wall
                                                  10 ft.             only
Residential Monume nt Mon.: 1  Mon.: 4   Mon.: 4  off paved External  
Use                            sq. ft.   ft.      surface
            Pole      Pole: 1  Pole: 4   Pole: 4                      
                               sq. ft.   ft.
                               Wall 15%
Shopping                       or 32 sq.                             Wall I.D.
Center,     Wall              ft.,                       Yes      sign: 15%
Convenien                      whichever                             of wall
ce                             is
                               greater
                                                  Mon.: 10
           Monume nt Mon.: 1  Mon.: 72  Mon.: 16 ft. off    
                               sq. ft.   ft.      paved              Monumen t
                                                  surface            or pole
                                                                     sign must
                                                  Pole: 20           contain
           Pole      Pole: 1  Pole: 72  Pole: 25 ft. off           name or
                               sq. ft.   ft.      paved              logo
                                                  surface

           Roof              Roof: 15%                           
                               Wall 15%
                               or 32 sq.                             Wall I.D.
            Wall              ft.,                                sign: 15%
                               whichever                             of wall
                               is
                               greater
Shopping                                          Mon.: 10
Center,     Monume nt Mon.: 2  Mon.: 100 Mon.: 16 ft. off   Yes
Neighbor-                      sq. ft.   ft.      paved              Monumen t
hood                                              surface            or pole
                                                                     sign must
                                                  Pole: 20           contain
            Pole      Pole: 2  Pole: 100 Pole: 25 ft. off            name or
                               sq. ft.   ft.      paved              logo
                                                  surface

            Roof              Roof: 15%                           
                               Wall 15%
                               or 32 sq.
            Wall              ft.,                                 
                               whichever
                               is
                               greater
                                                                     If monumen
                                                                     t sign
                                                                     erected,
                                                                     an
Shopping                                          Mon.: 10  Yes      additional
Center, Out Monume nt Mon.: 1  Mon.: 80  Mon.: 12 ft. off            monumen t
Parcel                         sq. ft.            paved              sign, 24
                                                  surface            sq. ft.
                                                                     max. may
                                                                     be erected
                                                                     at rear of
                                                                     lot
                                                  Pole: 20
            Pole      Pole: 1  Pole: 36  Pole: 20 ft. off             
                               sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
            Roof              Roof: 15%                           
Use Category
   Assembly Uses: Business college; churches; private club; schools
   Commercial Uses: All other listed uses
   Residential Uses: Community residence
Special Provisions
1.   Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and
pole sign size by a factor of 2
2.   If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants) the
development name must be placed on the sign; it may be a maximum of 25% of the
overall sign face; this shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant
signs
3.   Drive-through menu and presale boards not counted as part of allowed
signage when not located in primary front yard
4.   If more than one pole or monument sign allowed, the size may be increased
by 50% if only one sign is erected
 
   (H)   Parking, C-2 Zone. Additional information and standards for parking as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
C-2 Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
C-2 Parking Standards
Land Use                  Parking Required           Notes
                          1 space/employee + 1       Provide on-site area for
Adult day care            space/500 sq. ft.          safe drop off and pick up,
                                                     wholly on site
Art gallery/studio,       1 space/600 sq. ft.         
artisan workshop
Assisted living           .5 spaces/D.U.             Additionally, 1 space for
                                                     each employee
Barber/beauty shop        2 spaces/chair              
Bed and breakfast         1 space/room                
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
Business college and      office + 1 space/ 3 seats  on site an additional 1
technical school          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
Cemetery                  1 space/employee           1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                     by the facility
                          1 space/employee + 1       Provide on-site area for
Childcare                 space/400 sq. ft.          safe drop off and pick up,
                                                     wholly on site
                                                     Based on seating in main
Church                    1 space/3 seats            sanctuary, min. of 5
                                                     spaces
Clinic, medical/dental    1 space/400 sq. ft.         
Community residence       1 space/3 occupants         
Convenience shopping      1 space/400 sq. ft.        Based on leasable space
center                                               (not public spaces)
Convenience store         1 space/250 sq. ft.         
Data processing centers   1 space/200 sq. ft.         
Events center             1 space/200 sq. ft. 15      
Financial institutions    1 space/200 sq. ft.         
Halfway house             1 space/occupant            
Laboratory                1 space/400 sq. ft.         
Laundry, self service     1 space/2 machines          
Library                   1 space/600 sq. ft.         
Museum                    1 space/600 sq. ft.         
Neighborhood shopping     1 space/400 sq. ft.        Based on leasable space
center                                               (not public spaces)
                                                     Based on maximum employees
Nursing home              1 space/3 beds + 1 space/  on a shift, including
                          employee                   medical staff; minimum of
                                                     5 spaces
Office, general           1 space/250 sq. ft.        Financial; legal; medical;
                                                     professional; veterinarian
Office projects           1 space/400 sq. ft.        When more than one office
                                                     building on a lot
Pet grooming and boarding 1 space/500 sq. ft.         
Pharmacy                  1 space/400 sq. ft.         
Private club              1 space/200 sq. ft.         
Residential, single-unit  2 spaces/D.U.              1 additional space for an
                                                     accessory dwelling unit
Residential, duplex       2 spaces/D.U.              1 additional space for an
                                                     accessory dwelling unit
Residential, multi-unit,  2 spaces/D.U.               
10 or fewer units
Residential, multi-unit,  2 spaces/D.U.               
more than 10 units
Restaurant                150 sq. ft. g.f.a.         Includes outdoor dining
                                                     areas
Retail package liquor     1 space/400 sq. ft.         
sales
Retail, specialty         1 space/600 sq. ft.         
                                                     If gymnasium or auditorium
School, K - 8             1 space/classroom and      on site an additional 1
                          office + 10 visitor spaces space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, 9 - 12            office + 1 space/ 5 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, post-secondary    office + 1 space/ 2 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
Theater, indoor           1 space/4 seats             
Travel agency             1 space/400 sq. ft.         
 
   (I)   Landscaping, C-2 Zone. Additional information and standards for
vehicular use area (VUA) landscaping as well as specific requirements are found
in §§
154.150 through
154.164.
 
C-2 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area
Landscape Buffer Area Width Options (In Feet) Planting Density Multiplier
Category
                      10 ft.                  1.5
Category B            15 ft.                  1.33
                      20 ft.                  1
 
C-2 Buffering Requirements
Landscape Buffer Area Category Buffering Use Classification
                               Buffered Use                 Buffering Use
Category B                     R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 C-1, C-2, WCD
 
Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof
Planting Density Requirement Categories
A                   B                   C                   D
2 large trees or 1  2 large trees or 1  3 large trees or 2  3 large trees or 2
medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small
trees + 3 ft.       trees + 4 ft.       trees + 5 ft.       trees + 6 ft.
screening/80 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of
linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary
(OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.8; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. passed 9-6-2011; Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-
2011; Ord. 26-2011, passed 11-21-2011; Ord. 27-2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 28-
2014, passed 12-15-2014; Ord. 05-2015, passed 5-4-2015; Ord. 24-2016, passed
12-19-2016; Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 15-2017, passed 9-18-2017; Ord.
03-2022, passed 2-7-2022; Ord. 17-2023, passed 8-21-2023; Ord. 17-2025, passed
8-4-2025)
§ 154.063 C-3 REGIONAL COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Generally. This district is composed of areas to be used for
businesses which require a high volume of passing vehicular traffic to provide
the support necessary for successful operations. These are commonly retail and
other uses which are necessary for the economic viability of the community and
the region. Applied to areas with high traffic capacities and high visibility,
as well as areas where infrastructure necessary to support this type and scale
of use is in place.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this
zoning district and the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Business colleges or technical school;
         (b)   Churches and associated facilities;
         (c)   Community center;
         (d)   Convention center;
         (e)   Events center;
         (f)   Private club; and
         (g)   Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Adult daycare;
         (b)   Agricultural market;
         (c)   Art gallery, artist or artisan studio;
         (d)   Assisted living facilities;
         (e)   Automobile, motorcycle, truck sales, rental, service and repair
or sale of parts and supplies for such;
         (f)   Automobile service stations. No more than 15 inoperable vehicles
shall be stored on site for a period not to exceed 90 days. Vehicles shall be
stored within a fenced and screened area;
         (g)   Beauty shops, barber shops, shoe repair shops;
         (h)   Blueprinting, printing, publishing and lithographing;
         (i)   Building supply sales;
         (j)   Campground;
         (k)   Car wash;
         (l)   Carnivals and circuses on a temporary basis. Location to be
approved by Department and all other permits must be obtained;
         (m)   Cemetery;
         (n)   Childcare centers;
         (o)   Clinic;
         (p)   Convenience stores. The sale of petroleum products may be
included as part of this use;
         (q)   Data processing centers;
         (r)   Financial institutions;
         (s)   Flea market;
         (t)   Funeral homes;
         (u)   Garden centers;
         (v)   Golf course, driving range;
         (w)   Grocery;
         (x)   Health club;
         (y)   Homeless shelter;
         (z)   Hotel or motel;
         (aa)   Indoor recreation such as billiard or pool halls, skating
rinks, bowling alleys and dance halls;
         (bb)   Indoor theaters;
         (cc)   Kennel;
         (dd)   Laundry, self-service or laundry pick-up stations;
         (ee)   Library;
         (ff)   Marine sales, parts and service;
         (gg)    Medical cannabis dispensary;
         (hh)   Miniature golf or putting courses, outdoor;
         (ii)   Museum;
         (jj)   Nursing and rest homes;
         (kk)   Off-premises sign. Must meet spacing requirements found in §§
154.205 through
154.217;
         (ll)   Offices;
         (mm)   Parking lots and structures;
         (nn)   Pharmacy;
         (oo)   Recycling collection point;
         (pp)   Research and testing laboratories;
         (qq)   Residential storage facilities;
         (rr)   Restaurants;
         (ss)   Retail malt beverage establishment;
         (tt)   Retail package liquor sales;
         (uu)   Retail sale of merchandise;
         (vv)   Safety compliance facility, medical cannabis;
         (ww)   Shopping center, community, convenience, neighborhood and
regional;
         (xx)   Shopping center, enclosed regional mall;
         (yy)   Sign making;
         (zz)   Specialty retail shops;
         (aaa)   Tattoo shop;
         (bbb)   Telephone exchanges, radio and television studios, cable
television systems, signal distribution centers and studios;
         (ccc)   Towers for distribution of radio and similar signals;
         (ddd)   Towing services. No more than 15 inoperable vehicles shall be
stored on site for a period not to exceed 90 days. Vehicles shall be stored
within a fenced and screened area;
         (eee)   Travel agencies; and
         (fff)   Veterinary hospitals or clinics, provided that such structure
or use, excluding parking areas, shall be at least 100 feet from any
residential zone.
      (3)   Institutional uses: Hospitals.
      (4)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Community residence;
         (b)   Dwelling, single-unit attached;
         (c)   Dwelling, single-unit detached;
         (d)   Dwelling, duplex;
         (e)   Dwelling, multi-unit (maximum 20 du/acre);
         (f)   Halfway house;
         (g)   Recovery residence.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly
incidental and subordinate to permitted uses.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Dwelling unit for owners, operators or employees of a permitted
use provided that if such dwelling unit shall be a part of the building it
shall have a separate entrance;
         (b)   Outdoor wholesale, warehouse and storage facilities;
         (c)   Recycling collection point; and
         (d)    Temporary uses.
      (3)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Dwelling unit, accessory (ADU) associated with a single-unit or
duplex dwelling. See §
154.076(A) for standards specific to ADUs.
   (D)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the
intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the guidelines in
the comprehensive plan.
      (2)   Any conditional use shall be located so that the conditional use
has a minimal effect on the adjoining streets and the surrounding uses.
         (a)   Assembly uses: Indoor and outdoor athletic facilities such as
field houses, gymnasiums, football stadiums, soccer fields or polo fields and
baseball fields.
         (b)   Commercial uses:
            1.   Amusement parks, fairgrounds or horse racing tracks, if all
structures are located no less than 200 feet from any residential zone, and
further provided that all structures for housing animals shall be 200 feet from
any residential zone, residential use, school, hospital, nursing or rest home;
            2.   Indoor rifle and gun ranges. Use must meet all federal and
state regulations;
            3.   Outdoor recreational facilities including go cart tracks,
archery ranges, skateboard and roller skating rinks, trampoline centers,
swimming pools, water slides and other water related recreational facilities
and other similar uses; and
            4.   Outdoor theaters, provided that all facilities other than
highway access drives are not less than 1,000 feet from a residential zone,
residence, school, church, hospital, nursing or rest home, and further provided
that a vehicle storage area equal to 30% of the capacity of the theater be
provided between the highway and the theater ticket gate.
      (3)   Residential uses. Reversion of a structure originally designed and
constructed as a single family or two-family dwelling but later converted to a
commercial use may be converted back to its original use subject to all
applicable zoning, building and related code requirements for the residential
use, removal of all sign structures, and any modifications deemed appropriate
by the Board.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   All permitted business uses shall confine storage to side and rear
yards only, which shall be enclosed on all sides by a wall or fence not less
than five feet in height.
      (2)   Businesses involved in sales or recycling of automobile and truck
tires and like items shall limit storage of tires to be recycled or disposed of
to an area no larger than 2,500 cubic feet and shall be enclosed on all sides
by a wall or solid fence no less than five feet in height.
      (3)   (a)   Recycling collection points may be located in buildings no
greater than 3,500 square feet in floor area.
         (b)   Trailers and containers and the adjacent areas shall be kept in
a clean and sanitary condition.
         (c)   Any violation of health, safety or welfare regulations may be
cause for immediate removal.
         (d)   Recycling centers must comply with all other requirements of the
chapter.
         (e)   They shall be located so as not to present any danger to
pedestrian and vehicular traffic, with the location to be approved by the Fire
Chief and the Director of the Department.
      (4)   When new construction or additions are made to an existing
structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks
the same as other similar commercial structures on parcels within 500 feet.
      (5)   No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot
fronting on a right-of-way of less than 30 feet in width shall be permitted.
      (6)   (a)   Any outdoor theater screen or illuminated scoreboard or other
similar surface shall not be visible from any street for a distance of 1,000
feet from such structure.
         (b)   For these such uses entrances and exits shall not be closer than
300 feet to the nearest intersection of two streets.
         (c)   Points of ingress or egress, acceleration length and
deceleration length shall be provided in conformance with requirements as
established by the appropriate agency.
      (7)    The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum
lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of
the lot.
      (8)   All permitted medical cannabis facilities must be a minimum of at
least 1,000 feet from any parcel of land containing a school and/or Type 1
childcare center facility and/or park.
      (9)   Any permitted medical cannabis dispensary must be a minimum of at
least one mile from all other permitted medical cannabis dispensaries.
      (10)   Any permitted medical cannabis dispensary shall have operating
hours limited between 8:00 a.m and 8:00 p.m.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
Minimum lot frontage                  100 ft.
   Exception: Corner lots, minimum 200 ft. each street frontage
frontage
Minimum front yard setback            40 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2
                                     30 ft. when abutting R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     20 ft. when abutting all other zones
Minimum side yard setback             30 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2, R-3 or R-4
                                     20 ft. when abutting property zoned R-
                                      5 or R-6
                                     10 ft. when abutting all other zones
Minimum rear yard setback             40 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     20 ft. when abutting all other zones
Maximum impervious surface ratio      .85
(I.S.R.)
Maximum building height               75 ft.
Note: For the purposes of this chapter abutting shall address each lot line to
determine applicable setbacks for each yard
 
   (G)   Permitted signs, C-3 Zone. Additional information and standards for
signs as well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
C-3 Signs
                  Maximum Maximum Sign Maximum Location Lighting Additional
Use Allowed Types Number  Area         Height  Require- Allowed  Require- ments
                                               ments
C-3 Signs
              Allowed Maximum  Maximum   Maximum  Location  Lighting Additional
Use           Types   Number   Sign Area Height   Require-  Allowed  Require-
                                                  ments              ments
                                                                     Wall sign:
                                                  10 ft.             15% or 32
              Wall            Wall: 15%         off paved          sq. ft.,
                                                  surface            whichever
                                                                     is greater
Assembly Use  Monume  Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16          Yes       
             nt      street   sq. ft.   ft.
                                                  Pole: 20
              Pole    Pole: 1/ Pole: 150 Pole: 25 ft. off             
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
              Roof            Roof: 15%                           
                                                                     Wall sign
                                                                     15%
              Wall            Wall: 15%                           or 32 sq.
                                                                  ft.,
                                                                     whichever
                                                                     is greater
Commercial                                        Mon.: 10  Yes
Use           Monume  Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16 ft. off             
              nt      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
                                                  Pole: 20
              Pole    Pole: 1/ Pole: 150 Pole: 45 ft. off             
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
              Roof            Roof: 15%                           
                                                                     Wall sign
                                                                     15%
              Wall            Wall: 15%                           or 32 sq.
                                                                    ft.,
                                                                     whichever
                                                                     is greater
Institutional                                     Mon.: 10
Use           Monume  Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16 ft. off   Yes       
              nt      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
                                                  Pole: 20
              Pole    Pole: 1/ Pole: 150 Pole: 45 ft. off             
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
              Roof            Roof: 15%                            
              Wall    Wall: 1  Wall: 5%                             One wall
                                                  10 ft.             only
Residential   Monume  Mon.: 1  Mon.: 4   Mon.: 4  off paved External  
Use           nt               sq. ft.   ft.      surface
              Pole    Pole: 1  Pole: 4   Pole: 4                      
                               sq. ft.   ft.
                               Wall: 15%                             Wall I.D.
              Wall                                                sign: 15%
                                                                     of wall
              Monume  Mon.: 3  Mon.: 200 Mon.: 16
Shopping      nt               sq. ft.   ft.      20 ft.             Monument
Center,                                           off paved Yes      or pole
Community                                         surface            sign must
              Pole    Pole: 3  Pole: 200 Pole: 35                    contain
                               sq. ft.   ft.                         name or
                                                                     logo

              Roof            Roof: 15%                             
                               Wall 15%
                               or 32 sq.                             Wall I.D.
              Wall            ft.,                                sign: 15%
                               whichever                             of wall
                               is
                               greater
                                                  Mon.: 10
Shopping      Monume  Mon.: 1  Mon.: 100 Mon.: 16 ft. off
Center,       nt               sq. ft.   ft.      paved     Yes      Monumen t
Convenien ce                                      surface            or pole
                                                                     sign must
                                                  Pole: 20           contain
              Pole    Pole: 1  Pole: 200 Pole: 25 ft. off            name or
                               sq. ft.   ft.      paved              logo
                                                  surface

              Roof            Roof: 15%                            
                               Wall 15%
                               or 32 sq.          20 ft.
              Wall            ft.,              off paved Yes       
                               whichever          surface
                               is
                               greater
                                                                     If
                                                                     monument
                                                                     sign
Shopping                                                             erected,
Center,                                                              an
Neighbor-     Monume           Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16                    additional
hood          nt      Mon.: 2  sq. ft.   ft.                       monument
                                                                     sign, 24
                                                                     sq. ft.
                                                                     max. may
                                                                     be erected
                                                                     at rear of
                                                                     lot
              Pole    Pole: 2  Pole: 150 Pole: 35                    
                               sq. ft.   ft.
              Roof            Roof: 15%                            
                               Wall 15%
                               or 32 sq.
              Wall            ft.,                                 
                               whichever
                               is
                               greater
                                                                     If
                                                                     monument
                                                                     sign
                                                                     erected,
Shopping                                          Mon.: 10           an
Center, Out   Monume           Mon.: 80  Mon.: 12 ft. off   Yes      additional
Parcel        nt      Mon.: 1  sq. ft.   ft.      paved              monument
                                                  surface            sign, 24
                                                                     sq. ft.
                                                                     max. may
                                                                     be erected
                                                                     at rear of
                                                                     lot
                                                  Pole: 20
              Pole    Pole: 1  Pole: 50  Pole: 20 ft. off             
                               sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
              Roof            Roof: 15%                           
                               Wall 15%
                               or 32 sq.                             Wall I.D.
              Wall            ft.,                                 sign 15%
                               whichever                             of wall
                               is
                               greater
              Monume  Mon.: 4  Mon.: 250 Mon.: 25
              nt               sq. ft.   ft.                         If
                                                                     monument
                                                                     sign
                                                                     erected,
                                                                     an
Shopping                                          20 ft.             additional
Center,                                           off paved Yes      monument
Regional                                          surface            sign, 24
                                                                     sq. ft.
                               Pole: 250 Pole: 45                    max. may
              Pole    Pole: 4  sq. ft.   ft.                         be erected
                                                                     at rear of
                                                                     lot;
                                                                     monument
                                                                     or pole
                                                                     sign must
                                                                     contain
                                                                     name or
                                                                     logo

              Roof            Roof: 15%                             
Use Groups
   Assembly Uses: Business college/technical school; churches; community
center; convention center; schools
   Commercial Uses: All uses not listed as assembly or institutional
   Residential Uses: Hospital
Special Provisions
1.   Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and
pole sign size by a factor of 2
2.   If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants) the
development name must be placed on the sign; it may be a maximum of 25% of the
overall sign face; this shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant
signs
3.   Drive-through menu and presale boards not counted as part of allowed
signage when not located in primary front yard
4.   If more than one pole or monument sign allowed, the size may be increased
by 50% if only one sign is erected
5.   Hospitals may install one additional freestanding sign for each 500 ft. of
street frontage
6.   For the following commercial uses a multiplier is in effect:
      1) Automobile sales;
      2) Automobile service station;
      3) Contractor, farm equipment sales;
      4) Marine sales; and
      5) Motorcycle sales
Multiplier:   101 ft.—500 ft. street frontage: Maximum number – pole/monument
sign x 2
         501 ft.—1,000 ft. street frontage: Maximum number – pole/monument sign
x 3
         1001 ft. - > street frontage: Maximum number – pole/monument sign x 4
 
   (H)   Parking, C-3 Zone. Additional information and standards for parking as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
C-3 Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
C-3 Parking Standards
Land Use                   Parking Required          Notes
                           1 space/employee + 1      Provide on-site area for
Adult day care             space/500 sq. ft.         safe drop off and pick up,
                                                     wholly on site
Agricultural market        1 space/600 sq. ft.        
Art gallery/studio,        1 space/600 sq. ft.        
artisan workshop
Assisted living            .5 spaces/D.U.            Additionally, 1 space for
                                                     each employee
Automobile rental          1 space/600 sq. ft.       Lot for rental vehicles
                                                     not required to be striped
                                                     Parking for product in
Automobile sales           1 space/600 sq. ft.       display area not required
                                                     to be striped
                                                     Minimum of 5 spaces;
Automobile service station 1space/600 sq. ft.        storage area must be
                                                     fenced and screened
Automotive parts           1 space/600 sq. ft.        
Barber/beauty salon        2 spaces/chair             
Blueprinting, publishing   1 space/800 sq. ft.       Additionally, 1 space for
                                                     each delivery vehicle
                           1 space/classroom and     If gymnasium or auditorium
Business college and       office + 1 space/3 seats  on site an additional 1
technical school           in each classroom         space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
Car wash, full service     1 space/employee          Stacking area to equal 5
                                                     times capacity of car wash
Car wash, self service     N/A                       2 stacking spaces/bay
Carnival, temporary                                 Adequate parking on site
                                                     must be designated
Cemetery                   1 space/employee          1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                     by the facility
                           1 space/employee + 1      Provide on-site area for
Childcare                  space/400 sq. ft.         safe drop off and pick up,
                                                     wholly on site
                                                     Based on seating in main
Church                     1 space/3 seats           sanctuary, min. of 5
                                                     spaces
Clinic, medical/dental     1 space/400 sq. ft.        
Community center           1 space/600 sq. ft.       1 bus parking space/25
                                                     required spaces.
Convenience store          1 space/250 sq. ft.        
Convention center          1 space/75 sq. ft.        1 large vehicle15 parking
                                                     space/25 required spaces.
Data processing centers    1 space/200 sq. ft.        
Events center              1 space/200 sq. ft.        
Financial institutions     1 space/200 sq. ft.        
Flea market                2 spaces/vendor stall      
Funeral home               1 space/3 seats           1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                     by the use
Garden center              1 space/600 sq. ft.        
                                                     Additional parking
Golf course                3 spaces/hole             required if other uses
                                                     present
Golf driving range         1 space/tee               1 space for each employee
                                                     (minimum of 5 spaces)
Grocery, specialty         1 space/250 sq. ft.       Building size >5,000 sq.
                                                     ft.
Grocery, supermarket       1 space/200 sq. ft.       Building size <5,000 sq.
                                                     ft.
Halfway house              1 space/occupant           
Health club                1 space/200 sq. ft.        
Homeless shelter           1 space/600 sq. ft.        
                                                     Based on maximum employees
Hospital                   1 space/3 beds + 1 space/ on a shift, including
                           employee                  medical staff. Minimum of
                                                     5 spaces
Hotel/motel                1/room                    Minimum of 5 spaces
Indoor amusement or                                  Includes billiards,
athletic, w/o fixed seats  1 space/100 sq. ft.       dancing establishments,
                                                     and similar uses
Indoor amusement or        1 space/4 seats + 1/three Tennis courts; indoor
athletic, with fixed seats employees                 soccer and the like
Laboratory                 1 space/400 sq. ft.        
Laundry, self service      1 space/2 machines         
Library                    1 space/600 sq. ft.        
Medical cannabis           1 space/400 sq. ft.        
dispensary
Medical cannabis safety    1 space/employee + 5       
compliance facility        visitor spaces
Museum                     1 space/600 sq. ft.        
                                                     Based on maximum employees
Nursing home               1 space/3 beds + 1 space/ on a shift, including
                           employee                  medical staff; minimum of
                                                     5 spaces
                                                     Financial; legal; medical;
Office, general            1 space/250 sq. ft.       professional; veterinarian
                                                     and the like
Office projects            1 space/400 sq. ft.       When more than one office
                                                     building on a lot
Pharmacy                   1 space/400 sq. ft.        
Private club               1 space/200 sq. ft.        
Residential, single-unit   2 spaces/D.U.             1 additional space for an
                                                     accessory dwelling unit
Residential, duplex        2 spaces/D.U.             1 additional space for an
                                                     accessory dwelling unit
Residential, multi-unit,   2 spaces/D.U.              
10 or fewer units
Residential, multi-unit,   1.5 spaces/D.U.            
more than 10 units
Residential storage        1 space/employee + 5      Area in and around units
facility                   spaces                    may not be counted as
                                                     parking spaces
Restaurant                 150 sq. ft. g.f.a.        Includes outdoor dining
                                                     areas
                                                     Books; camera; clothing;
Retail                     1 space/400 sq. ft.       computer; electronics;
                                                     musical instruments;
                                                     sporting goods
Retail, department store   1 space/300 sq. ft.       Includes superstore or
                                                     warehouse store
Retail malt beverage       1 space/60 sq. ft.         
establishment
Retail package liquor      1 space/400 sq. ft.        
sales
Retail, specialty          1 space/600 sq. ft.        
                           1 space/classroom and     If gymnasium or auditorium
School, 9 - 12             office + 1 space/ 5 seats on site an additional 1
                           in each classroom         space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                           1 space/classroom and     If gymnasium or auditorium
School, post-secondary     office + 1 space/ 2 seats on site an additional 1
                           in each classroom         space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
Shopping center (all)      1 space/400 sq. ft.       Based on leasable space
                                                     (not public spaces)
Tattoo shop                2 spaces/chair             
Theater, indoor            1 space/4 seats            
Theater, outdoor           1 space/speaker            
Travel agency              1 space/400 sq. ft.        
 
   (I)   Landscaping, C-3 Zone. Additional information and standards for
vehicular use area (VUA) landscaping as well as specific requirements are found
in §§
154.150 through
154.164.
 
C-3 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area
Landscape Buffer Area Width Options (In Feet) Planting Density Multiplier
Category
Category C            20 ft.                  1.5
                     25 ft.                  1.33
                     30 ft.                  1
 
C-3 Buffering Requirements
Landscape Buffer Area Category Buffering Use Classification
                               Buffered Use                 Buffering Use
Category C                     R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 C-3, C-4, C-5
 
Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) or Fraction Thereof
Planting Density Requirement Categories
A                   B                   C                   D
2 large trees or 1  2 large trees or 1  3 large trees or 2  3 large trees or 2
medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small
trees + 3 ft.       trees + 4 ft.       trees + 5 ft.       trees + 6 ft.
screening/80 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of
linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary
(OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.9; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
12-2009, passed 9-8-2009; Ord. 05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. passed 9-6-2011;
Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-2011; Ord. 26-2011, passed 11-21-2011; Ord. 27-2012,
passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 28-2014, passed 12-15-
2014; Ord. 05-2015, passed 5-4-2015; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 05-
2017, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 11-2017, passed 9-5-2017; Ord. 09-2020, passed 8-3-
2020; Ord. 03-2022, passed 2-7-2022; Ord. 17-2023, passed 8-21-2023; Ord. 24-
2024, passed 11-18-2024; Ord. 17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.064 C-4 GENERAL SERVICE COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Generally. This district is composed of businesses that generate
traffic and other perceived nuisances such as outdoor storage, dust, noise and
odors. This zone primarily applied to areas with adequate infrastructure but
less visibility and areas between higher intensity industrial and lower
intensity commercial uses.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be deemed permitted, in light of the above described purposes of
this zoning district and the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Stadium;
         (b)   Churches and associated facilities; and
         (c)   Private club.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Agricultural laboratories and testing facilities;
         (b)   Agricultural market;
         (c)   Agricultural supply sales;
         (d)   Artisan’s workshop;
         (e)   Automobile, motorcycle, truck, sales, rental, service and repair
or sale of parts and supplies for such;
         (f)   Automobile service stations. No more than 15 inoperable vehicles
shall be stored on site for a period not to exceed 90 days. Vehicles shall be
stored within a fenced and screened area;
         (g)   Blueprinting, printing, publishing and lithographing;
         (h)   Building supply sales;
         (i)   Campground;
         (j)   Car wash;
         (k)   Cemetery;
         (l)   Childcare;
         (m)   Commercial warehousing;
         (n)   Construction equipment sales, rental, service and repair or sale
of parts and supplies for such;
         (o)   Contractor’s office;
         (p)   Crematorium;
         (q)   Convention center;
         (r)   Events center;
         (s)   Farm equipment and agricultural supply sales;
         (t)   Flea market;
         (u)   Garden center;
         (v)   Health club;
         (w)   Homeless shelter;
         (x)   Hotel;
         (y)   Kennels;
         (z)   Marine sales, service and repair, including parts and supplies;
         (aa)    Medical cannabis safety compliance facility;
         (bb)   Off-premises sign. Must meet spacing requirements found in §§
154.205 through
154.217;
         (cc)   Offices;
         (dd)   Parking lot/structure;
         (ee)   Passenger transportation terminals;
         (ff)   Recycling collection point;
         (gg)   Residential storage facility;
         (hh)   Restaurant;
         (ii)   Retail package liquor sales;
         (jj)   Sign making;
         (kk)   Tattoo shop;
         (ll)   Telephone exchanges, radio and television studios, cable
television systems, signal distribution centers and studios;
         (mm)   Towers for distribution of radio and similar signals;
         (nn)   Towing services. No more than 15 inoperable vehicles shall be
stored on site for a period not to exceed 90 days. Vehicles shall be stored
within a fenced and screened area;
         (oo)   Truck stop/plaza;
         (pp)   Warehousing, with office space;
         (qq)   Wholesale establishments; and
         (rr)   Veterinary hospitals or clinics.
      (3)   Institutional uses: Correctional facilities.
      (4)   Residential uses: Halfway house.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly
incidental and subordinate to permitted uses.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Dwelling unit for owners, operators or employees of a permitted
use provided that such dwelling unit shall be a part of the building and shall
have a separate entrance;
         (b)   Parking area;
         (c)   Storage yard for contractor equipment and supplies; and
         (d)   Temporary uses.
   (D)   Conditional uses. Uses permitted only with Board approval after
consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration
of the guidelines in the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Agricultural events centers, including museums and indoor theaters;
      (2)   Livestock events centers, including indoor/outdoor arenas for sales
and demonstrations; and
      (3)   Agricultural product storage and handling facilities.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   All permitted business uses shall confine storage to side and rear
yards only. When adjacent to any residential zoning district the storage area
shall be enclosed on all sides by a wall or fence not less than five feet in
height.
      (2)   Businesses involved in sales or recycling of automobile and truck
tires and like items shall limit storage of tires to be recycled or disposed of
to an area no larger than 2,500 cubic feet and shall be enclosed on all sides
by a wall or solid fence no less than five feet in height, but shall in any
case be one foot higher than items stored.
      (3)   Recycling collection points may be located in buildings no greater
than 3,500 square feet in floor area. Trailers and containers and the adjacent
areas shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Any violation of health,
safety or welfare regulations may be cause for immediate removal. Recycling
centers must comply with all other requirements of the chapter. They shall be
located so as not to present any danger to pedestrian and vehicular traffic,
with the location to be approved by the Fire Chief and the Director of the
Department.
      (4)   When new construction or additions are made to an existing
structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks
the same as other similar commercial structures on parcels within 500 feet.
      (5)   No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot
fronting on a right-of-way of less than 30 feet in width shall be permitted.
      (6)    The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum
lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of
the lot.
      (7)   All permitted medical cannabis facilities must be a minimum of at
least 1,000 feet from any parcel of land containing a school and/or Type 1
childcare center facility and/or park.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
Minimum lot frontage                  100 ft.
   Exception: Corner lots, minimum 200 ft. each street frontage
frontage
Minimum front yard setback            40 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2 or R-3
                                     30 ft. when abutting R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     20 ft. when abutting all other zones
Minimum side yard setback             30 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2 or R-3
                                     20 ft. when abutting property zoned R-4,
                                      R-5 or R-6
                                     10 ft. when abutting all other zones
Minimum rear yard setback             40 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     20 ft. when abutting all other zones
Maximum impervious surface ratio      .85
(I.S.R.)
Maximum building height               75 ft.
Note: For the purposes of this chapter abutting shall address each lot line to
determine applicable setbacks for each yard
 
   (G)   Signs, C-4 Zone. Additional information and standards for signs as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
C-4 Signs
                  Maximum Maximum Sign Maximum Location Lighting Additional
Use Allowed Types Number  Area         Height  Require- Allowed  Require- ments
                                               ments
C-4 Signs
              Allowed Maximum  Maximum   Maximum  Location Lighting Additional
Use           Types   Number   Sign Area Height   Require- Allowed  Require-
                                                  ments             ments
                                                                    Wall sign
                                                                    15% or 32
              Wall            Wall: 15%                          sq. ft.,
                                                                    whichever
                                                                    is greater
                                                  Mon.: 10
Assembly Use  Monume  Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16 ft. off  Yes       
              nt      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
                                                  Pole: 20
              Pole    Pole: 1/ Pole: 150 Pole: 45 ft. off            
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
              Roof            Roof: 15%                           
                                                                    Wall sign
                                                                    15% or 32
              Wall            Wall: 15%                          sq. ft.,
                                                                    whichever
                                                                    is greater
                                                  Mon.: 10
Commercial    Monume  Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16 ft. off  Yes       
Use           nt      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
                                                  Pole: 20
              Pole    Pole: 1/ Pole: 150 Pole: 45 ft. off            
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
              Roof            Roof: 15%                           
                                                                    Wall sign
                                                                    15% or 32
              Wall            Wall: 15%                          sq. ft.,
                                                                    whichever
                                                                    is greater
                                                  Mon.: 10
Institutional Monume  Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16 ft. off  Yes       
Use           nt      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
                                                  Pole: 20
              Pole    Pole: 1/ Pole: 150 Pole: 45 ft. off            
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
              Roof            Roof: 15%                           
Use Groups
   Assembly Uses: Stadium
   Commercial Uses: All uses not labeled as assembly or institutional
   Institutional Uses: Correctional facility
Special Provisions
1.   If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants)6 the
development name must be placed on the sign; it may be a maximum of 25% of the
sign face; this shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant signs
2.   If more than one pole or monument sign allowed, the size may be increased
by 50% if only one sign is erected
3.   For the following commercial uses a multiplier is in effect:
      1) Automobile sales;
      2) Automobile service station;
      3) Contractor, farm equipment sales;
      4) Marine sales;
      5) Motorcycle sales; and
      6) Stadium
Multiplier:   101 ft.—500 ft. street frontage: Maximum number – pole/monument
sign x 2
         501 ft.—1,000 ft. street frontage: Maximum number – pole/monument
sign x 3
         1001 ft. - > street frontage: Maximum number – pole/monument sign x 4
 
   (H)   Parking, C-4 Zone. Additional information and standards for parking as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
Parking Standards
Land Use                  Parking Required           Notes
Agricultural events       1 space/75 sq. ft.          
center
Agricultural laboratory   1 space/800 sq. ft.         
and testing facility
Agricultural market       1 space/600 sq. ft.         
Agricultural product      1 space/300 sq. ft.         
storage
Agricultural supply store 1 space/600 sq. ft.         
Art gallery/studio,       1 space/600 sq. ft.         
artisan workshop
                                                     Parking for product in
Automobile sales          1 space/600 sq. ft.        display area not required
                                                     to be striped
Automotive parts          1 space/600 sq. ft.         
Automobile service        1 space/400 sq. ft.         
station
Blueprinting, printing    1 space/600 sq. ft.         
publishing
Building supply           1 space/400 sq. ft.        1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                     by the use
Car wash, full service    1 space/employee           Stacking area to equal 5
                                                     times capacity of car wash
Car wash, self service    N/A                        2 stacking spaces/bay
Cemetery                  1 space/employee           1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                     by the facility
                          1 space/employee + 1       Provide on-site area for
Childcare                 space/400 sq. ft.          safe drop off and pick up,
                                                     wholly on site
                                                     Based on seating in main
Church                    1 space/3 seats            sanctuary, min. of 5
                                                     spaces
Commercial warehouse      1 space/employee           Minimum of 5 spaces
                                                     required
Construction equipment    1 space/600 sq. ft.         
Contractors office        1 space/600 sq. ft.         
Crematorium               1 space/employee           1 space/vehicle owned by
                                                     use.
Convention center         1 space/75 sq. ft.         1 large vehicle parking
                                                     space/25 required spaces
Events center             1 space/200 sq. ft.         
Flea market               2 spaces/vendor stall       
Garden center             1 space/600 sq. ft.         
Halfway house             1 space/occupant            
Health club               1 space/200 sq. ft.         
Homeless shelter          1 space/600 sq. ft.         
Hotel                     1 space/room                
Indoor theater            1 space/4 seats             
Kennel                    1 space/300 sq. ft.         
Livestock events center   1 space/4 seats             
                                                     Parking for product in
Marine sales              1 space/600 sq. ft.        display area not required
                                                     to be striped
Medical cannabis safety   1 space/employee + 5        
compliance facility       visitor spaces
                                                     Financial; legal; medical;
Office, general           1 space/250 sq. ft.        professional; veterinarian
                                                     and the like
Office w/warehousing      1 space/500 sq. ft.        1 space/4,000 of warehouse
                                                     space
Passenger terminal        1 space/200 sq. ft. lobby   
                          area + 1 space/emp.
Private club              1 space/200 sq. ft.         
                                                     Drop off area for
Recycling, neighborhood   1 space/600 sq. ft.        recyclables should not
                                                     conflict with parking
                                                     areas
Residential storage       1 space/employee + 5       Area in and around units
facility                  spaces                     may not be counted as
                                                     parking spaces
Restaurant                150 sq. ft. g.f.a.         Includes outdoor dining
                                                     areas
Retail, department store  1 space/300 sq. ft.        Includes superstore or
                                                     warehouse store
Retail package liquor     1 space/400 sq. ft.         
sales
Retail, specialty         1 space/600 sq. ft.        Florist; flea market; mail
                                                     order; tobacco
Sign making               1 space/600 sq. ft.        1 space/employee
Stadium                   1 space/3 seats + 1 space/  
                          employee
Tattoo shop               2 spaces/chair              
Television, radio,        1 space/2 employees        1 space/each vehicle owned
studios and the like                                 by the use
Towing service            1 space/employee           1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                     by the facility
Truck stop/plaza          1 space/200 sq. ft.        1 space/600 sq. ft. for
                                                     large truck parking
Wholesale business        1 space/600 sq. ft.         
Veterinary hospital/      1 space/200 sq. ft. lobby   
clinic                    area + 1 space/emp.
 
   (I)   Landscaping, C-4 Zone. Additional information and standards for
vehicular use area (VUA) Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found
in §§
154.150 through
154.164.
 
C-4 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area
Landscape Buffer Area Width Options (In Feet) Planting Density Multiplier
Category
                      20 ft.                  1.5
Category C            25 ft.                  1.33
                      30 ft.                  1
 
C-4 Buffering Requirements
Landscape Buffer Area Category Buffering Use Classification
                               Buffered Use                 Buffering Use
Category C                     R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 C-3, C-4, C-5
 
Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof
Planting Density Requirement Categories
A                   B                   C                   D
2 large trees or 1  2 large trees or 1  3 large trees or 2  3 large trees or 2
medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small
trees + 3 ft.       trees + 4 ft.       trees + 5 ft.       trees + 6 ft.
screening/80 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of
linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary
(OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.10; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
12-2009, passed 9-8-2009; Ord. 05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. passed 9-6-2011;
Ord. 26-2011, passed 11-21-2011; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 28-2014,
passed 12-15-2014; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-5-
2017; Ord. 11-2017, passed 9-5-2017; Ord. 09-2020, passed 8-3-2020; Ord. 17-
2023, passed 8-21-2023; Ord. 24-2024, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 154.065 C-5 DOWNTOWN MIXED USE.
   (A)   Generally. This district is comprised of residential and commercial
uses conducive to a compact coordinated development pattern historically
associated with downtown central business districts.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this
zoning district and the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Business colleges or technical school;
         (b)   Churches and associated facilities;
         (c)   Community center;
         (d)   Events center;
         (e)   Private club; and
         (f)   Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Adult daycare;
         (b)   Agricultural market;
         (c)   Art galleries;
         (d)   Assisted living facilities;
         (e)   Banks and similar financial institutions/offices;
         (f)   Beauty shops, barber shops, shoe repair shops;
         (g)   Bed and breakfast establishments;
         (h)   Billiard or pool halls;
         (i)   Blueprinting, printing, publishing and lithographing;
         (j)   Cable TV, radio, satellite signal distribution centers and
similar uses;
         (k)   Childcare;
         (l)   Data processing centers;
         (m)   Distillery (1,000 gallon/week maximum output);
         (n)   Fine arts studio;
         (o)   Funeral homes;
         (p)   Grocery;
         (q)   Health club;
         (r)   Indoor theaters;
         (s)   Laundry;
         (t)   Library;
         (u)   Microbrewery;
         (v)   Motel or hotel;
         (w)   Museum;
         (x)   Offices;
         (y)   Parking lots and structures;
         (z)   Restaurants, no drive-in or drive-through service facilities are
allowed;
         (aa)   Retail drink liquor establishment;
         (bb)   Retail malt beverage establishment;
         (cc)   Retail package liquor sales;
         (dd)   Retail sales;
         (ee)   Self-service laundry or laundry pick-up stations;
         (ff)   Sidewalk food vendors. Location is to be approved jointly by
the Department and the Police Department before issuance of permits;
         (gg)   Skating rinks;
         (hh)   Telephone exchanges, radio and television studios, cable
television systems, signal distribution centers and studios;
         (ii)   Towers for distribution of radio and similar signals;
         (jj)   Travel agencies; and
         (kk)   Winery.
      (3)   Institutional uses: Nursing and rest homes.
      (4)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Dwelling units, provided the units are not mixed with non-
residential uses on the same floor unless separate entrances are provided for
the residential and non-residential uses;
         (b)   Short-term rental, non-owner occupied.
   (C)   Accessory uses. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory,
clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses.
      (1)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Sidewalk café when accessory to any permitted restaurant;
         (b)   Storage, wholesaling and warehousing; and
         (c)   Storage yards for delivery vehicles of a permitted use.
      (2)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Home occupation;
         (b)   Short-term rental, owner occupied.
   (D)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the
intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the development
guidelines as detailed in the comprehensive plan.
      (2)   Assembly uses: Stadium and exhibition halls.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   All permitted business uses shall confine storage to principal or
accessory structures.
      (2)   There shall be no maximum density restriction in the C-5 Zone.
      (3)   For short-term rental, owner or non-owner occupied, the dwelling
unit is limited to one short-term rental contract at a time and the number of
occupants in the dwelling unit during a short-term rental shall not exceed two
times the number of bedrooms plus four individuals notwithstanding restrictions
of the applicable building or property maintenance code.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
Minimum lot frontage                      25 ft.
Minimum lot area                          No minimum
Minimum front yard setback                0 ft.
Minimum side yard setback                 0 ft.
Minimum rear yard setback                 0 ft.
Maximum impervious surface ratio (I.S.R.) 1.00
Maximum building height                   75 ft.
Note: For the purposes of this chapter abutting shall address each lot line to
determine applicable setbacks for each yard
 
   (G)   Signs, C-5 Zone. Additional information and standards for signs as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
C-5 Signs
                  Maximum Maximum Sign Maximum Location Lighting Additional
Use Allowed Types Number  Area         Height  Require- Allowed  Require- ments
                                               ments
C-5 Signs
            Allowed   Maximum  Maximum   Maximum  Location  Lighting Additional
Use         Types     Number   Sign Area Height   Require-  Allowed  Require-
                                                  ments              ments
                                                                     Wall sign
                                                                     15%or 32
            Wall              Wall: 15%                            sq. ft.,
                                                                     whichever
Assembly                                          10 ft.             is greater
Use         Monume nt Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 100 Mon.: 16 off paved Yes       
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      surface
                      Pole: 1/ Pole: 100 Pole: 25
            Pole      street   sq. ft.   ft.                          
                      frontage
            Roof              Roof: 15%                             
                                                                     Wall sign
                                                                     15% or 32
            Wall              Wall: 15%                           sq. ft.,
                                                                     whichever
                                                                     is greater
                                                  Monumen
Commercial  Monume nt Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 100 Mon. 16  t: 10 ft. Yes       
Use                   street   sq. ft.   ft.      off paved
                                                  surface
                                                  Pole: 20
            Pole      Pole: 1/ Pole: 100 Pole 35  ft. off             
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
            Roof              Roof: 15%                            
            Wall,     Wall: 1  Wall: 5%;                           W.M., one
                                                                     wall only
                                                  Monumen
            Monume nt Mon.: 1  Mon.: 4   Mon.: 4  t: 10 ft.           
Residential                    sq. ft.   ft.      off paved External
Use                                               surface
                                                  Pole: 20
            Pole      Pole: 1  Pole: 4   Pole: 4  ft. off             
                               sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
Use Groups
   Assembly Uses: Business college/technical school; churches; community
center; convention center; schools
   Commercial Uses: All uses not listed as assembly or institutional
   Institutional Uses: Hospital
   Residential Uses: Dwelling units; community residence
Special Provisions
1.   If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants) the
development name must be placed on the sign; it may be a maximum of 25% of the
sign face; this shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant signs
2.   If more than one pole or monument sign allowed, the size may be increased
by 50% if only one sign is erected
3.   Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable
copy when located in the National Register Historical District Overlay Zone
4.   Incidental signs, when located so as not to inhibit pedestrian or
vehicular traffic movements
 
   (H)   Parking requirements, C-5 Zone.
      (1)   Additional information and standards for parking as well as
specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
      (2)   Uses located within the C-5 Zone are not required to provide on-
site parking. Should on-site parking be provided, must meet the specific
location and other standards as found in this zoning chapter to the extent
possible.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.11; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
23-2009, passed 11-16-2009; Ord. 05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. passed 9-6-
2011; Ord. 26-2011, passed 11-21-2011; Ord. 27-2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 10-
2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 28-2014, passed 12-15-2014; Ord. 05-2015, passed 5-
4-2015; Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 14-2018, passed 6-4-2018; Ord. 04-
2020, passed 4-20-2020; Ord. 03-2022, passed 2-7-2022; Ord. 11-2022, passed 5-
16-2022; Ord. 17-2023, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 154.066 I-1 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL.
   (A)   Generally. This district is composed of industrial areas for
manufacturing and related uses that generate few if any off-site impacts.
Applied to areas usually considered self-sufficient rather than inter-related
uses. They are encouraged to develop in a campus atmosphere.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this
zoning district and the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Automobile, motorcycle, truck, commercial truck (greater than
7,500 GVW), boat and farm implement sales, rental, service and repair or sale
of parts and supplies for such, provided the outdoor display or storage of
vehicles shall conform to the requirements of the zoning chapter;
         (b)   Breweries, distilleries, wineries;
         (c)   Building supply sales;
         (d)   Cable television systems, signal distribution centers and
studios, including, but not limited to, towers;
         (e)   Childcare centers;
         (f)   Construction equipment sales, rental, service and repair or sale
of parts and supplies for such;
         (g)   Crematorium;
         (h)   Data processing centers;
         (i)   Electrical contractors office;
         (j)    Farm equipment and agricultural supply sales;
         (k)   Medical cannabis safety compliance facility;
         (l)   Off-premises sign. Must meet spacing requirements found in §§
154.205 through
154.217;
         (m)   Offices;
         (n)   Research laboratory;
         (o)   Sexually oriented business;
         (p)   Sign making;
         (q)   Towing services. No more than 15 inoperable vehicles shall be
stored on site for a period not to exceed 90 days. Vehicles shall be stored
within a fenced and screened area; and
         (r)   Waste haulers. Offices, vehicle parking and storage of empty
containers are permitted. No storage of waste materials allowed.
      (2)   Industrial uses:
         (a)   Air and ground freight transportation services;
         (b)   Automobile and automobile parts manufacturing;
         (c)   Manufacturing, compounding, assembling and/or wholesaling of the
following:
            1.   Chemical products;
            2.   Concrete products;
            3.   Electrical/electronic products;
            4.   Food and food related products;
            5.   Machinery manufacturing;
            6.   Medical cannabis cultivator, processor, producer;
            7.   Metals and metal products;
            8.   Plastic products;
            9.   Stone and similar materials;
            10.   Textiles and textile products; and
            11.   Wood and wood products.
         (d)   Public or private utility facilities;
         (e)   Recycling center for sorting baling and processing of glass and
metals, including automobile and home appliance recycling, but not including
automobile wrecking yard, building materials salvage or junk yards or toxic or
hazardous wastes; and
         (f)   Warehousing.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly
incidental and subordinate to permitted uses.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Dwelling units for watchman or caretakers provided that such
facilities shall be located on the same premises as the permitted use;
         (b)   Facilities for serving food only for employees and visitors and
having no direct access to the exterior and having no signs visible from the
right-of-way;
         (c)   Off-street parking areas and structures and loading facilities;
         (d)   Offices;
         (e)   Outdoor storage of products manufactured on the premises or
materials to be used in manufacture on the premises; and
         (f)   Recreational facilities.
   (D)   Conditional uses. Uses permitted only with Board approval after
consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration
of the development guidelines as detailed in the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Commercial uses: Sale of manufactured goods related or incidental
to the principal use.
      (2)   Industrial uses:
         (a)   Compressed natural gas cascade system, provided such system
meets the compressed natural gas standard of the National Fire Prevention
Association. Such a system shall be fully enclosed with a chain link fence at
least to the height of the tanks and not less than six feet in any case; and
         (b)   Gas storage and distribution facility where the means of
distribution is railroad tank cars, gas piping or tank trucks which may each
have a water capacity in excess of 4,000 gallons; however, the volume shall be
governed by National Fire Prevention Association regulations.
      (3)   Institutional uses: Correctional institutions.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   All uses shall be conducted in a completely enclosed building,
except for outdoor storage uses which may be enclosed on all sides by a wall or
fence not less than six feet in height.
      (2)   Total building area in square feet is not to exceed 175,000,
inclusive of all buildings on an individual site.
      (3)   Recycling operations, including, but not limited to, automobile and
home appliance recycling must be enclosed by a solid fence no less than 12 feet
in height. Public parking areas must be paved with a durable dustless bound
surface. Yard storage areas must be gravel or similar material. All street
frontages shall contain, in addition to the required fence, a landscape buffer
consisting of trees, shrubs and similar landscape material.
      (4)   No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot
fronting on a right-of-way of less than 30 feet in width shall be permitted.
      (5)   Sexually oriented businesses must be located a minimum of 1,000
feet from any residentially zoned area, planned neighborhood area, and a
minimum of 1,000 feet from any public or private recreation facility, school,
church, childcare center or any establishment that sells or serves alcohol.
      (6)   When new construction or additions are made to an existing
structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks
the same as other similar industrial structures on parcels within 1,000 feet.
      (7)    The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum
lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of
the lot.
      (8)   All permitted medical cannabis facilities must be a minimum of at
least 1,000 feet from any parcel of land containing a school and/or Type 1
childcare center facility and/or park.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
Minimum lot frontage                  100 ft.
   Exception: Corner lots, minimum 150 ft.
frontage
Minimum front yard setback            75 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     50 ft. when abutting all other zones
Minimum side yard setback             50 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     20 ft. when abutting all other zones
Minimum rear yard setback             75 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     25 ft. when abutting all other zones
Maximum impervious surface ratio      .85
(I.S.R.)
Maximum building height               75 ft.
Note: For the purposes of this chapter abutting shall address each lot line to
determine applicable setbacks for each yard
 
   (G)   Signs, I-1 Zone. Additional information and standards for signs as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
I-1 Signs
                  Maximum Maximum Sign Maximum Location Lighting Additional
Use Allowed Types Number  Area         Height  Require- Allowed  Require- ments
                                               ments
I-1 Signs
              Allowed Maximum  Maximum   Maximum  Location Lighting Additional
Use           Types   Number   Sign Area Height   Require- Allowed  Require-
                                                  ments             ments
                                                                    Wall sign
                                                                    15% or 32
              Wall            Wall: 15%                          sq. ft.,
                                                                    whichever
                                                                    is greater
                                                  Mon.: 10
Commercial    Monume  Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16 ft. off  Yes       
Use           nt      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
                                                  Pole: 20
              Pole    Pole: 1/ Pole: 150 Pole: 45 ft. off            
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
              Roof            Roof: 15%                           
                                                                    Wall sign
                                                                    15% or 32
              Wall            Wall: 15%                          sq. ft.,
                                                                    whichever
                                                                    is greater
                                                  Mon.: 10
Industrial    Monume  Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16 ft. off  Yes       
Use           nt      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
                                                  Pole: 20
              Pole    Pole: 1/ Pole: 150 Pole: 45 ft. off            
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
              Roof            Roof: 15%                           
                                                                    Wall sign
Institutional                                                       15% or 32
Use           Wall            Wall: 15%                 Yes      sq. ft.,
                                                                    whichever
                                                                    is greater
                                                  Mon.: 10
             Monume  Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16 ft. off           
              nt      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
                                                  Pole: 20
             Pole    Pole: 1/ Pole: 150 Pole: 45 ft. off           
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
             Roof            Roof: 15%                          
Use Groups
   Commercial Uses: automobile sales and supplies; building supply sales;
cable television systems; childcare centers; crematorium; data processing
centers; dwelling units for watchmen; farm equipment and agricultural supply
sales; food service (for employees); off-street parking; offices; outdoor
storage; recreational facility; research laboratory; sale of manufactured
goods on site; sexually oriented business; sign making; waste haulers
   Industrial Uses: Any use not listed as commercial or institutional
   Institutional Uses: Correctional facility
Special Provisions
1.   If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants) the
development name must be placed on the sign. It may be a maximum of 25% of the
sign face. This shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant signs
2.   If more than one pole or monument sign allowed, the size may be increased
by 50% if only one sign is erected
3.   For the following commercial uses a multiplier is in effect:
      1) Automobile sales;
      2) Automobile service station;
      3) Contractor, farm equipment sales;
      4) Marine sales;
      5) Motorcycle sales; and
      6) Stadium
Multiplier:   101 ft.—500 ft. street frontage: Maximum number – pole/monument
sign x 2
         501 ft.—1,000 ft. street frontage: Maximum number – pole/monument
sign x 3
         1001 ft. - > street frontage: Maximum number – pole/monument sign x 4
 
   (H)   Parking, I-1 Zone. Additional information and standards for parking as
well as specific
requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
I-1 Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
I-1 Parking Standards
Land Use                   Parking Required      Notes
Brewery, distillery,       1 space/employee      On a maximum shift
winery
                           1 space/employee + 1  Provide on-site area for
Childcare                  space/400 sq. ft.     safe drop off and pick up,
                                                 wholly on site
                                                 Parking for product in
Commercial truck sales     1 space/600 sq. ft.   display area not required
                                                 to be striped
Correctional facility      1 space/employee       
Construction equipment     1 space/600 sq. ft.    
Crematorium                1 space/employee      1 space/vehicle owned by
                                                 use
Data processing centers    1 space/200 sq. ft.    
Manufacturing              1 space/employee      On a maximum shift
Medical cannabis safety    1 space/employee + 5   
compliance facility        visitor spaces
Office                     1 space/250 sq. ft.    
Public/private utility     1 space/employee      1 space/vehicle owned by
                                                 the use
Recycling                  1 space/employee + 5  1 space/vehicle owned by
                           spaces                the use
Research laboratory        1 space/employee + 5   
                           visitor spaces
Sexually oriented business 1 space/50 sq. ft.    All spaces must be visible
                                                 from public right-of-ways
                                                 Based on maximum employees
Sign making                1 space/600 sq. ft.   on a shift, including
                                                 medical staff; minimum of 5
                                                 spaces
Transportation services    1 space/250 sq. ft.   Air; bus; rail; truck
Towing service             1 space/employee      1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                 by the facility
Warehouse                  1 space/3,000 sq. ft. Any office area calculated
                                                 at 1 space/500 sq. ft.
Waste haulers              1 space/employee      1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                 by the facility
 
   (I)   Landscaping, I-1 Zone. Additional information and standards for
vehicular use area (VUA) landscaping as well as specific requirements are found
in §§
154.150 through
154.164.
 
I-1 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area
Landscape Buffer Area Width Options (In Feet) Planting Density Multiplier
Category
                      30 ft.                  1.5
Category D            40 ft.                  1.33
                      50 ft.                  1
 
I-1 Buffering Requirements
Landscape Buffer Area Category Buffering Use Classification
                               Buffered Use                       Buffering Use
Category D                     R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, C-1, I-2, MAZ
                               C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, WCD
 
Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) or Fraction Thereof
Planting Density Requirement Categories
A                   B                   C                   D
2 large trees or 1  2 large trees or 1  3 large trees or 2  3 large trees or 2
medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small
trees + 3 ft.       trees + 4 ft.       trees + 5 ft.       trees + 6 ft.
screening/80 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of
linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary
(OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.12; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. passed 9-6-2011; Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-
2011; Ord. 26-2011, passed 11-21-2011; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 28-
2014, passed 12-15-2014; Ord. 05-2015, passed 5-4-2015; Ord. 24-2016, passed
12-19-2016; Ord. 24-2024, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 154.067 I-2 REGIONAL INDUSTRIAL.
   (A)   Generally. This district is comprised of those manufacturing and
related uses with potential off-site impacts (such as noise, traffic, dust and
odors) due to processes of the scale of the use. This zone is primarily
assigned to areas with highest level of infrastructure and areas of sufficient
size. Such areas include industrial parks.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted.
      (1)   Assembly uses: Community center.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Cable television systems, signal distribution centers and
studios, including, but not limited to, towers;
         (b)   Childcare centers;
         (c)   Commercial truck (greater than 7,500 GVW), boat and farm
implement sales, rental, service and repair or sale of parts and supplies for
such, provided the outdoor display or storage of vehicles shall conform to the
requirements of the zoning chapter;
         (d)   Data processing centers;
         (e)    Employment job training centers and associated offices;
         (f)   Medical cannabis safety compliance facility;
         (g)   Off-premises sign. Must meet spacing requirements found in §§
154.205 through
154.217;
         (h)   Offices;
         (i)   Sexually oriented business;
         (j)   Sign making; and
         (k)   Waste haulers. Offices, vehicle parking and storage of empty
containers are permitted. No storage of waste materials allowed.
      (3)   Industrial uses:
         (a)   Air and ground freight transportation services;
         (b)   Automobile and automobile parts manufacturing;
         (c)   Breweries, distilleries, wineries;
         (d)   Manufacturing, compounding, assembling and/or wholesaling of the
following:
            1.   Chemical products;
            2.   Concrete products;
            3.   Electrical/electronic products;
            4.   Food and food related products;
            5.    Machinery manufacturing;
            6.   Medical cannabis cultivator, processor, producer;
            7.   Metals and metal products;
            8.   Plastic products;
            9.   Stone and similar materials;
            10.   Textiles and textile products; and
            11.   Wood and wood products.
         (e)   Public or private utility facilities;
         (f)   Recycling center for sorting baling and processing of glass and
metals, including automobile and home appliance recycling, but not including
automobile wrecking yard, building materials salvage or junk yards or toxic or
hazardous wastes; and
         (g)   Warehousing.
   (C)   Accessory uses. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory,
clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses.
      (1)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Dwelling units for watchman or caretakers provided that such
facilities shall be located on the same premises as the permitted use;
         (b)   Facilities for serving food only for employees and visitors and
having no direct access to the exterior and having no signs visible from the
right-of-way;
         (c)   Off-street parking areas and structures and loading facilities;
         (d)   Offices; and
         (e)   Recreational facilities.
      (2)   Industrial uses: Outdoor storage of products manufactured on the
premises or materials to be used in manufacture on the premises.
   (D)   Conditional uses. Uses permitted only with Board approval after
consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration
of the development guidelines as detailed in the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Commercial uses: Sale of manufactured goods related or incidental
to the principal use.
      (2)   Industrial uses: Livestock feed yards.
      (3)   Institutional uses: Correctional institutions.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   All uses shall be conducted in a completely enclosed building,
except for outdoor storage uses which may be enclosed on all sides by a wall or
fence not less than six feet in height.
      (2)   Recycling operations, including, but not limited to, automobile and
home appliance recycling must be enclosed by a solid fence no less than 12 feet
in height. Public parking areas must be paved with a durable dustless bound
surface. Yard storage areas must be gravel or similar material. All street
frontages shall contain, in addition to the required fence, a landscape buffer
consisting of trees, shrubs and similar landscape material.
      (3)   No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot
fronting on a right-of-way of less than 30 feet in width shall be permitted.
      (4)   Sexually oriented businesses must be located a minimum of 1,000
feet from any residentially zoned area, planned neighborhood area, and a
minimum of 1,000 feet from any public or private recreation facility, school,
church, childcare center or any establishment that sells or serves alcohol.
      (5)   When new construction or additions are made to an existing
structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks
the same as other similar industrial structures on parcels within 1,000 feet.
      (6)    The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum
lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of
the lot.
      (7)   All permitted medical cannabis facilities must be a minimum of at
least 1,000 feet from any parcel of land containing a school and/or Type 1
childcare center facility and/or park.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
Minimum lot frontage              150 ft.
Exception: Corner lots, minimum   300 ft.
frontage
Minimum front yard setback        150 ft. when abutting property zoned R-
                                  1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                 50 ft. when abutting all other zones
Minimum side yard setback         100 ft. when abutting property zoned R-
                                  1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                 20 ft. when abutting all other zones
Minimum rear yard setback         100 ft. when abutting property zoned R-
                                  1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                 25 ft. when abutting all other zones
Maximum impervious surface ratio  .85
(I.S.R.)
Maximum building height           75 ft.
Note: For the purposes of this chapter abutting shall address each lot
line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard.
 
   (G)   Permitted signs, I-2 Zone. Additional information and standards for
signs as well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
I-2 Signs
                  Maximum Maximum Sign Maximum Location Lighting Additional
Use Allowed Types Number  Area         Height  Require- Allowed  Require- ments
                                               ments
I-2 Signs
              Allowed Maximum  Maximum   Maximum  Location Lighting Additional
Use           Types   Number   Sign Area Height   Require- Allowed  Require-
                                                  ments             ments
                                                                    Wall sign
                                                                    15% or 32
              Wall            Wall: 15%                          sq. ft.,
                                                                    whichever
                                                                    is greater
                                                  Mon.: 10
Commercial    Monume  Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16 ft. off  Yes       
Use           nt      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
                                                  Pole: 20
              Pole    Pole: 1/ Pole: 150 Pole: 45 ft. off            
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
              Roof            Roof: 15%                           
                                                                    Wall sign
                                                                    15% or 32
              Wall            Wall: 5%                           sq. ft.,
                                                                    whichever
                                                                    is greater
                                                  Mon.: 10
Industrial    Monume  Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16 ft. off  Yes       
Use           nt      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
                                                  Pole: 20
              Pole    Pole: 1/ Pole: 150 Pole: 45 ft. off            
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
              Roof            Roof: 15%                           
                                                                    Wall sign
Institutional                                                       15% or 32
Use           Wall            Wall: 15%                 Yes      sq. ft.,
                                                                    whichever
                                                                    is greater
                                                  Mon.: 10
             Monume  Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16 ft. off           
              nt      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
                                                  Pole: 20
             Pole    Pole: 1/ Pole: 150 Pole: 35 ft. off           
                      street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                  surface
             Roof            Roof: 15%                          
Use Groups
   Commercial Uses: Cable television systems; childcare centers; commercial
truck sales; data processing centers; dwelling units for watchmen; farm
equipment and agricultural supply sales; food service (for employees); off-
street parking; offices; outdoor storage; recreational facility; research
laboratory; sale of manufactured goods on site; sexually oriented business;
sign making; waste haulers
   Industrial Uses: Any use not listed as commercial or institutional
   Institutional Uses: Correctional facility
Special Provisions
1.   If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants) the
development name must be placed on the sign; it may be a maximum of 25% of the
sign face; this shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant signs
2.   If more than one pole or monument sign allowed, the size may be increased
by 50% if only one sign is erected
3.   For the following commercial uses a multiplier is in effect:
      1) Automobile sales;
      2) Automobile service station;
      3) Contractor, farm equipment sales;
      4) Marine sales;
      5) Motorcycle sales; and
      6) Stadium
Multiplier:   101 ft.—500 ft. street frontage: Maximum number – pole/monument
sign x 2
         501 ft.—1,000 ft. street frontage: Maximum number – pole/monument
sign x 3
         1,001 ft. - > street frontage: Maximum number – pole/monument sign x
4
 
   (H)   Parking requirements, I-2 Zone. Additional information and standards
for parking as well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
I-2 Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
I-2 Parking Standards
Land Use                Parking Required            Notes
Brewery, distillery,    1 space/employee            On a maximum shift
winery
                        1 space/employee + 1 space/ Provide on-site area for
Childcare               400 sq. ft.                 safe drop off and pick up,
                                                    wholly on site
                                                    Parking for product in
Commercial truck sales  1 space/600 sq. ft.         display area not required
                                                    to be striped
Community center        1 space/600 sq. ft.          
Correctional facility   1 space/employee             
Data processing centers 1 space/200 sq. ft.          
Employment job training 1 space/400 sq. ft.          
center
Manufacturing           1 space/employee            On a maximum shift
Medical cannabis safety 1 space/employee + 5         
compliance facility     visitor spaces
Office                  1 space/250 sq. ft.          
Public/private utility  1 space/employee            1 space/vehicle owned by
                                                    the use
Recycling               1 space/employee + 5 spaces 1 space/vehicle owned by
                                                    the use
Research laboratory     1 space/employee + 5         
                        visitor spaces
Sexually oriented bus.  1 space/50 sq. ft.          All spaces must be visible
                                                    from public rights-of-way
Transportation services 1 space/250 sq. ft.         Air; bus; rail; truck
                                                    Based on maximum employees
Sign making             1 space/600 sq. ft.         on a shift, including
                                                    medical staff; minimum of 5
                                                    spaces
Warehouse               1 space/3,000 sq. ft.       Any office area calculated
                                                    at 1 space/500 sq. ft.
Waste haulers           1 space/employee            1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                    by the facility
 
   (I)   Landscaping, I-2 Zone. Additional information and standards for
vehicular use area (VUA) landscaping as well as specific requirements are found
in §§
154.150 through
154.164.
 
I-2 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area
Landscape Buffer Area Width Options (In Feet) Planting Density Multiplier
Category
                      30 ft.                  1.5
Category D            40 ft.                  1.33
                      50 ft.                  1
 
I-2 Buffering Requirements
Landscape Buffer Area Category Buffering Use Classification
                               Buffered Use                       Buffering Use
Category D                     R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, C-1, I-2, MAZ
                               C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, WCD
 
Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof
Planting Density Requirement Categories
A                   B                   C                   D
2 large trees or 1  2 large trees or 1  3 large trees or 2  3 large trees or 2
medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small
trees + 3 ft.       trees + 4 ft.       trees + 5 ft.       trees + 6 ft.
screening/80 ft. Of screening/60 ft. Of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of
linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary
(OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.13; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. passed 9-6-2011; Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-
2011; Ord. 26-2011, passed 11-21-2011; Ord. 28-2014, passed 12-15-2014; Ord.
24-2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 24-2024, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 154.068 PDD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   Generally. The Planned Development District is intended to implement
the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan by incentivizing dense and
compact developments, developing open space and parks within walking distance
of residents, and developing neighborhoods with a high quality of design. The
District encourages flexibility and innovation in site design including a mix
of uses, pedestrian friendly streetscapes, common open space, and a variety of
housing types, lot sizes and densities.
      (1)   A Planned Development District should only be used where the
proposed design could not be largely or substantially achieved using a
residential or commercial zoning district, and should not be used for the sole
purpose of circumventing the requirements of the zoning code.
   (B)   Procedures. Applications for a PDD zoning district shall be processed,
reviewed, and approved using the procedures of the zoning map amendment process
established in §
154.018, Map Amendment Procedures, including concurrent approval of a Master
Plan, as established in §
154.115, Master Plan, Planned District. The Master Plan shall meet the
requirements of this section and shall become part of the PDD ordinance.
   (C)   PDD Master Plan. Before approving a PDD zoning district, the City
Council shall find that the application for zoning map amendment and the Master
Plan comply with the Comprehensive Plan and the following standards.
      (1)   Establish a statement of goals that is consistent with the
comprehensive plan and purposes of the individual PDD zoning district
      (2)   Establish a list of principal, accessory, and temporary uses
permitted in the zoning district. Any use listed in a residential or commercial
zoning district in this ordinance may be proposed for a PDD zoning district as
long as they are organized in a manner that conforms to the goals and
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.
      (3)   Establish the general location of each development area in the
zoning district, its acreage, types and mix of land uses, number of residential
units, and non-residential floor area.
      (4)   Show the general location of public and private roadways and access
easements pursuant to the development standards established in division (D).
      (5)   Establish building setbacks and height standards, and other
dimensional standards that apply to the PDD pursuant to the development
standards established in division (D).
      (6)   Establish site design standards for the location of buildings,
parking, and driveway access pursuant to the development standards established
in division (D).
      (7)   Establish sign standards, including size, height, and style.
      (8)   Establish access management standards for driveway access within
the PDD zoning district pursuant to the development standards established in
division (D).
      (9)   Establish streetscape standards for all types of streets to be used
within the PDD zoning district pursuant to the development standards
established division (D).
      (10)   Establish parking and loading standards for the development site,
including bicycle parking and facilities.
      (11)   Establish building design standards for all use types permitted
within the PDD zoning district pursuant to the development standards
established in division (D).
      (12)   Establish standards for landscaping, screening and buffering to
ensure appropriate transitions between uses within the development site.
      (13)   Establish standards for screening and buffering along the
perimeter of the PDD zoning district to ensure appropriate transitions and
compatibility with adjacent or nearby development.
      (14)   Establish the general location, amount, and type of open space
pursuant to the development standards established in division (D).
      (15)   Identify the location of environmentally sensitive lands, resource
lands, wildlife habitat, and waterway corridors, and ensure protection of these
lands.
      (16)   Identify the general location of water, sewer, gas, and stormwater
drainage facilities.
      (17)   Establish standards for lighting within the development site,
including street lighting.
   (D)   Amendments to a PDD Master Plan.
      (1)   Amendments to a PDD Master Plan shall go through the same the same
process for the initial approval of the Master Plan. This includes a public
hearing by the Planning Commission and final action by the City Council.
   (E)   PDD Development Guidelines. Development within the Planned Development
shall comply with the following guidelines. These guidelines are not intended
to be strict requirements, but are instead intended to provide guidance for a
high quality design.
      (1)   Lot layout.
         (a)   Lots should be configured in an efficient manner that provides
appropriate easements for utilities and vehicular and pedestrian access.
         (b)   Lots must comply with standards with the subdivision
regulations.
      (2)   Environmental.
         (a)   The site should respect the natural topography, protect
environmentally sensitive lands, wildlife habitats, and waterway corridors.
         (b)   Healthy trees should be preserved to the greatest extent
possible. Especially trees near waterway corridors.
      (3)   Site design.
         (a)   Buildings should be located in close proximity to abutting
roadways.
         (b)   Parking areas should be located to the rear of buildings with
access from an alley or secondary street.
         (c)   Pedestrian access should be provided from abutting streets to a
clearly defined entry.
         (d)   Site distance triangles of the zoning ordinance are applicable
within PDD developments.
      (4)   Building design.
         (a)   Building should provide a clearly defined entry oriented toward
an abutting roadway.
         (b)   Building should provide direct pedestrian access from the
clearly defined entry to the public sidewalk.
         (c)   Predominant exterior building materials should use brick, stone,
wood, or sturdy siding, such as Hardie. Vinyl should be avoided.
         (d)   Building facades should be articulated to provide visual
interest and designed for a human scale.
         (e)   Building should provide a variation in roofline.
      (5)   Signs.
         (a)   Sign size should be minimized and not distract from the overall
design of buildings and site.
         (b)   Signs should be monument style and generally constructed of
materials similar to the building in which it is advertising.
         (c)   Off-site advertising signs should be highly discouraged within a
PDD development site, unless it advertises a business within the PDD
development site and is modest in size.
      (6)   Screening.
         (a)   A minimum of a ten-foot buffer shall be provided on non-
residential lots along boundaries adjacent to residential lots.
         (b)   The buffer shall consist of an evergreen screening of at least
six feet in height at maturity, or a solid wooden, masonry or metal fence at
least six feet in height.
         (c)   Other buffer as approved by the Planning Commission that
provides adequate screening and buffering of adjacent land uses.
      (7)   Streetscape.
         (a)   Streetscape design should include sidewalks on both sides of the
street with a minimum width of five feet.
         (b)   Sidewalks along commercial developments should be a minimum of
seven feet in width.
         (c)   Streetscapes should include trees or other barriers between the
curb and the sidewalk of a sufficient distance to protect pedestrians.
         (d)   Streetscapes should include lighting.
         (e)   If on-street parking is provided, curb extensions should be
provided at intersections to reduce pedestrian crossing distances.
         (f)   Intersections should be provided at short intervals to reduce
speeds and provide many opportunities for safe pedestrian crossings.
      (8)   Access management.
         (a)   Driveway access from public and private roads should be
minimized.
         (b)   When feasible, driveway and parking lot access should be
provided from alleys or secondary roadways.
         (c)   Driveway access from public and private roads should be
minimized.
      (9)   Open space.
         (a)   Open space for recreation and community gathering should be
provided on the PDD development site for the enjoyment of the general public.
         (b)   Open space should be identified and dedicated on a subdivision
plat.
         (c)   Maintenance and funding of common open space should be
established through an association, or other common ownership method as
provided for in the subdivision regulations. These documents should be recorded
along with the plat. Alternatively, open space may be conveyed to a public body
that agrees to accept and maintain the open space.
(Ord. 17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.069 PNR-1 PLANNED NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENTIAL-1.
   (A)   Generally. The Planned Neighborhood Residential classification
includes low and medium density residential development, consisting of single-
family and multi-family residential uses along with limited service and light
retail uses to serve the needs of the local population. Density and use bonuses
may be realized by the provision of site amenities such as wider sidewalks,
bicycle or walking paths, park or open spaces, mixed use residential/commercial
buildings, as outlined in these regulations.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted.
      (1)   Adult day care;
      (2)   Assisted living facilities;
      (3)   Childcare centers;
      (4)   Churches and associated facilities;
      (5)   Community center;
      (6)   Convenience shopping center;
      (7)   Convenience stores no less than 500 square feet and no greater than
5,000 square feet in building area. Sales of gasoline are permitted;
      (8)   Events center;
      (9)   Financial institution;
      (10)   Government operated parks;
      (11)   Libraries;
      (12)   Multi-family residences;
      (13)   Neighborhood center;
      (14)   Neighborhood shopping centers, no greater than 25,000 square feet
in building area for all buildings;
      (15)   Nursing home;
      (16)   Offices;
      (17)   Residential care facilities;
      (18)   Residential storage facilities;
      (19)   Restaurants, no greater than 3,000 square feet in building area
and no drive-in or drive-through facilities are provided.
      (20)   Schools for academic instruction;
      (21)   Single-family attached (two residences);
      (22)   Single-family attached (three or more residences);
      (23)   Single-family detached residences; and
      (24)   Two-family residences.
   (C)   Accessory uses. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory,
clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses.
      (1)   Home occupation;
      (2)   Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking areas;
and
      (3)   Swimming pools, tennis courts, clubhouses and other private or
common use open space and recreational areas.
   (D)   Conditional uses. Uses permitted only with Board approval after
consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration
of the development guidelines as detailed in the comprehensive plan: Golf
course.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   Commercial and other non-residential uses are to be designed to
complement the style, size and architecture of the residential uses.
      (2)   No outside storage of any type permitted for any commercial use.
      (3)   No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot
fronting on a right-of-way of less than 30 feet in width shall be permitted.
      (4)   The developer will be required to submit an overall design,
including types, sizes, allowable colors and landscape treatments for approval.
      (5)   Planned neighborhood developments are required to file a master
plan designating all areas to be reserved for lots, streets, utilities, open
space and other requirements to ensure these developments are developed to the
highest standards possible.
      (6)   Planned neighborhood developments must file a separate landscape
plan designating areas and materials for interior and perimeter landscaping.
      (7)   Planned neighborhood developments must file an architectural design
plan designating permitted architectural styles for both commercial and
residential structures.
      (8)   All special conditions, awarded bonuses, private restrictions,
covenants and special provisions shall be formalized in a binding elements
document and submitted to the Commission for approval.
      (9)   Single-family detached zero lot line developments are required to
designate on the subdivision plat which side yard will have zero-foot setback.
All single-family detached zero lot line developments shall have maintenance/
access/use easements and when necessary, drainage easements, provided on
adjacent lots and at a width of not less than ten feet. Adjacent lots shall not
place any building within this easement.
      (10)   The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum
lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of
the lot.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
Minimum lot frontage, single-family     50 ft.
detached
   Exception: Corner lots minimum    100 ft. each street frontage
frontage
Minimum lot frontage, single-family     30 ft./D.U.
attached and two-family
   Exception: Corner lots minimum    65 ft. each street frontage
frontage
Minimum lot frontage, multi-family      100 ft.
   Exception: Corner lots minimum    185 ft. each street frontage
frontage
Minimum lot frontage, commercial        150 ft.
   Exception: Corner lots minimum    200 ft. each street frontage
frontage
Maximum lot area                        29,040 sq. ft./D.U.; no maximum for
                                        commercial
Minimum lot area, per dwelling unit     8,712 sq. ft. when abutting R-1
(without density bonuses)
                                       5,124 sq. ft. when abutting R-2
                                       3,960 sq. ft. when abutting R-3
                                       3,630 sq. ft. when abutting R-4
                                       2,904 when abutting all other zones
   Minimum for commercial            43,560 sq. ft.
Minimum front yard setback              15 ft.
Minimum side yard setback, single-      10 ft.
family
Minimum side yard setback, single-      15 ft. one side yard, 0 ft. other side
family detached zero lot line           yard
Minimum side yard setback, single-      10 ft. each end wall, 0 ft. each common
family attached (2 residences)          wall
Minimum side yard setback, multi-family 15 ft. each end wall, 0 ft. each common
and single-family attached (3 or more   wall
residences)
Minimum side yard setback, commercial   15 ft.
Minimum rear yard setback, single-
family and single-family attached (2    15 ft.
residences)
Minimum rear yard setback, multi-family
and single-family attached (3 or more   20 ft.
residences)
Minimum rear yard setback, commercial   30 ft.
Maximum impervious surface ratio
(I.S.R.), single-family and single-     .70
family attached (2 residences)
Maximum impervious surface ratio
(I.S.R.), single-family attached (3 or  80
more residences), multi-family
Maximum impervious surface ratio        .80
(I.S.R.), commercial
Maximum building height                 45 ft.
Note: For the purposes of this chapter
abutting shall address each lot line to  
determine applicable setbacks for each
yard
 
   (G)   Density bonuses.
      (1)   Minimum gross density in the PNR-1 zone is one and one-half D.U./
acre and the maximum gross density, without bonuses is 3 D.U./Acre, with
bonuses gross density may rise to eight D.U./acre.
      (2)   When density bonuses apply to a development then for each
additional residential unit constructed over and above the maximum density
without bonuses, an additional 500 square feet of commercial floor area may be
constructed.
      (3)   Commercial areas may not exceed 15% of the total building area
unless density and use bonuses are earned.
      (4)   If multi-family residential structures provide variation in colors,
fenestration, trim, building materials and offsets in building facades, a
density bonus of 1.0 D.U./acre will be added to the density calculation.
      (5)   If wider sidewalks (minimum of six feet in width), multipurpose
paths or bicycle trails (minimum of eight feet in width) are provided
throughout the development, a density bonus of one- half D.U./acre will be
added to the density calculation. Also, two square feet of additional
commercial floor area may be constructed for each lineal foot of wider
sidewalk, walking path or bicycle trail.
      (6)   If open space is provided, a density bonus of one-fourth D.U./acre
will be added to the density calculation for each ten acres of open space
provided above the minimum. A minimum of ten acres of open space must be
provided to qualify for a density bonus. Also, 500 square feet of additional
commercial floor area may be constructed for each acre of open space. Open
spaces shall be contiguous and yard and other setback areas shall not be
calculated in determining acreage of open space. Areas designated as part of
any golf course may not be used in calculating open spaces or park space when
determining density bonuses.
      (7)   If park space is provided, a density bonus of 1.0 D.U./acre will be
added to the density calculation for each five acres of park space provided
above the minimum. A minimum of five acres of park space must be provided to
qualify for a density bonus. Also, 1,000 square feet of additional commercial
floor area may be constructed for each acre of park space. Park spaces should
consist of both active and passive recreation opportunities and must be a
minimum of two contiguous acres in size. Areas designated as part of any golf
course may not be used in calculating open space or park space when determining
density bonuses.
      (8)   Density bonuses may not result in the commercial areas exceeding
25% of the total building area. The square footage of schools and churches is
not considered commercial area.
   (H)   Signs, PNR-1 Zone. Additional information and standards for signs as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217. Along with the general requirements found elsewhere in this zoning
chapter, and the guidance of the comprehensive plan, and to ensure the
integration of the development with surrounding land and uses, a separate
signage plan shall be submitted as part of the master plan requirements.
   (I)   Parking, PNR-1 Zone. Additional information and standards for parking
as well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
 
PNR-1 Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
PNR-1 Parking Standards
Land Use                  Parking Required           Notes
                          1 space/employee + 1       Provide on-site area for
Adult day care            space/500 sq. ft.          safe drop off and pick up,
                                                     wholly on site
Assisted living           .5 spaces/D.U.             Additionally, 1 space for
                                                     each employee
                          1 space/employee + 1       Provide on-site area for
Childcare                 space/400 sq. ft.          safe drop off and pick up,
                                                     wholly on site
                                                     Based on seating in main
Church                    1 space/3 seats            sanctuary, min. of 5
                                                     spaces
Community center          1 space/600 sq. ft.         
Convenience shopping      1 space/400 sq. ft.        Based on leasable space
center                                               (not public spaces)
Convenience store         1 space/250 sq. ft.         
Events center             1 space/200 sq. ft.         
                                                     No on street parking
Home occupation           N/A                        allowed for commercial
                                                     vehicles owned by the use
Library                   1 space/600 sq. ft.         
Neighborhood center       5 spaces                    
Neighborhood shopping     1 space/400 sq. ft.        Based on leasable space
center                                               (not public spaces)
                                                     Based on maximum employees
Nursing home, orphanage,  1 space/3 beds + 1 space/  on a shift, including
rehab                     employee                   medical staff; minimum of
                                                     5 spaces
Parks                     1 space/acre               Other uses present require
                                                     parking based on use.
Residential care facility 1 space/3 beds              
Residential, multi-       2 spaces/D.U.               
family, 10 or fewer units
Residential, multi-
family, more than 10      1.5 spaces/D.U.             
units
Residential, single-      2 spaces/D.U.               
family
Residential, two- family  2 spaces/D.U.               
Restaurant                1 space/150 sq. ft. g.f.a. Includes outdoor dining
                                                     areas
                                                     If gymnasium or auditorium
School, K - 8             1 space/classroom and      on site an additional 1
                          office + 10 visitor spaces space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, 9 - 12            office + 1 space/ 5 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, post-secondary    office + 1 space/ 2 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
 
   (J)   Landscaping, PNR-1 Zone.
      (1)   Additional information and standards for vehicular use area (VUA)
landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.150 through
154.164.
      (2)   Along with the general requirements found elsewhere in this zoning
chapter, and the guidance of the comprehensive plan, a separate landscaping
plan shall be submitted as part of the master plan requirements. The Commission
may require landscaping above the minimums required to ensure the integration
of the development with surrounding land and uses.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.14; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-2011; Ord. 26-2011, passed
11-21-2011; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 05-2015, passed 5-4-2015; Ord.
24-2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 17-2023, passed
8-21-2023; Ord. 17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.070 PNR-2 PLANNED NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENTIAL-2.
   (A)   Generally. The Planned Neighborhood Residential classification
provides for manufactured housing developments and provides for the necessary
services for these developments.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted.
      (1)   Childcare centers;
      (2) Government parks;
      (3)   Manufactured housing developments;
      (4)   Neighborhood center; and
      (5)   Single-family dwelling.
   (C)   Accessory uses. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory,
clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses.
      (1)   Home occupation;
      (2)   Leasing/management office;
      (3)   Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking areas;
      (4)   Residential storage building; and
      (5)   Swimming pools, tennis courts, clubhouses and other private or
common use open space and recreational areas.
   (D)   Conditional uses. Uses permitted only with Board approval after
consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration
of the development guidelines as detailed in the comprehensive plan: None.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   Planned neighborhood developments are required to file a master
plan designating all areas to be reserved for lots, streets, drive lanes,
utilities, open space and other requirements to ensure these developments are
developed to the highest standards possible.
      (2)   Planned neighborhood developments must file a separate landscape
plan designating areas and materials for interior and perimeter landscaping.
      (3)   All special conditions, private restrictions, covenants and special
provisions shall be formalized in a binding elements document and submitted to
the Commission for approval.
      (4)   The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum
lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of
the lot.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
 
Minimum lot frontage                        30 ft. Manufactured housing Type 2
Minimum lot frontage, single-family         50 ft.
   Exception: Corner lots, minimum fronta100 ft. each street frontage
Minimum lot area, per dwelling unit         3,000 sq. ft.
Minimum front yard setback                  25 ft.
Minimum side yard setback                   5 ft.
Minimum rear yard setback                   15 ft.
Maximum impervious surface ratio (I.S.R.)   .80
Maximum building height                     35 ft.
Open space ratio                            50 sq. ft. per dwelling unit
Note: For the purposes of this chapter abutting shall address each lot line to
determine applicable setbacks for each yard
 
   (G)   Signs, PNR-2 Zone.
      (1)   Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific
requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
      (2)   Along with the general requirements found elsewhere in this zoning
chapter, and the guidance of the comprehensive plan, and to ensure the
integration of the development with surrounding land and uses, a separate
signage plan shall be submitted as part of the master plan requirements.
   (H)   Parking, PNR-2 Zone. Additional information and standards for parking
as well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
PNR-2 Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
PNR-2 Parking Standards
Land Use               Parking Required            Notes
                       1 space/employee + 1 space/ Provide on-site area for
Childcare              400 sq. ft.                 safe drop off and pick up,
                                                   wholly on site
                                                   No on street parking allowed
Home occupation        N/A                         for commercial vehicles
                                                   owned by the use
Manufactured home      2 spaces/unit                
Manufactured housing   1 space/400 sq. ft.          
management office
Neighborhood center    5 spaces                     
Parks                  1 space/acre                Other uses present require
                                                   parking based on use
Single-family dwelling 2 spaces/unit                
 
   (I)   Landscaping, PNR-2 Zone.
      (1)   Additional information and standards for vehicular use area (VUA)
landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.150 through
154.164.
      (2)   Along with the general requirements found elsewhere in this zoning
chapter, a separate landscaping plan shall be submitted as part of the master
plan requirements. The Commission may require landscaping above the minimums
required to ensure the integration of the development with surrounding land and
uses.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.15; Ord. 05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord.
10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 17-2025, passed
8-4-2025)
§ 154.071 PNC PLANNED NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Generally. The Planned Neighborhood Commercial classification includes
neighborhood office commercial, limited regional commercial and low, medium and
high density residential development, consisting of single-family, two-family
and multi-family residential uses with the residential developments serving to
provide housing alternatives as well as facilitating live/work arrangements and
similar needs. Density bonuses may be realized by provision of site amenities
such as wider sidewalks, bicycle or walking paths, park or open spaces, mixed
use residential/commercial buildings and the like.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted.
      (1)   Assisted living facilities;
      (2)   Childcare centers;
      (3)   Churches and associated facilities;
      (4)   Community center;
      (5)   Community shopping center;
      (6)   Convenience shopping center;
      (7)   Convenience stores, which may contain gasoline sales, no less than
500 square feet and no greater than 5,000 square feet in building area;
      (8)   Events center;
      (9)   Financial institution;
      (10)   Fine art studios;
      (11)   Government operated parks;
      (12)   Health clubs;
      (13)   Indoor theaters;
      (14)   Laundry pick-up stations;
      (15)   Libraries;
      (16)   Multi-family residences;
      (17)   Neighborhood center;
      (18)   Neighborhood shopping center;
      (19)   Nursing homes;
      (20)   Offices;
      (21)   Residential care facilities;
      (22)   Restaurants;
      (23)   Retail malt beverage establishment;
      (24)   Retail package liquor sales;
      (25)   Schools for academic instruction;
      (26)   Single-family detached residences;
      (27)   Specialty retail shops;
      (28)   Single-family attached (two residences);
      (29)   Single-family attached (three or more residences); and
      (30)   Two-family residences.
   (C)   Accessory uses. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory,
clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses.
      (1)   Home occupation;
      (2)   Outdoor storage of merchandise, when screened from adjacent uses or
roadways;
      (3)   Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking areas;
and
      (4)   Swimming pools, tennis courts, clubhouses and other private or
common use open space and recreational areas.
   (D)   Conditional uses. Uses permitted only with Board approval after
consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration
of the development guidelines as detailed in the comprehensive plan: Golf
course.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   Commercial and other non-residential uses are to be designed to
complement the style, size and architecture of the residential uses.
      (2)   Outdoor storage must be screened by a solid wall a minimum of six
feet in height and at least one foot higher than the material stored. The wall
should be of materials similar to building facade.
      (3)   No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot
fronting on a right-of-way of less than 30 feet in width shall be permitted.
      (4)   The developer will be required to submit a signage plan, including
types, sizes, allowable colors and landscape treatments for approval.
      (5)   Planned neighborhood developments are required to file a master
plan designating all areas to be reserved for lots, streets, drive lanes,
utilities, open space and other requirements to ensure these developments are
developed to the highest standards possible.
      (6)   Planned neighborhood developments must file a separate landscape
plan designating areas and materials for interior and perimeter landscaping.
      (7)   Planned neighborhood developments must file an architectural design
plan designating permitted architectural styles for both commercial and
residential structures.
      (8)   All special conditions, awarded bonuses, private restrictions,
covenants and special provisions shall be formalized in a binding elements
document and submitted to the Commission for approval.
      (9)   Single-family detached zero lot line developments are required to
designate on the subdivision plat which side yard will have zero-foot setback.
All single-family detached zero lot line developments shall have maintenance/
access/use easements and when necessary, drainage easements, provided on
adjacent lots and at a width of not less than ten feet. Adjacent lots shall not
place any building within this easement.
      (10)   The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum
lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of
the lot.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
 
Minimum lot frontage, single-family     50 ft.
detached
   Exception: Corner lots, minimum   100 ft. each street frontage
frontage
Minimum lot frontage, single-family     30 ft./D.U.
attached and two-family
   Exception: Corner lots, minimum   65 ft. each street frontage
frontage
Minimum lot frontage, multi-family      100 ft.
   Exception: Corner lots, minimum   65 ft. each street frontage
frontage
Minimum lot frontage, commercial        200 ft.
Maximum lot area                        29,040 sq. ft./D.U.
Minimum lot area, per dwelling unit     8,712 sq. ft. when abutting R-1
(without density bonuses)
                                       5,124 sq. ft. when abutting R-2
                                       3,960 sq. ft. when abutting R-3
                                       3,630 sq. ft. when abutting R-4
                                       2,904 when abutting all other zones
   Minimum for commercial            43,560 sq. ft.
Minimum front yard setback              15 ft.
Minimum side yard setback, single-      10 ft.
family detached
Minimum side yard setback, single-      15 ft. one side yard, 0 ft. other side
family detached zero lot line           yard.
Minimum side yard setback, single-      10 ft. each end wall, 0 ft. each common
family attached (2 residences), and     wall
two-family
Minimum side yard setback, multi-family 15 ft. each end wall, 0 ft. each common
                                        wall
Minimum side yard setback, commercial   15 ft.
Minimum rear yard setback, single-
family, single-family attached (2       15 ft.
residences) and two- family
Minimum rear yard setback, multi-family 20 ft.
and single-family attached (3 or more)
Minimum rear yard setback, commercial   30 ft.
Maximum impervious surface ratio
(I.S.R.), single-family, single-family  .70
attached (2 residences) and two-family
Maximum impervious surface ratio
(I.S.R.), single-family attached (3 or  .80
more residences), multi-family
Maximum impervious surface ratio        .80
(I.S.R.), commercial
Maximum building height                 55 ft.
Note: For the purposes of this chapter abutting shall address each lot line to
determine applicable setbacks for each yard
 
   (G)   Density bonuses.
      (1)   Commercial floor area may not exceed 60% of the total lot or
development area unless use bonuses are earned.
      (2)   If wider sidewalks (minimum of six feet in width), walking paths or
bicycle trails (minimum of eight feet in width) are provided throughout the
development, two square feet of additional commercial floor area may be
constructed for each lineal foot of sidewalk, walking path or bicycle trail.
      (3)   If open space is provided, 500 square feet of additional commercial
floor area may be constructed for each acre of open space. A minimum of ten
acres of open space must be provided to qualify for a bonus. Open spaces shall
be contiguous and yard and other setback areas shall not be calculated in
determining acreage of open space. Areas designated as part of any golf course
may not be used in calculating open space, park space when determining density
bonuses.
      (4)   If park space is provided, 1,000 square feet of additional
commercial floor area may be constructed for each acre of park space. A minimum
of five acres of park space must be provided to qualify for a bonus. Park
spaces should consist of both active and passive recreation opportunities and
be a minimum of one acre in size.
      (5)   If residential uses are developed an additional 500 square feet of
commercial building area may be constructed for each dwelling unit, a minimum
of 24 dwelling units must be provided.
      (6)   After inclusion of all bonuses, the total commercial building floor
area may not exceed 85% of the total development.
   (H)   Signs, PNC Zone.
      (1)   Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific
requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
      (2)   Along with the general requirements found elsewhere in this zoning
chapter, and the guidance of the comprehensive plan, and to ensure the
integration of the development with surrounding land and uses, a separate
signage plan shall be submitted as part of the master plan requirements.
   (I)   Parking requirements, PNC Zone. Additional information and standards
for parking as well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
 
PNC Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
PNC Parking Standards
Land Use                  Parking Required           Notes
Assisted living           .5 spaces/D.U.             Additionally, 1 space for
                                                     each employee
                          1 space/employee + 1       Provide on-site area for
Childcare                 space/400 sq. ft.          safe drop off and pick up,
                                                     wholly on site
                                                     Based on seating in main
Church                    1 space/3 seats            sanctuary, min. of 5
                                                     spaces
Community center          1 space/600 sq. ft.         
Clinic, medical/dental    1 space/400 sq. ft.         
Convenience shopping      1 space/400 sq. ft.        Based on leasable space
center                                               (not public spaces)
Convenience store         1 space/250 sq. ft.         
Events center             1 space/200 sq. ft.         
Financial institutions    1 space/200 sq. ft.         
                                                     Additional parking
Golf course               3 spaces/hole              required if other uses
                                                     present
Grocery, specialty        1 space/250 sq. ft.        Building size >5,000 sq.
                                                     ft.
Health club               1 space/200 sq. ft.         
                                                     No on street parking
Home occupation           N/A                        allowed for commercial
                                                     vehicles owned by the use
Laundry, pick up          1 space/400 sq. ft.         
Library                   1 space/600 sq. ft.         
Neighborhood center       5 spaces                    
                                                     Based on maximum employees
Nursing home, orphanage,  1 space/3 beds + 1 space/  on a shift, including
rehabilitation facility   employee                   medical staff; minimum of
                                                     5 spaces
                                                     Financial; legal; medical;
Office, general           1 space/250 sq. ft.        professional; veterinarian
                                                     and the like
Office, real estate       1 space/400 sq. ft.         
Office projects           1 space/400 sq. ft.        When more than one office
                                                     building on a lot
Parks                     1 space/acre               Other uses present require
                                                     parking based on use
Pharmacy                  1 space/400 sq. ft.         
Residential care facility 1 space/3 beds              
                                                     Provide on-site area for
Residential childcare     N/A                        drop off/pick up, wholly
                                                     on site
Residential, multi-       2 spaces/D.U.               
family, 10 or fewer units
Residential, multi-
family, more than 10      1.5 spaces/D.U              
units
Residential, single-      2 spaces/D.U.               
family
Residential, two-family   2 spaces/D.U.               
Restaurant                1 space/150 sq. ft. g.f.a. Includes outdoor dining
                                                     areas
Retail, general and       1 space/600 sq. ft.        Florist; flea market; mail
specialty                                            order; tobacco
Retail malt beverage      1 space/60 sq. ft.          
establishment
Retail package liquor     1 space/400 sq. ft.         
sales
Retail, shopping center   1 space/400 sq. ft.        Based on leasable space
                                                     (not public spaces)
                                                     If gymnasium or auditorium
School, K - 8             1 space/classroom and      on site an additional 1
                          office + 10 visitor spaces space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, 9 - 12            office + 1 space/ 5 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
                          1 space/classroom and      If gymnasium or auditorium
School, post-secondary    office + 1 space/ 2 seats  on site an additional 1
                          in each classroom          space/3 seats shall be
                                                     provided
Theater, indoor           1 space/4 seats             
Travel agency             1 space/400 sq. ft.         
 
   (J)   Landscaping, PNC Zone.
      (1)   Additional information and standards for vehicular use area (VUA)
landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.150 through
154.164.
      (2)   Along with the general requirements found elsewhere in this zoning
chapter, a separate landscaping plan shall be submitted as part of the master
plan requirements. The Commission may require landscaping above the minimums
required to ensure the integration of the development with surrounding land and
uses.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.16; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-2011; Ord. 26-2011, passed
11-21-2011; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016;
Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 17-2023, passed 8-21-2023; Ord. 17-2025,
passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.072 WCD-1, WCD-2 WOODLAND CORRIDOR DISTRICT.
   (A)   Generally. The purpose of the Woodland Corridor District (WCD) is to
regulate the development and use of property in the Woodland Corridor by
providing additional protections and flexibility not provided through the
application of conventional zoning regulations. This district is intended to
promote the objectives of the Woodland Corridor Plan adopted by the city as a
guide to future development along Woodland Drive. The Woodland Corridor
District is a zoning district and shall be designated on the official zoning
map or the city and shall be further subdivided into sub-districts 1 and 2. All
property within the Woodland Corridor District boundaries is subject to the
provisions of this section.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be deemed permitted, in light of the above described purposes of
this zoning district and the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Principal uses for sub-district 1 are as follows:
         (a)   Assembly uses:
            1.   Medical educational facilities; and
            2.   Adult care facilities.
         (b)   Commercial uses:
            1.   Assisted living facility;
            2.   Childcare centers;
            3.   Emergency services including ambulance service;
            4.   Medical and dental equipment and supply facilities;
            5.   Medical research, experimental and testing laboratories;
            6.   Offices, general;
            7.   Offices for professionals providing health care, including,
but not limited to, doctors, dentists, optometrists, ophthalmologists,
chiropractors and related providers of health care; and
            8.   Retail sale of medically related products, including but not
limited to, pharmacies, medical supplies and related health care products.
         (c)   Institutional uses:
            1.   Hospitals; and
            2.   Nursing homes and congregate care facilities.
         (d)   Residential uses:
            1.   Community residences;
            2.   Multi-family residences;
            3.   Single-family attached (two residences);
            4.   Single-family attached (three or more residences);
            5.   Single-family detached residences; and
            6.   Two-family residences.
      (2)   Principal uses for sub-district 2 are as follows:
         (a)   Assembly uses:
            1.   Churches and associated facilities; and
            2.   Medical educational facilities.
         (b)   Commercial uses:
            1.   Adult care facilities;
            2.   Assisted living facility;
            3.   Childcare centers;
            4.   Emergency services including ambulance service;
            5.   Financial institutions provided that they not exceed 3,000
square feet in gross floor area;
            6.   Medical and dental equipment and supply facilities;
            7.   Medical research, experimental and testing laboratories;
            8.   Offices, general;
            9.   Offices for professionals providing health care, including,
but not limited to, doctors, dentists, optometrists, ophthalmologists,
chiropractors and related providers of health care;
            10.   Office buildings;
            11.   Professional services;
            12.   Retail sale of medically related products, including, but not
limited to, pharmacies, medical supplies and related health care products;
            13.   Retail facilities, provided that they not exceed 10,000
square feet in gross floor area and that no automotive sales or services are
permitted; and
            14.   Restaurants, no greater than 2,000 square feet in building
area and no drive-in or drive-through service facilities are provided.
         (c)   Institutional uses:
            1.   Hospitals; and
            2.   Nursing homes.
         (d)   Residential uses:
            1.   Community residences;
            2.   Family lodging facility;
            3.   Multi-family residences;
            4.   Single-family detached residences;
            5.   Single-family attached (two residences);
            6.   Single-family attached (three or more residences); and
            7.   Two-family residences.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly
incidental and subordinate to permitted uses.
      (2)   Assembly/commercial/institutional/residential uses: Accessory
buildings; exterior treat-ments shall be designed to complement the principal
structure found on site.
   (D)   Conditional uses. Uses permitted only with Board approval after
consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration
of the development guidelines as detailed in the comprehensive plan: None.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   The Woodland Corridor Development Control Standards, The Woodland
Drive Conceptual Streetscape Plan and the Woodland Drive Corridor Plan,
contained within the Woodland Corridor Plan adopted by the City Council on 6-
19-1995, shall serve as a guide to the Department and Commission in the review
of development plans submitted pursuant to §§
154.105 through
154.116, provided, however that additional documentation may be required by the
Department to demonstrate compliance with this section.
      (2)   No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot
fronting on a right-of-way of less than 30 feet in width shall be permitted.
      (3)   When new construction or additions are made to an existing
structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks
the same as other similar residential or commercial structures on parcels
within 500 feet.
      (4)   The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum
lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of
the lot.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
 
Minimum lot frontage                  100 ft.
   Exception: Corner lots, minimum 150 ft. each street frontage
frontage
Minimum lot area                      21,780 sq. ft.
Minimum front yard setback            30 ft.
Minimum side yard setback             10 ft.
Minimum rear yard setback             20 ft.
                                     50 ft. if abutting any residential use
Maximum building height               45 ft.
Maximum impervious surface ratio
(I.S.R.) nursing homes and congregate .75
care facilities
   All other uses                  .60
Note: For the purposes of this chapter abutting shall address each lot line
to determine applicable setbacks for each yard
 
   (G)   Signs, WCD Zone. Additional information and standards for signs as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
 
WCD Signs
                  Maximum Maximum Sign Maximum Location Lighting Additional
Use Allowed Types Number  Area         Height  Require- Allowed  Require- ments
                                               ments
WCD Signs
              Allowed  Maximum  Maximum Maximum Location    Lighting Additional
Use           Types    Number   Sign    Height  Require-    Allowed  Require-
                                Area            ments                ments
                                                                     Wall sign
                                Wall:                                15% or 32
              Wall             15%                       Yes      sq. ft.,
                                                                     whichever
                                                                     is greater
                                Mon.:           Mon.: 10
              Monument Mon.: 1  50 sq.  Mon.:   ft. off              
Assembly Use                    ft.     16 ft.  paved
                                                surface
                                Pole:           Pole: 20
              Pole     Pole: 1  50 sq.  Pole:   ft. off              
                                ft.     20 ft.  paved
                                                surface
              Roof             Roof:                              
                                15%
                                                                     Wall sign
                                Wall:                                15% or 32
              Wall             15%                                sq. ft.,
                                                                     whichever
                                                                     is greater
                                Mon.:           Mon.: 10
Commercial    Monument Mon.: 1  50 sq.  Mon.:   ft. off               
Use                             ft.     16 ft.  paved       Yes
                                                surface
                                Pole:           Pole: 20
              Pole     Pole: 1  50 sq.  Pole:   ft. off               
                                ft.     20 ft.  paved
                                                surface
              Roof             Roof:                               
                                15%
                                                                     Wall sign
                                Wall:                                15% or 32
              Wall             15%                                sq. ft.,
                                                                     whichever
                                                                     is greater
                                Mon.:           Mon.: 10
Institutional Monument Mon.: 1  100 sq. Mon.:   ft. off               
Use                             ft.     16 ft.  paved       Yes
                                                surface
                                Pole:           Pole: 20
              Pole     Pole: 1  100 sq. Pole:   ft. off               
                                ft.     35 ft.  paved
                                                surface
              Roof             Roof:                               
                                15%
Single-family                                                        Walls and
Attached,                                       To be                fences
Two- family,  Monume   2/       32 sq.          approved by          permitted
Multi- family nt       entrance ft.     15 ft.  Engineering Yes      as part of
Identifica-                                     Department           overall
tion                                                                 sign
                                                                     design
              Wall     Wall 1   Wall:                               One wall
                                5%              10 ft. off           only
Residential   Monume   Mon.: 1  Mon.: 4 Mon.: 4 paved       External  
Use           nt                sq. ft. ft.     surface
              Pole     Pole: 1  Pole: 4 Pole: 4                       
                                sq. ft. ft.
Use Groups
   Assembly Uses: Churches; medical educational facility
   Commercial Uses: Adult care; assisted living; childcare centers; emergency
services; financial institutions; offices; professional services; research
laboratory; retail; institutional uses: hospital; nursing home
   Residential Uses: Community residence; family lodging facility; multi-
family; single-family
Special Provisions
1. Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and
pole sign size by a factor of 2
2.   Multi-family identification signs, one per entrance, containing the name
of the development and date of construction; sign face not to exceed 32 sq.
ft.; structures such as fences and walls when part of the overall sign design
are allowed. Maximum height shall be 15 ft.; landscaping is required
3.   If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants) the
development name must be placed on the sign; it may be a maximum of 25% of the
sign face; this shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant signs
4.   If more than one pole or monument sign allowed, the size may be increased
by 50% if only one sign is erected
5.   Hospitals may install one additional freestanding sign for each 500 ft. of
street frontage
6.   Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable
copy; when an assembly, commercial, or institutional use has frontage on both
Woodland Drive and North Dixie Avenue, an electronic message board is permitted
on a pole or monument sign along North Dixie Avenue, on the east facade of the
building, or on the north or south facade if it is mounted on the eastern one-
fourth of the building, subject to other requirements of this chapter
7.   When a business has frontage on both Woodland Drive and North Dixie Avenue
(US 31W) one additional pole or monument sign is permitted; the maximum size
and height of pole/monument sign along Woodland Drive frontage shall be 50 sq.
ft. and 20 ft., the maximum size and height of pole/monument sign along North
Dixie Avenue shall be 150 sq. ft. and 45 ft.
8.    When a commercial use has frontage in excess of 400 feet on Woodland
Drive one additional pole or monument sign is permitted; the maximum size and
height of the additional pole/monument sign along Woodland Drive shall be 100
sq. ft. in sign area and 35 feet in height.
 
   (H)   Parking, WCD Zone. Additional information and standards for parking as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
WCD Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
WCD Parking Standards
Land Use                  Parking Required           Notes
                          1 space/employee + 1       Provide on-site area for
Adult day care            space/500 sq. ft.          safe drop off and pick up,
                                                     wholly on site
Assisted living           .5 spaces/D.U.             Additionally, 1 space for
                                                     each employee
                          1 space/employee + 1       Provide on-site area for
Childcare                 space/400 sq. ft.          safe drop off and pick up,
                                                     wholly on site
Clinic, medical/dental    1 space/400 sq. ft.         
Community residence       1 space/3 occupants         
Congregate care           .75 spaces/D.U.             
Financial institutions    1 space/200 sq. ft.         
                                                     No on-street parking
Home occupation           N/A                        allowed for commercial
                                                     vehicles owned by the use
                                                     Based on maximum employees
Hospital                  1 space/3 beds + 1 space/  on a shift, including
                          employee                   medical staff; minimum of
                                                     5 spaces
                                                     Based on maximum employees
Nursing home, orphanage,  1 space/3 beds + 1 space/  on a shift, including
rehabilitation facility   employee                   medical staff; minimum of
                                                     5 spaces
                                                     Financial; legal; medical;
Office, general           1 space/250 sq. ft.        professional; veterinarian
                                                     and the like
Pharmacy                  1 space/400 sq. ft.         
Residential, multi-       2 spaces/D.U.               
family, 10 or fewer units
Residential, multi-
family, more than 10      1.5 spaces/D.U.             
units
Residential, single-      2 spaces/D.U.               
family
Residential, two-family   2 spaces/D.U.               
Restaurant                1 space/150 sq. ft. g.f.a. Includes outdoor dining
                                                     areas
Retail, specialty         1 space/600 sq. ft.        Florist; flea market; mail
                                                     order; tobacco
Research laboratory       1 space/employee + 5        
                          visitor spaces
 
   (I)   Landscaping, WCD Zone. Additional information and standards for
vehicular use area (VUA) landscaping as well as specific requirements are found
in §§
154.150 through
154.164.
 
WCD Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area
Landscape Buffer Area Width Options (In Feet) Planting Density Multiplier
Category
                      10 ft.                  1.5
Category B            15 ft.                  1.33
                      20 ft.                  1
 
 
WCD Buffering Requirements
Landscape Buffer Area Category Buffering Use Classification
                               Buffered Use                 Buffering Use
Category B                     R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 C-1, C-2, WCD
 
 
Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof
Planting Density Requirement Categories
A                   B                   C                   D
2 large trees or 1  2 large trees or 1  3 large trees or 2  3 large trees or 2
medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small
trees + 3 ft.       trees + 4 ft.       trees + 5 ft.       trees + 6 ft.
screening/80 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of
linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary
(OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.17; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
12-2009, passed 9-8-2009; Ord. 05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. passed 9-6-2011;
Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-2011; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 24-2016,
passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 15-2017, passed 9-18-
2017; Ord. 04-2020, passed 4-20-2020; Ord. 17-2023, passed 8-21-2023; Ord. 17-
2025, passed 8-4-2025; Ord. 18-2025, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 154.073 MAZ MUNICIPAL AIRPORT ZONE.
   (A)   Generally. The Municipal Airport Zone (MAZ) is created for the purpose
of assuring that property comprising airfields continue to be used in a manner
compatible with general aviation and aircraft operations. The MAZ is intended
to provide for uses associated with the operation of the airport and uses that
might benefit from their proximity to the airport. This district will regulate
the height of structures and objects, either natural or human-made, in order to
protect the lives of airport users and to protect the property and occupants of
land in its vicinity.
   (B)   Principal uses. Permitted uses include, but are not limited to, the
following types of activities provided they comply with the development
standards found herein. Other uses substantially similar to those listed herein
may also be deemed permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this
zoning district and the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Assembly uses:
         (a)   Aerospace and aviation related training facilities and schools;
         (b)   Open space; and
         (c)   Public and semi-public buildings, structures and uses essential
to the welfare of the city such as fire stations, police stations, water
storage facilities and similar uses.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Air ambulance facilities;
         (b)   Aircraft sales, repair, rebuild, rental, maintenance service and
storage and facilities for or important for the operation of such businesses;
         (c)   Airport passenger terminal, with associated ticket sales,
restaurant/lounge and food services and other incidental services when
associated with said terminal facility;
         (d)   Automobile rental/leasing agencies;
         (e)   Automotive parts and supply distributors;
         (f)   Aviation fuel, oil and other fluids sales;
         (g)   Aviation research and testing laboratories;
         (h)   Call center or data processing center;
         (i)   Cemetery;
         (j)   Commercial printing facilities;
         (k)   Fixed base operations providing aviation and aircraft services
to the public;
         (l)   Hangars intended for the storage of aircraft;
         (m)   Landscape and horticultural services;
         (n)   Laundry cleaning and garment services;
         (o)   Machinery equipment sales/rental and supply;
         (p)   Sales of agricultural supplies or products;
         (q)   Transportation terminals, including bus terminals, rail
terminals, trucking terminals, commuter van, taxi and limousine services and
incidental parking garages and lots;
         (r)   Wholesale bakeries;
         (s)   Wholesale florists;
         (t)   Wholesale lawn and garden supply;
         (u)   Wholesale lumber and construction materials;
         (v)   Wholesale plumbing/heating/electrical supply;
         (w)   Runways, taxiways, navigational equipment, aircraft parking
areas and other facilities and features normally associated with a general
aviation airport; and
         (x)   Triage center used to provide first aid and/or medical
stabilization necessary prior to air evacuation.
      (3)   Industrial uses:
         (a)   Air cargo/freight terminals, operations and activities;
         (b)   Industrial activities;
         (c)   Mail order facilities;
         (d)   Newspaper, periodical publishing and printing; and
         (e)   Warehousing and storage facilities.
      (4)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Agricultural use; and
         (b)   Single-family detached residence.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly
incidental and subordinate to permitted uses.
      (2)   Commercial uses: Parking areas.
   (D)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the
intent and purpose of these regulations and when appropriate measures are taken
to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses and goals of the comprehensive
plan.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Radio, television, communication and data transmission services
and facilities including antennas and satellite dishes; and
         (b)   Service retail businesses.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   All developments in the MAZ shall comply with the Federal Air
Regulations Part 77 “Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace” and Federal Aviation
Administration Advisory Circular 150/530013 “Airport Design”, or subsequently
adopted regulation.
      (2)   All developments in the MAZ shall comply with the regulations of
the Kentucky Airport Zoning Commission and KRS Chapter 183.
      (3)   When new construction or additions are made to an existing
structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks
the same as other similar structures on parcels within 1,000 feet.
      (4)   The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum
lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of
the lot.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
Minimum lot frontage                  100 ft.
   Exception: Corner lots, minimum 200 ft. each street frontage
frontage
Minimum front yard setback            75 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     50 ft. when abutting all other zones
Minimum side yard setback             30 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     20 ft. when abutting all other zones
Minimum rear yard setback             50 ft. when abutting property zoned R-1,
                                      R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6
                                     20 ft. when abutting all other zones
Maximum impervious surface ratio      .85
(I.S.R.)
Maximum building height               75 ft.
Note: For the purposes of this chapter abutting shall address each lot line to
determine applicable setbacks for each yard
 
   (G)   Prohibited uses.
      (1)   Any use that would encourage the concentration of bird populations;
      (3)   Churches and related facilities and buildings;
      (4)   Hospitals;
      (5)   Schools for academic instruction;
      (6)   Stadiums;
      (7)   Sanitary landfill; and
      (8)   Theaters, amphitheaters.
   (H)   Signs, MAZ Zone. Additional information and standards for signs as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
 
MAZ Signs
                  Maximu m Maximu m Sign Maximu m Location Lighting Additiona l
Use Allowed Types Number   Area          Height   Require- Allowed  Require-
                                                  ments             ments
MAZ Signs
           Allowed   Maximu m Maximu m  Maximu m Location   Lighting Additiona
Use        Types     Number   Sign Area Height   Require-   Allowed  l Require-
                                                 ments               ments
                                                                     Wall sign
                                                                     15% or 32
           Wall              Wall: 15%                            sq. ft.,
                                                                     whichever
                                                                     is greater
                                                 Mon.: 10
Assembly   Monume nt Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16 ft. off    Yes       
Use                  street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                 surface
                                                 Pole: 20
           Pole      Pole: 1/ Pole: 150 Pole: 25 ft. off              
                     street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                 surface
           Roof              Roof: 15%                             
                                                                     Wall sign
                                                                     15% or 32
           Wall              Wall: 15%                   Yes      sq. ft.,
                                                                     whichever
                                                                     is greater
Commerci                                         Mon.: 10
al Use     Monume nt Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16 ft. off             
                     street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                 surface
                                                 Pole: 20
           Pole      Pole: 1/ Pole: 150 Pole: 45 ft. off             
                     street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                 surface
          Roof              Roof: 15%                            
                                                                     Wall sign
                                                                     15% or 32
           Wall              Wall: 15%                            sq. ft.,
                                                                     whichever
                                                                     is greater
                                                 Mon.: 10
Industrial Monume nt Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 150 Mon.: 16 ft. off    Yes       
Use                  street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                 surface
                                                 Pole: 20
           Pole      Pole: 1/ Pole: 150 Pole: 25 ft. off              
                     street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved
                                                 surface
           Roof              Roof: 15%                             
           Wall      Wall: 1  Wall: 5%                              One wall
                                                 10 ft. off          only
Residentia Monume nt Mon.: 1  Mon.: 4   Mon.: 4  paved      External  
l Use                         sq. ft.   ft.      surface
           Pole      Pole: 1  Pole: 4   Pole: 4                       
                              sq. ft.   ft.
Use Groups
   Assembly Uses: Open space; schools; public buildings.
   Commercial Uses: Any use not listed as assembly; industrial or residential
   Industrial Uses: Air terminals; industrial activity; mail order; printing;
warehousing
   Residential Uses: Single-family
Special Provisions
1.   If more than one pole or monument sign allowed; the size may be increased
by 50% if only one sign is erected
2.   If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants) the
development name must be placed on the sign; it may be a maximum of 25% of the
sign face; this shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant signs
 
   (I)   Parking, MAZ Zone. Additional information and standards for parking as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
MAZ Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
MAZ Parking Standards
Land Use                   Parking Required         Notes
Aerospace training         1 space/ 3 seats in each  
facility                   classroom
Agricultural use           1 space/employee          
Air ambulance facility     1 space/employee          
Air cargo, freight         1 space/employee          
terminal
Aircraft sales, repair     1 space/1000 sq. ft.      
Automobile rental          1 space/600 sq. ft.      Lot for rental vehicles not
                                                    required to be striped
Automotive parts           1 space/600 sq. ft.       
distributor
Aviation fuel sales        1 space/employee          
Aviation testing, research 1 space/employee          
Cemetery                   1 space/employee         1 space/each vehicle owned
                                                    by the facility
Commercial printing        1 space/employee          
Fixed base operator        1 space/employee         Minimum of 5 spaces
                                                    required
Hangers, aircraft          1 space/hanger            
Landscape nursery          1 space/employee          
Laundry                    1 space/600 sq. ft.       
Machinery sales            1 space/600 sq. ft.      Display space not required
                                                    to be striped
Mail order facility        1 space/employee         On a maximum shift
Newspaper printing and the 1 space/400 sq. ft.       
like
Public buildings           1 space/250 sq. ft.      When more than one building
                                                    on a lot, 1/400 sq. ft.
Residential, single-family 2 spaces/unit             
Terminal                   1 space/250 sq. ft.      Air; bus; rail; truck
Warehouse                  1 space/3,000 sq. ft.    Any office area calculated
                                                    at 1 space/500 sq. ft.
Wholesale business         1 space/600 sq. ft.       
 
   (J)   Landscaping, MAZ zone Additional information and standards for
vehicular use area (VUA) landscaping as well as specific requirements are found
in §§
154.150 through
154.164.
 
MAZ Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area
Landscape Buffer Area Width Options (In Feet) Planting Density Multiplier
Category
                      30 ft.                  1.5
Category D            40 ft.                  1.33
                      50 ft.                  1
 
 
MAZ Buffering Requirements
Landscape Buffer Area Category Buffering Use Classification
                               Buffered Use                       Buffering Use
Category D                     R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, C-1, I-2, MAZ
                               C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, WCD
 
 
Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof
Planting Density Requirement Categories
A                   B                   C                   D
2 large trees or 1  2 large trees or 1  3 large trees or 2  3 large trees or 2
medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small  medium and 2 small
trees + 3 ft.       trees + 4 ft.       trees + 5 ft.       trees + 6 ft.
screening/80 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of screening/60 ft. of
linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary     linear boundary
(OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*              (OFT)*
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.18; Ord. 08-2009, passed 5-18-2009; Ord.
05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. passed 9-6-2011; Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-
2011; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 17-
2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.074 AGB AGRI-BUSINESS.
   (A)   Generally. The Agri-Business Zone is created for the purpose of
encouraging and allowing agricultural business uses to develop in a rural
setting within the corporate limits. This zone is intended to allow for a mix
of uses, both residential and commercial, that will assure that small family
agricultural businesses thrive in the community.
   (B)   Principal uses. Uses substantially similar to those listed herein
shall also be permitted, in light of the purposes of this zoning district and
the comprehensive plan.
      (1)   Assembly uses: Churches and associated facilities.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Agricultural uses excluding open or enclosed commercial feedlot
operations;
         (b)   Bed and breakfast;
         (c)   Communications towers/poles or collocations of equipment for the
same, when erected by or on property owned by a public entity or public
utility;
         (d)   Distilleries;
         (e)   Facilities, indoor and outdoor, used for wedding receptions and
events;
         (f)   Golf course;
         (g)   Government operated parks;
         (h)   Retail sales of agricultural products;
         (i)   Outdoor amphitheater; and
         (j)   Wineries.
      (3)   Residential uses: Single-family detached residences.
   (C)   Accessory uses. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory,
clearly incidental and subordinate to principal uses.
      (1)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Childcare centers, in home. Centers shall comply with all
requirements as regulated by the commonwealth’s Department of Families and
Children;
         (b)   Home occupations;
         (c)   Keeping of not more than two roomers or boarders without kitchen
facilities;
         (d)   Living quarters with cooking facilities and not rented for
guests and employees of the premises;
         (e)   Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking
areas;
         (f)   Private swimming pools and tennis courts, private non-commercial
parks and open spaces.
      (2)   Commercial uses: Catering kitchens.
   (D)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the
intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the guidelines in
the comprehensive plan.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Outdoor commercial recreation facilities such as adventure
tourism, zoos, riding stables, fishing lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts and
campgrounds; and
         (b)   Resort hotels and restaurants.
   (E)   Special provisions.
      (1)   More than one principal structure per lot or parcel of land shall
be permitted.
      (2)   Structures are encouraged to place the front facade of the building
facing the primary street frontage.
      (3)   Structures shall not be subject to the commercial guideline
provisions of this chapter but all structures associated with a single property
are encouraged to contain similar design features and should utilize designs
compatible with their rural setting.
   (F)   Lot criteria.
Minimum lot frontage                             150 ft.
   Exception: Corner lots, minimum frontage   175 ft. each street frontage
Minimum lot area                                 217,800 sq. ft.
Minimum front yard setback                       100 ft.
Minimum side yard setback                        50 ft.
Minimum rear yard setback                        50 ft.
Maximum building height, residential             35 ft.
Maximum building height, commercial and assembly 75 ft.
Note: For the purposes of this chapter abutting shall address each lot line to
determine applicable lot frontage, lot area and setbacks for each yard
 
   (G)   Signs, AGB Zone. Additional information and standards for signs as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
AGB Signs
                  Maximu m Maximu m Sign Maximu m Location Lighting Additiona l
Use Allowed Types Number   Area          Height   Require- Allowed  Require-
                                                  ments             ments
AGB Signs
           Allowed   Maximu m Maximu m  Maximu m Location   Lighting Additiona
Use        Types     Number   Sign Area Height   Require-   Allowed  l Require-
                                                 ments               ments
           Wall      Wall: 1  Wall: 15%                              
Assembly   Monume nt Mon.: 1/ Mon.: 100 Mon.: 15 10 ft. off           
Use                  street   sq. ft.   ft.      paved      Yes
           Pole      Pole: 1/ Pole: 50  Pole: 15 surface              
                     street   sq. ft.   ft.
           Wall      Wall: 1  Wall: 15%                              
Commerci   Monume nt Mon.: 1  Mon.: 100 Mon.: 15 10 ft. off           
al Use                        sq. ft.   ft.      paved      Yes
           Pole      Pole: 1  Pole: 50  Pole: 15 surface              
                              sq. ft.   ft.
           Wall      Wall: 1  Wall :5%                              W.M., one
                                                 10 ft. off          wall only
Residentia Monume nt Mon.: 1  Mon.: 4   Mon.: 4  paved      External  
l Use                         sq. ft.   ft.      surface
           Pole      Pole: 1  Pole: 4   Pole: 4                       
                              sq. ft.   ft.
Use Groups
   Assembly Uses: Churches
   Commercial Uses: Agricultural uses; bed and breakfast; distilleries; golf
course; outdoor commercial; parks; resort hotel; wineries
   Residential Uses: Child care; home occupation; keeping of roomers; living
quarters; private garages; private pools; residential care facility; single-
family
Special Provisions
1.   Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and
pole sign size by a factor of 2
2.   Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable
copy, when located along local or residential collector streets
 
   (H)   Parking AGB Zone Additional information and standards for parking as
well as specific requirements are found in §§
154.175 through
154.192.
AGB Parking Standards
Land Use Parking Required Notes
AGB Parking Standards
Land Use                  Parking Required      Notes
Agricultural use          1 space/employee       
Bed and breakfast         1 space/room rented    
Childcare, in home        N/A                   Provide on-site area for drop
                                                off and pick up wholly on site
Church                    1 space/3 seats       Based on seating in main
                                                sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces
Distilleries and wineries 1 space/employee      On a maximum shift
Events facility           1 spaces/200 sq. ft.   
Hotels                    1 spaces/room          
Outdoor amphitheater      1 space/2 seats       May be gravel or other approved
                                                surface
Outdoor commercial        5 spaces + 1/employee May be gravel or other approved
                                                surface
Residential care facility 1 space/3 beds         
Retail                    1/400 sq. ft.          
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.19; Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-5-2017; Ord.
17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.075 FDH FUTURE DEVELOPMENT HOLDING.
   (A)   In certain situations, such as proposed annexations, or areas
currently within the city limits not fully served by adequate infrastructure,
including, but not limited to, potable water, adequate fire protection, public
sanitary sewer or streets of insufficient design or construction to allow for
the safe movement of vehicular traffic, the Future Development Holding (FDH)
Zone is created to be implemented as an interim zone until such time as the
above noted deficiencies have been addressed.
   (B)   Except for those uses or structures existing at the time of the
classification of the property as FDH, no new development may occur which would
adversely impact any public facility or utility. Existing structures are
allowed to expand. Accessory structures, such as barns, private garages for
personal automobiles, swimming pools, private storage buildings, gazebos and
other similar structures are permitted only if they are accessory to an
existing principal use.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.8.20; Ord. 17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.076 USE-SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   (A)   Accessory dwelling use (ADU).
      (1)   General standards for all accessory uses and structures. All
accessory uses and accessory structures shall generally comply with the
standards set forth in §
154.265, Accessory Structure Location Requirements.
      (2)   Accessory dwelling units (ADUs). Where permitted, accessory
dwelling units shall be subject to the standards in this section.
      (3)   Integrated ADUs. Integrated ADUs are located within a permitted
principal structure and shall comply with the standards for principal
structures established in the zoning districts of this Zoning Code.
         (a)   Integrated ADUs may be established by dividing space within a
principal building, or by adding floor area to an existing building.
         (b)   Integrated ADUs shall have direct access from the outside of the
building.
         (c)   Integrated ADUs shall not involve design modifications to the
exterior of the principal building that make their presence obvious.
         (d)   Any exterior stairs that serve as an entrance to the ADU shall
be located on the side or rear of the principal structure and are prohibited
from being located on the front of the principal structure.
         (e)   If a principal building is expanded to accommodate an integrated
ADU, the expansion shall be designed in a manner that is comparable to the
principal building.
      (4)   Detached ADUs are dwelling units that are located inside of an
accessory structure, such as a detached residential garage or detached
structure.
      (5)   ADUs may not be established within manufactured homes or structures
and vehicles that do not have a permanent foundation, including, but not
limited to recreational vehicles, travel trailers, or campers.
      (6)   Maximum floor area of the ADU.
         (a)   Measurement. The floor area is measured as the area within the
ADU itself and does not include areas of an accessory building that are used
for other purposes, such as a detached garage or a workshop that is not
incorporated into the ADU.
         (b)   The floor area of an ADU shall not exceed 25% of the total
square footage of the principal residential building to which it is accessory,
or 800 square feet, whichever is greater.
      (7)   Required parking for ADUs. In the R-1 through R-6 districts, in
addition to the parking requirements for the principal residential use set out
in the zoning district, one off-street parking space for the ADU shall be
provided.
   (B)   Community garden.
      (1)   No sale of any items may take place on-site.
      (2)   Storage of equipment and materials shall be inside a structure or
fully screened.
      (3)   Compost storage, if utilized, shall have a setback of a minimum of
30 feet from the front property line, and ten feet from any side or rear
property line. Compost storage shall be used only to support onsite operations.
      (4)   Community gardens that have ceased permanent operation or been
abandoned, shall be cleared, all associated structures removed, and the area
re-vegetated no more than 30 days after the date of discontinued operations,
unless otherwise specified by the Planning Director.
   (C)   Home occupation.
      (1)   The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to use for
dwelling purposes.
      (2)   The use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit or
enclosed accessory structure.
      (3)   The use shall not require external alteration of the dwelling unit.
      (4)   The use shall be carried on only by residents of the dwelling unit.
The use may have employees but they may not work from the dwelling unit.
      (5)   The use shall not entail any exterior display or storage of
merchandise or product.
      (6)   The use shall not generate traffic in greater volumes than would
normally be expected in a neighborhood.
      (7)   The use shall create no nuisance, offensive noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare or electrical disturbance.
      (8)   One commercial vehicle, less than 7,500 GVW, associated with the
business use, may be located at the residence.
      (9)   A barber shop/beauty salon use shall have a maximum of one chair.
   (D)   Short-term rental, owner-occupied. 
      (1)   Each dwelling unit is limited to one short-term rental contract at
a time;
      (2)   The number of occupants in the dwelling unit during a short-term
rental shall not exceed two times the number of bedrooms plus four individuals,
notwithstanding restrictions of the applicable building or property maintenance
code; and
      (3)   The dwelling unit is limited to ten short-term rental days each
calendar year.
(Ord. 17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.077 CONDITIONAL USE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. The following standards shall apply to all conditional
uses, in addition to the specific standards in this section. If a use requires
a conditional use permit and has no associated specific standards in this
section, then the Director and the Board of Zoning Adjustment or Planning
Commission shall consider the following standards when making a recommendation
or decision on a conditional use:
      (1)   The proposed conditional use will operate or be designed in a
manner that does not diminish the use or functionality of surrounding
properties;
      (2)   The proposed conditional use will incorporate provisions for hours
of operation, parking and loading areas, driveways, lighting, signs,
landscaping, buffering, and other site improvements;
      (3)   The proposed conditional use must have adequate public services
(e.g. streets, off-street parking, pedestrian facilities, water, sewer, gas,
electricity, and police and fire protection) available without the reduction of
services to any existing uses;
      (4)   If, in the opinion of Planning Commission or City Council, the
conditional use becomes a nuisance, the conditional use permit may be recalled
for further review, which could lead to the need for additional conditions,
restrictions, or the revocation of the permit;
      (5)   The proposed conditional use will incorporate design features to
sufficiently protect adjacent uses that may include but are not limited to
service areas, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, safety provisions, access
ways to and from the site, lighting, screening and buffering, fencing, and
building placement; and
      (6)   The proposed use is compatible with adjacent existing uses.
Compatibility shall be expressed in terms of appearance, architectural scale,
use and intensity, and features, site design and scope, landscaping, as well as
the control of adverse environmental impacts, including noise and lighting, or
other undesirable conditions.
   (B)   Private club. Shall not be located on a site that is within:
      (1)   One thousand feet of a site that contains another private club use;
      (2)   Two hundred feet of a property in a district in which a residential
use is allowed or located; or
      (3)   The use may not be co-located in the same structure as other uses.
   (C)   Resort hotel. In the R-1 and R-2 districts, resort hotels shall only
be permitted when associated with a golf course.
   (D)   Restaurant. In the R-1 and R-2 districts, restaurants shall only be
permitted when associated with a golf course.
   (E)   Short-term rental, non-owner occupied.
      (1)   Rental limit. The dwelling unit is limited to one short-term rental
contract at a time.
      (2)   Maximum guests. The number of occupants in the dwelling unit during
a short-term rental shall not exceed two times the number of bedrooms plus four
individuals notwithstanding restrictions of the applicable building or property
maintenance code.
      (3)   Tenure. A short-term rental tenant shall not stay for more than 30
consecutive days in duration.
      (4)   Signs. There shall be no outdoor signage which identifies the
short-term rental use.
      (5)   Insurance. Each short-term rental host shall obtain and maintain,
at the host's sole expense, liability insurance to cover the injury or death of
a tenant while the tenant is in, on, or about the short-term rental property.
      (6)   Additional review criteria. The review for conditional use permit
approval of a non-owner occupied short-term rental shall consider but not be
limited to the following factors:
         (a)   The proposed occupancy and the size of the property, and whether
a smaller occupancy level is appropriate.
         (b)   Setbacks and proximity to other dwellings.
         (c)   Rental regulations (such as no large parties, no extra guests)
imposed by the owner and the degree of owner involvement in property
management.
         (d)   Vehicle access and onsite parking and the number of parking
spaces available.
         (e)   Compliance with all state, county, and city ordinances, laws,
rules, and regulations including the city's building and fire codes.
         (f)   Maintaining the appearance of the property as a residential use
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
         (g)   Prior use of the property as a short-term rental without
substantiated complaints as of the date of the adoption of this section.
   (F)   Wireless telecommunications facility. Communications towers/poles or
collocations of equipment for the same, when erected by or on property owned by
a public entity or public utility.
(Ord. 17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.078 CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Description. A conservation development consists of smaller lots than
are generally permitted by the zoning district that are clustered together in
order to provide for more common open space. The common open space may be set-
aside for resource features such as public or private parks, recreation areas,
woodlands, creeks, streams, and similar features.
   (B)   Minimum site area. The minimum site area required for a conservation
development is five acres.
   (C)   A minimum buffer of 100 feet shall be provided along the perimeter of
the development, and shall be maintained in a natural state (e.g. trees,
riparian buffer, etc.).
      (1)   Exception. Conservation development lots directly abutting an
existing single-unit residential development shall provide setbacks equal to or
greater than those of the existing, adjacent lots.
   (D)   Common open space. Conservation Development shall be required to have
common open space subject to the following requirements.
      (1)   A minimum of 30% of the total development site shall be provided as
common open space.
      (2)   A minimum of 25% of the common open space requirement shall be
useable and open to the public.
      (3)   Common open space at the periphery of the development shall consist
of natural areas open space.
      (4)   Common open space shall be integrated into the development design
to bring access to the maximum number of properties; provided, however, that
physical access may be limited if such limitation would materially enhance
natural resource management.
      (5)   Perimeter buffers may count toward required common open space
requirement.
   Figure 154.078-1, Conservation Development Type
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cfa1911bfa0ab5e9746785b7ab63422cfaa1ec4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2189.png]
 
(Ord. 17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.079 COTTAGE COURT DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Purpose. A cottage court development type broadens the diversity of
housing options available in the city to provide accessible, adequate, and
affordable housing. This development type contains dwelling units arranged
around an internal courtyard, and may include a community center as an amenity
space.
   (B)   Development standards.
      (1)   Maximum density. The maximum density for a cottage court
neighborhood shall be as established in the base zoning districts.
      (2)   Minimum lot size and setbacks shall be as established within the
base zoning district.
      (3)   The development shall be oriented around an internal courtyard, and
may contain additional common open space.
         (a)   The internal courtyard and common open space shall combine for a
minimum of 30 percent of the development site.
         (b)   The internal courtyard shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width.
         (c)   Minimum five-foot pedestrian walkways shall be provided in the
internal courtyard and common open space connecting each dwelling unit to a
community-wide sidewalk network, and shared parking areas or garages.
         (d)   If a community center is provided as a required open space, it
shall serve all residents of the cottage court development, and its gross floor
area shall be no greater than 10% of the site area. A common building may
include a kitchen and meeting or indoor recreation facilities but shall not
contain bedrooms.
         (e)   The internal courtyard and common open space shall not contain
parking spaces or areas.
         (f)   A minimum of one side of the internal courtyard shall be open
to, and visible from, an adjacent public street.
      (4)   A minimum of 50% of dwelling units shall be oriented toward the
internal courtyard.
      (5)   Each dwelling unit shall have direct access to, and contain livable
space on, the ground level of the development.
      (6)   Garages.
         (a)   Garages shall be accessed via a private drive or alley.
         (b)   Garages shall not be oriented toward a public street.
         (c)   Garages shall not be oriented toward an internal courtyard.
         (d)   Garage buildings shall be consistent in architecture, materials,
and color to the principal dwellings.
      (7)   Cottage court developments shall provide parking as required by the
base zoning district.
   Figure 154.079-1, Cottage Court Development Type
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cfa1911bfa0ab5e9746785b7ab63422cfaa1ec4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2191.png]
(Ord. 17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 154.080 TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Purpose. A townhouse development type broadens the diversity of
housing options available in the city to provide accessible, adequate, and
affordable housing. This development type contains dwelling units with at least
one common sidewall, typically more than one story in height.
   (B)   Development standards.
      (1)   Maximum density. The maximum density for a townhouse development
shall be as established in the base zoning districts.
      (2)   Townhouse developments shall contain a minimum of three, and a
maximum of eight attached units.
      (3)   Minimum lot size and setbacks shall be as established within the
base zoning district.
      (4)   Each dwelling unit shall be oriented toward a public street.
      (5)   Each dwelling unit shall have direct access to, and contain livable
space on, the ground level of the development.
      (6)   Garages.
         (a)   Garages shall be accessed via a rear private drive or alley.
         (b)   Garages shall not be oriented toward a public street.
      (7)   Townhouse developments shall provide parking as required by the
base zoning district.
(Ord. 17-2025, passed 8-4-2025)
OVERZONES
§ 154.085 INTERSTATE HIGHWAY SERVICE BUSINESS (IHSB).
   (A)   This overzone is intended to provide additional on-premises business
identification signage which may be visible to motorists traveling Interstate
65 such that potential customers have adequate time to exit the interstate in a
safe manner. These provisions are intended for those businesses which are
located near the interstate primarily for the purpose of providing goods and
services to interstate motorists. Additionally, it is believed that in
attracting interstate motorists to goods and services near interstate highways,
there may be additional business activity generated for the remainder of
business establishments in the city.
   (B)   The Interstate Highway Service Business Overzone shall be located on
the official zoning map. When desired, all permitted business uses which
qualify for signage as regulated by §§
154.205 through
154.217 and are located within the overzone as measured, 2,600 feet from the
intersection of the centerline of Interstate-65 and U. S. 62, and ending at the
railroad right-of-way to the west; and measured 1,800 feet from the
intersection of the centerline of Interstate 65 and U.S. 31W and U.S. 61; and
measured 1,500 feet from the intersection of the centerline of Western Kentucky
Parkway (KY 9001) and Ring Road(KY 3005), may apply for this additional signage
as required in §§
154.205 through
154.217.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.9.1; Ord. 28-2014, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 154.086 FLOODPLAIN OVERZONE.
   (A)   Generally. The Floodplain (FO) Overzone is designed to protect certain
areas which have been designated as being susceptible to periodic inundation
which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
destruction or disruption of commercial and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
   (B)   Purpose. The designation of these areas and the regulations imposed on
this overzone are designed to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health;
      (2)   Provide for public awareness of the flooding potential;
      (3)   Minimize public and private property damage;
      (4)   Protect individuals from buying lands and structures which are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards;
      (5)   Minimize surface and ground water pollution and erosion of the
floodplain soils which will adversely affect human, animal or plant life;
      (6)   Minimize the expenditure of money for costly flood control
projects; and
      (7)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water,
natural gas and sanitary sewer lines, mains and facilities; electric, telephone
and cable television lines and facilities; streets and bridges; and storm sewer
facilities and structures.
   (C)   Establishment of Floodplain Overzone.
      (1)   The boundaries of the Floodplain Overzone shall be determined by
scientific and engineering studies prepared by the Federal Insurance
Administration employing customarily accepted scientific and engineering
practices of flood protection and the results thereof shall be located on the
official zoning map. The Floodplain Overzone includes all areas designated as
special flood hazard areas on the National Flood Insurance Program Flood
Boundaries and Floodway Map, City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky, dated 8-16-2007,
or an approved subsequent amendment to that map. Where interpretation is needed
in order to allow a property owner, surveyor or other individual to locate the
exact boundaries of the Floodplain Overzone as shown on the official zoning
map, the city’s Director of Storm Water Management (Floodplain Administrator)
shall initially make the interpretation based on flood profile information.
      (2)   Where Floodplain Overzone areas are designated, regulations for
these areas shall be in addition to the regular zoning district requirements.
The floodplain district shall overlay regular zoning districts. The regulations
of these areas shall be established by the flood damage prevention ordinance as
adopted by the City Council and as codified in Ch. 151 of this code of
ordinances.
   (D)   Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where an
applicant wishes to establish a permitted use, he or she must conform to the
following requirements when relevant:
      (1)   All encroachment, including fill, new construction and substantial
improvements are prohibited unless permitted by the city’s Department of Storm
Water Management and other appropriate agency having jurisdiction;
      (2)   Permits for any new construction or substantial improvement for
residential construction shall be obtained from the city’s Director of Storm
Water Management (Floodplain Administrator) and shall comply with all
standards, regulations and requirements, including but not limited to, any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation;
      (3)   Permits for any new construction or substantial improvement for non
residential construction shall be obtained from the city’s Director of Storm
Water Management (Floodplain Administrator) and shall comply with all
standards, regulations and requirements, including, but not limited to, any
non-residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
flood-proofed below an elevation one above the base flood elevation and
elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or have
compliance certified as specified in the city flood damage prevention
ordinance.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.9.2)
§ 154.087 FREEMAN LAKE OVERZONE.
   (A)   Generally. The Freeman Lake (FLO) Overzone is designed to protect
certain areas in and around Freeman Lake which have been designated as being
susceptible to inundation based on the probable maximum precipitation (PMP).
   (B)   Purpose. The designation of these areas and the regulations imposed in
this overzone are designed for the purpose of:
      (1)   Protecting human life and health;
      (2)   Minimizing public and private property damage;
      (3)   Protecting individuals from developing lands and structures which
are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards;
      (4)   Minimizing surface and ground water pollution;
      (5)   Controlling development, such as fill, dumping, storage of
materials, structures and buildings which will minimize the effectiveness of
public flood control efforts by reducing the capacity of the flood control
structure at Freeman Lake; and
      (6)   Providing for public awareness of the flooding potential.
   (C)   Goals. These goals will be accomplished by:
      (1)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property which result in damaging increases in flood heights;
      (2)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction;
      (3)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers;
      (4)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging or other activity which may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
      (5)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.
   (D)   Boundaries. The boundaries of the Freeman Lake Overzone shall be
determined by scientific and engineering studies prepared by the city employing
customarily accepted scientific and engineering practices of flood protection
and climatology with the results thereof being indicated on the official zoning
map. The boundaries of the FLO for construction or use restrictions set forth
within the ordinance shall be delineated by the elevation determined by the
scientific and engineering practices for flood hazards based on the PMP. Where
interpretation is needed in order to allow a property owner, surveyor or other
individual to locate the exact boundaries of the FLO as shown on the official
zoning map, the Director of the Department and the city’s Director of Storm
Water Management (Floodplain Administrator) shall make the interpretation based
on flood profile information contained within the Hydrologic Study - PMP Flood
Limit Determinations Freeman Lake Dam Elizabethtown, Kentucky, dated July 2000,
prepared by Fuller, Mossbarger, Scott & May, Inc.
   (E)   Establishment of Freeman Lake (FLO) Overzone.
      (1)   The overzone established by this chapter shall include all areas
designated as possible flooding areas based on the PMP and flood routing
analysis prepared for the city and detailed in the Hydrologic Study - PMP Flood
Limit Determinations Freeman Lake Dam, Elizabethtown, Kentucky, dated July
2000, prepared by Fuller, Mossbarger, Scott & May, Inc.
      (2)   Where Freeman Lake (FLO) Overzone areas are designated, regulations
for these areas shall be in addition to the regular zoning district
requirements. The Freeman Lake (FL) Overzone district shall overlay regular
zoning districts.
   (F)   Specific standards. In all areas of the Freeman Lake (FLO) Overzone
where an applicant wishes to undertake activity associated with a permitted
use, he or she must conform to the following requirements when relevant:
      (1)   Permit. Prior to any encroachment, such as filling, grading or
dredging, a permit shall be obtained from the city’s Department of Storm Water
Management based on the Hydrologic Study - PMP Flood Limit Determinations
Freeman Lake Dam, Elizabethtown, Kentucky, dated July 2000, prepared by Fuller,
Mossbarger, Scott & May, Inc.; and
      (2)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvements of any residential structure for any property within the overzone
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the
base elevation as determined by the Hydrologic Study - PMP Flood Limit
Determinations Freeman Lake Dam, Elizabethtown, Kentucky, dated July 2000,
prepared by Fuller, Mossbarger, Scott & May, Inc. This requirement shall not
apply to structures and/or buildings that are not occupied as dwelling/living
space, including, but not limited to, garages, decks, accessory storage
buildings, play equipment and swimming pools.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.9.3)
§ 154.088 NATIONAL REGISTER HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE.
   This zone is defined as follows: all properties within an area bounded by
North Mulberry Street, Plum Alley, Quince Alley and Strawberry Alley (shown on
Figure 2.0). This zone is intended to provide additional protections for these
properties and to recognize their importance the historical character
Elizabethtown. All buildings shall be limited to a height of 35 feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cfa1911bfa0ab5e9746785b7ab63422cfaa1ec4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1870.png]
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.9.4; Ord. 23-2009, passed 11-16-2009; Ord.
03-2022, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 154.089 COMMERCIAL TRANSITION OVERZONE.
   (A)   Gene rally. The Commercial Transition Overzone is designed to provide
for flexibility in areas of the community determined to be in transition from
predominantly residential uses and developed commercial uses to redeveloped or
more intense commercial uses. The Commercial Transition Overzone is created to
meet the goals of the comprehensive plan, including, but not limited to,
redevelopment or reuse of declining residential and commercial areas and the
recognition that transitional areas contain land uses that are potentially more
intense and dense. Because some areas to which these goals apply are comprised
of older, smaller and narrower lots, certain waivers may be commonly required
to meet the goals of the comprehensive plan.
   (B)   Waivers. Parcels within a designated commercial transition zone may
apply for waivers from the following requirements when circumstances warrant
such waivers. These areas are:
      (1)   Minimum lot frontages;
      (2)   Parking reduction in excess of 50% of the required parking spaces;
      (3)   Parking design requirements relating to setbacks from property
lines;
      (4)   Entrance standards for distance and locations; and
      (5)   Landscaping requirements. Some landscaping must be installed as lot
and parking configurations allow.
   (C)   Process. A development plan and/or subdivision plat, as applicable,
and a waiver application must be submitted for review to the Planning
Commission for consideration of approval for all such waivers.
   (D)   Waiver limitation. Waivers are applicable to the specific development
and use requested and will not run with the land, exception being lot frontage
waivers granted for subdivisions, and are not transferable to other uses or
other lots.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.9.5; Ord. 27-2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord.
10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 28-2014, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 154.090 PROHIBITED USES.
   (A)   Enclosed commercial livestock, poultry or similar feeding operations;
   (B)   Hazardous waste facility for the purpose of acceptance, storage,
handling and transfer of hazardous or toxic wastes, when said acceptance,
storage, handling and transfer are the primary use of the property. This shall
not include businesses and industries which as a byproduct of their business or
manufacturing process create a hazardous or toxic substance;
   (C)   Landfill;
   (D)   Mining, either underground or open pit;
   (E)   Recreational vehicle, camper, travel trailer, mobile home, house
trailer or residential manufactured housing unit as an office or principal
structure/use or accessory structure/use in any residential, commercial or
industrial zone, with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Office trailers used as a temporary construction office to be
removed at the completion of the construction activity and prior to the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy;
      (2)   Office trailers used as temporary real estate sales office, for the
sale of lots in a subdivision, to be removed when all lots are sold;
      (3)   Mobile homes or trailers located in approved mobile home parks in
mobile home subdivisions;
      (4)   Type 1 manufactured housing units as defined by this ordinance may
be placed in any residential zone; and
      (5)   Units designed and constructed as offices in an industrial zone.
   (F)   Salvage yards.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.9.6; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 154.091 CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Intent and purpose. The purpose of these regulations are to provide
for safe and efficient integration of cellular antenna towers for cellular
telecommunications services or personal communications services within the
city; to provide for such facilities in conformance with the goals and
guidelines and recommendations of the comprehensive plan; and to allow such
facilities with the intention of protecting the public health, safety and
general welfare.
   (B)   Pre-application conference. Applicants are encouraged to meet with the
Department to discuss their proposal, to allow for early coordination and to
identify those items that are in conformance/non-conformance with the
comprehensive plan, specific standards of this chapter, other provisions of the
zoning ordinance, and other city regulations or standards prior to filing a
uniform application with the Commission.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section and chapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      ALTERNATE CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. Human-made trees, clock towers, bell
towers, steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that accommodate, camouflage, minimize or conceal the presence of
cellular antennas or cellular antenna towers or are reconstructed for the
purpose of accommodating cellular antennas or cellular antenna towers. This
term does not include existing structures erected for another primary purpose,
but which subsequently have cellular antennas attached to or located within
them, without any reconstruction of the original structure. For the provision
of these regulations an ALTERNATIVE CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER is considered a
cellular antenna tower.
      ANTENNAS OR RELATED EQUIPMENT. Transmitting, receiving or other equipment
used to support cellular telecommunications service or personal communications
service. This definition does not include towers.
      CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. A tower constructed for, or an existing facility
that has been adapted for, the location of transmission or related equipment to
be used in the provision of cellular telecommunications services or personal
communications services.
      CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. A retail telecommunications service
that uses radio signals transmitted through cell sites and mobile switching
stations.
      CO-LOCATION. Locating two or more transmission antennas or related
equipment on the same cellular antenna tower.
      GUYED CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. A type of wireless transmission tower that
is supported by guy wires.
      LATTICE CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. A self-supporting tower with multiple
legs and cross bracing of structural steel.
      MONOPOLE CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. A single self-supporting tower on which
wireless antenna can be placed.
      PERSONAL COMMUNICATION SERVICE. Has the meaning as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
332(c).
      UNIFORM APPLICATION. An application to construct a cellular antenna tower
submitted to the Planning Commission in conformity with KRS 100.985 through
100.987.
      UTILITY. Has the meaning as defined in KRS 278.010(3).
   (D)   General. Cellular antenna towers may be allowed in any residential
zoning district if the property is owned by a public agency or utility or
within any C-3, C-4, C-5, C-6 Zoning District or within any I-1 or I-2 Zoning
District after a review in accordance with the procedures in this chapter to
determine agreement with the comprehensive plan and the regulations contained
within city ordinances and regulations.
      (1)   Applicability. Every utility, or a company that is engaged in the
business of providing the required infrastructure to a utility, that proposes
to construct a cellular antenna tower shall submit a completed uniform
application to the Commission. Where the Commission finds that circumstances or
conditions relating to the application of an alternative cellular antenna tower
are such that one or more of the requirements of the uniform application listed
in KRS Chapter 100 are not necessary or desirable for the protection of the
surrounding property or the public health, safety and general welfare, and that
such special conditions or circumstances make one or more of said requirements
unreasonable, the Commission may modify or waive such requirements of the
uniform application, either permanently or on a temporary basis. Any such
modification or waiver shall be requested by the applicant, and the applicant
shall submit a written justification for each requested modification or waiver.
The Commission shall not regulate the placement of antennas or related
equipment on an existing structure.
      (2)   Application requirements. Applications for the construction of
cellular antenna towers for cellular telecommunications services or personal
communications services shall include all information for the uniform
application as noted in KRS 100.9865 and 100.987. Notice to local officials as
outlined in KRS Chapter 100 shall be to the Mayor of the city, the City
Administrator and the City Council members. Additionally, the applicant shall
notify the Elizabethtown-Hardin County Airport Board.
      (3)   Application fee. Applicants shall pay the applicable fee as
established by city ordinances to the Department upon the filing of a uniform
application.
   (E)   Review process. Applications for the construction of a cellular
antenna tower for cellular telecommunications services or personal
communications services shall be processed as follows.
      (1)   Hearing. At least one public hearing on the application shall be
held by the Commission at which interested parties and citizens shall have the
opportunity to be heard. Notice of the date, time and place of the hearing
shall be published in the local newspaper not less than seven days and not more
than 21 days before the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall also be posted on
the site at least 14 days prior to the hearing as required by KRS Chapter 100.
Written notice shall be given to all property owners within 500 feet of the
site as required by KRS Chapter 100. The applicant shall certify that proper
notice was given as part of their uniform application.
      (2)   Hearing action. Upon holding a hearing the Commission shall, within
60 days commencing from the date the application is received by the Commission,
or within a date specified in a written agreement between the applicant and the
Commission, make its final decision to approve or disapprove the uniform
application. If the Commission fails to issue a final decision within 60 days
and if there is no written agreement between the Commission and the applicant
for a specific date for the Commission to issue a final decision it shall be
presumed that the Commission has approved the applicant’s uniform application.
   (F)   Design standards. The applicant shall provide information
demonstrating compliance with the requirements contained within this section
and any other applicable laws or statute. Potential sites that should be
considered (in order of most preferred to least preferred) include existing
utility towers, existing water towers, industrial zones, commercial zones and
government owned property. Co-location of service facilities (towers and
equipment) is preferred. All new cellular antenna towers or alternate cellular
antenna towers shall be designed to accommodate a minimum of three service
providers.
      (1)   Pole. Monopole cellular antenna towers shall be permitted in any
zone specified in division (E) above. Lattice or guyed cellular antenna towers
shall be permitted only in industrial zones.
      (2)   Setbacks. All cellular antenna towers or alternate cellular antenna
towers shall be setback at least the height of the tower, but not less than 50
feet. The Commission may require a greater setback when the proposed cellular
antenna tower or alternate cellular antenna tower adjoins residential
properties. This setback requirement does not include fencing and guy wires.
      (3)   Height. All cellular antenna towers or alternate cellular antenna
towers shall not exceed a maximum height of 200 feet. This also applies to any
antenna tower taller than 15 feet in height constructed on the top of another
building or structure, with the height being the overall height of the
building/structure and tower together, measured at its highest point. The
Commission may allow an antenna tower greater than 200 feet in height based
upon review of the applicant’s justification pursuant to information provided
in the uniform application.
      (4)   Construction. All cellular antenna towers or alternate cellular
antenna towers shall be constructed in compliance with the current ANSI/EIA/TIA
222-F standards and other applicable state standards.
      (5)   Illumination. All cellular antenna towers or alternate cellular
antenna towers shall not be illuminated, except as required by other state or
federal regulations.
      (6)   Site staffing. All cellular antenna towers or alternate cellular
antenna towers shall be unstaffed. Personnel may periodically visit the site
for maintenance, equipment modification, or repairs.
      (7)   Fencing. All cellular antenna towers or alternate cellular antenna
towers shall be enclosed by fencing or fencing materials to provide for a
minimum opacity of 50%. Such fences shall not be more than eight feet in height
and may be located in the front, side or rear yard. Barbed wire may only be
used at sites within industrial zones.
      (8)   Screening. All cellular antenna towers or alternate cellular
antenna towers shall be screened by evergreen trees with a minimum height of
six feet upon planting; planted on a staggered pattern a maximum distance of 15
feet on center. The screening shall be located within a landscape buffer area
that is located within a minimum of ten feet and a maximum of 20 feet of the
fenced area and shall be placed to provide a screen to adjoining structures.
Additional screening may be required by the Commission when the site is
adjacent to a residential use regardless of the zoning district classification.
      (9)   Driveways. All cellular antenna towers or alternate cellular
antenna towers shall be provided with a hard bound surface driveway and off-
street parking area. The area inside the fenced equipment compound area may be
gravel. Ingress/egress shall be provided from an access point approved by the
applicable agency and any required encroachment permit shall be obtained prior
to construction of the driveway.
      (10)   Signs. No signs shall be permitted, except those displaying
emergency information, owner contact information, warning or safety
instructions or signs require by a federal, state or local agency. Such signs
shall not exceed five square feet in area.
      (11)   Number of service providers. All new cellular antenna towers or
alternate cellular antenna towers shall be designed to accommodate a minimum of
three service providers.
      (12)   Lease agreements. All option and site lease agreements shall not
prohibit the possibility of co-location, and in the case of abandonment, shall
include a method that the applicant or utility will follow in dismantling and
removing the proposed cellular tower including a time schedule for the removal.
      (13)   Other agency approvals. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and
the Kentucky Airport Zoning Commission (KAZC) approvals or documentation that
approval is not required shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a
construction permit for the construction of a cellular antenna tower.
   (G)   Criteria. Approval or disapproval of the proposal shall be based upon
an evaluation of the proposal’s agreement with the comprehensive plan and the
standards established within this chapter and other applicable city standards
and ordinances.
      (1)   Co-location. The Commission may require the applicant to make a
reasonable attempt to co-locate additional transmitting or related equipment.
The Commission may provide the location of existing cellular antenna towers on
which the Commission deems the applicant can successfully co-locate its
transmitting or related equipment. If the Commission requires the applicant to
attempt co-location, the applicant shall provide the Commission with a
statement indicating that the applicant has:
         (a)   Successfully attempted to co-locate on towers designed to host
multiple wireless service providers facilities or existing structures such as a
telecommunications tower or another suitable structure capable of supporting
the applicant’s facilities, and that identifies the location of the tower or
suitable structure on which the applicant will co-locate its transmission and
related facilities; or
         (b)   Unsuccessfully attempted to co-locate on towers designed to host
multiple wireless services providers’ facilities or existing structures such as
a telecommunications tower or another suitable structure capable of supporting
the applicant’s facilities and that:
            1.   Identifies the location of the towers or other structures on
which the applicant attempted to co-locate; and
            2.   Lists the reasons why the co-location was unsuccessful in each
instance.
      (2)   Denial. The Commission may deny a uniform application to construct
a cellular antenna tower based on an applicant’s unwillingness to attempt to
co-locate additional transmitting or related equipment on a new or existing
towers or other structures.
      (3)   Limits of approval. The Commission shall not regulate the placement
of cellular antenna towers on the basis of the environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions to the extent that the proposed facility complies with the
regulations of the Federal Communication Commission concerning radio frequency
emissions.
   (H)   Amendments. Any amendments to plans, except for minor amendments as
determined by the Commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall be
made in accordance with the procedures required in division (B) above, subject
to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were
originally approved.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 2.9.7)
DEVELOPMENT PLAN
§ 154.105 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This subchapter establishes and defines development plans which may be
utilized for a wide variety of planning related procedures. This subchapter
outlines the procedure for submission and content of all development plans
required by these regulations unless another procedure or different contents
are specified elsewhere.
   (B)   The purpose in requiring submission of a development plan is to assure
compliance with the standards and requirements of the zoning chapter and other
city ordinances for all construction, with the intent of implementing the
community’s comprehensive plan and promoting the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare through planned development. It is the intent of the
development plan submission to provide as much information to all city
departments and public agencies for their reviews, in an effort to streamline
the approval process for developers and owners.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 3.0)
§ 154.106 DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIRED.
   Development plans shall be required as follows:
   (A)   For map amendment requests. Exception: If large tracts are involved a
preliminary plat may be substituted;
   (B)   For new construction of a church, school, commercial, institutional or
industrial building;
   (C)   For the enlargement, addition, exterior alteration or extension of a
church, school, commercial, institutional or industrial building;
   (D)   For new construction of multi-family structures of three or more
dwelling units on a single lot. This includes the conversion or alteration or
addition to existing structures into multi-family units of three or more;
   (E)   When there is to be more than one principal structure on a lot;
   (F)   For conditional use permits;
   (G)   For variances, except when for a single-family or two-family use;
   (H)   For the conversion of a residential structure to a commercial or
industrial use or for a change in use of a commercial or industrial structure
when parking, perimeter landscape screening or other similar improvements are
required or changed;
   (I)   For installation of parking areas of five or more spaces;
   (J)   For developments requiring review under the commercial design
guidelines found in §§
154.130 through
154.136; and
   (K)   Exception: For temporary structures, such as tents and fireworks
tents, that are erected for less than six months, however, a site sketch with
sufficient information to assure that vehicular and pedestrian access are
properly maintained may be required by the Department to obtain the required
construction permit.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 3.1; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 24-
2016, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 154.107 DEVELOPMENT PLAN PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Generally. To formally request action on the required development
plan, the applicant shall file a completed application form, a filing fee, and
two copies of the plan. After departmental or Commission review, the applicant
shall then provide an original Mylar and four copies of the final plan, signed
by the applicant, for full approval. The procedure for development plans
differs based upon the type of plan.
   (B)   Pre-application conference required.
      (1)   When a development plan is required and meets any of the following
thresholds a pre-application conference shall be required. They are:
         (a)   Multi-family developments containing in excess of 24 units;
         (b)   Commercial developments requiring commercial design guideline
review or when a building exceeds 15,000 square feet in floor area;
         (c)   Industrial developments, when a building or building addition
exceeds 15,000 square feet; and
         (d)   Shopping center developments.
      (2)   The Department shall arrange the conference which shall be held not
less than five working days nor greater than three months prior to the filing
date. The Department shall keep a record of the conference date and include the
information in the record of the development plan application. The Department
shall not accept an application for a development plan meeting the above
criteria for which a pre-application conference has not been held.
   (C)   Development plans with map amendment requests.
      (1)   Review. The Department and concerned agencies shall meet to review
the development plan for the purpose of resolving all differences and to make
recommendations to the Planning Commission. These meetings shall be open to the
applicant.
      (2)   Action. At the public hearing for the map amendment request, the
Commission shall act in the following form:
         (a)   Approval. The Commission may approve the development plan as
submitted. In cases where the map amendment request is later disapproved by the
City Council, this action is automatically disapproval;
         (b)   Approval with conditions. The Commission may approve the
development plan with conditions and require amendments to the plan and/or
completion of all conditions, for either Commission or Department approval,
before full approval is granted;
         (c)   Postponement. The Commission may postpone its decision but must
approve or disapprove the plan no later than 30 days from City Council action
on the map amendment request; or
         (d)   Disapproval. The Commission may disapprove the development plan
and shall state in writing its reasons for disapproval. To be reconsidered, a
new development plan shall be submitted to the Department, and must be approved
or disapproved by the Commission within 60 days of resubmission to the
Department.
   (D)   All other development plans; review. The Department and concerned
agencies shall meet to review the development plan for the purpose of resolving
all differences. These meetings shall be open to the applicant.
      (1)   Action. The Department or Commission when required by this chapter
shall act within 30 days of submission in the following form.
      (2)   Approval. The Department or Commission may approve the development
plan as submitted;
      (3)   Approval with conditions. The Department or Commission may approve
the development plan with conditions and require amendment to the plan and/or
completion of all conditions before granting full approval;
      (4)   Resubmission. The Department may review the plan and submit review
comments to the owner and/or owner’s agent listing items that must be provided,
corrected or completed for additional review before full approval; or
      (5)   Disapproval. The Department or Commission may disapprove the
development plan and shall state in writing, its reasons for disapproval. To be
reconsidered, a new development plan shall be submitted to the Department, and
must be approved or disapproved within 30 days of submission to the Department.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 3.2; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 24-
2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 154.108 CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL.
   Within two months of approval or within six months of an approval with
conditions, unless a time extension has been granted previous to the
expiration, the following shall be completed, or else the approval becomes null
and void:
   (A)   The developer shall fully comply with any conditions of approval
placed on the plan and submit the completed original of the plan to the
Department with signatures affixed; and
   (B)   A plan shall be certified by the Planning Commission Chairperson or
the Director of the Department if it is in conformance with all requirements.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 3.3; Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 154.109 CONSTRUCTION COMMENCEMENT.
   Any approved development plan shall become invalid if the authorized work
has not commenced within one year of plan approval. To be reconsidered, a new
development plan shall be resubmitted to the Department for approval.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 3.4)
§ 154.110 APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN BEFORE BUILDING PERMIT.
   When a development plan is required, no building permit shall be issued
until a development plan is approved, and the plan is certified by the Planning
Commission Chairperson or the Director of the Department and is filed with the
Department. The approved development plan shall limit and control the issuance
of all building and occupancy permits, and restrict the construction, location
and use of all land and structures to the conditions as set forth in the plan.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 3.5)
§ 154.111 COMPLETION OF SITE IMPROVEMENTS BEFORE OCCUPANCY.
   Prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy, all site
improvements as shown on the development plan and as required in the chapter
shall be completed. However, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued
prior to the completion of all site improvements.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 3.6)
§ 154.112 CONTENT OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   Required plan information shall be as follows (unless certain items are
waived by the Department):
   (A)   All plans shall be prepared by using an engineering drafting scale and
shall be a minimum of 18 inches by 24 inches. The plan’s scale shall be
approved by the Department upon submission but typically should be one inch
equals 100 feet or less;
   (B)   The title block shall be placed on the bottom right corner of the
sheet and shall contain the plan name, preceded by the words “Development Plan
For (name of development)” with a written and graphic scale, north arrow, the
name and address of the developer and plan preparer and the development
address;
   (C)   The boundary of the subject property, its record plat designation (if
available) and a record plat name or owner’s name(s) of all adjoining property;
   (D)   A vicinity sketch, oriented in the same direction as the design
scheme;
   (E)   Zoning classification of all abutting properties, including those
across any street, railroad or other public way;
   (F)   Topography with spot elevations adequate to determine parking lot
grades and site grades relative to accessible routes to the building and
positive drainage from the building. A separate site grading and drainage plan
may be required for Storm Water Department approval;
   (G)   Building finished floor elevation(s);
   (H)   Size, location, height, floor area, number of stories and use of all
proposed and/or existing buildings and signs, including service structures;
   (I)   Location, arrangement and dimensions of existing and proposed
driveways, walkways, parking areas and arrangement of parking spaces. Including
the location of all street entrances and access points and their respective
grade and curb radius;
   (J)   Location of any proposed or existing streets within or abutting the
subject property. Including the existing elevation at the street in relation to
the site;
   (K)   Screening, landscape buffering, recreational and other open space
areas including notes on landscaping material used. A separate landscape plan
may be required by the Department or Commission;
   (L)   Floodplains, storm water retention/detention areas and any other
designated environmentally sensitive or geologic hazard areas;
   (M)   A note relating to a review of the local FIRM determining the
property’s inclusion in or exclusion from a special flood hazard area;
   (N)   Proposed and existing easements for utilities or other purposes;
   (O)   Utility connections for items such as water, sanitary sewer, natural
gas and electric service, including the location of regulator stations,
transformers, fire hydrants and fire protection and water meter vaults;
   (P)   Areas of existing trees including those located along fence rows and
drainage areas;
   (Q)   Notes relative to any special restrictions on the property, such as,
access, shared features (entrances, parking or drive lanes), record plat
restrictions/covenants, maintenance of common areas and/or architectural
building elements;
   (R)   A statistical summary of all pertinent site data (this information
should be listed in acreage, square footage and/or percentage of the site as
applicable), including site area, zoning, use, building coverage and floor
area, parking and open space areas, number of parking spaces, number of
dwelling units, building height, landscape categories;
   (S)   A Storm Water Department certification as follows: “I do hereby
certify that the appropriate storm water plans for this development have been
reviewed by this office and are approved.” ___________________ Storm Water
Manager signature, ___________Date;
   (T)   An improvement certification as follows: “I do hereby certify that the
appropriate utility plans for this development have been reviewed by this
office and are approved.” _____________ City Engineer signature, ___________
Date, ___________________ Hardin County Water District #2 signature,
___________ Date;
   (U)   An Owner Certification as follows: “I (we) do hereby certify that I am
(we are) the only owner(s) of the property shown herein, do adopt this as my
(our) development for the property and agree to complete all site improvements
shown hereon in their entirety prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy to
use and occupy the building(s) and property. I (we) further assure and
understand that the building and premises, including all landscape materials
shall be maintained in a proper manner.”___________________ Owner signature,
___________ Date; and
   (V)   A commission certification to be signed by the Planning Commission
Chair or the Director of the Department as follows: “I do hereby certify that
this development plan meets the requirements set by the City of Elizabethtown
and is approved”. ___________________ Commission Chair or Department Director
signature, ___________ Date.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 3.7)
§ 154.113 CONTENT OF CONCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Under certain conditions the Commission or Department may allow the
submission of a conceptual development plan with a map amendment request.
   (B)   Required plan information shall be as follows (unless certain items
are waived by the Department):
      (1)   All plans shall be done by using an engineering drafting scale and
shall be a minimum of 18 inches by 24 inches. The plan’s scale shall be
approved by the Department upon submission but typically should be one inch
equals 100 feet or less;
      (2)   The title block shall be placed on the bottom right corner of the
sheet and shall contain the plan name, preceded by the words “Conceptual
Development Plan For (name of development)” with a written and graphic scale,
north arrow, the name and address of the developer and plan preparer and the
development address;
      (3)   The boundary of the subject property, its record plat designation
(if available) and a record plat name or owner’s name(s) of all adjoining
property;
      (4)   A vicinity sketch, oriented in the same direction as the design
scheme;
      (5)   Zoning classification of all abutting properties, including those
across any street, railroad or public way;
      (6)   Location and arrangement of existing and proposed driveways,
general location of proposed walkways and parking areas;
      (7)   Location of any proposed or existing streets within or abutting the
subject property;
      (8)   Size, location, floor area and use of proposed and/or existing
buildings and signs;
      (9)   General location of screening, landscape buffering, parking areas,
recreational and other open space areas;
      (10)   Floodplains, storm water retention/detention areas and any other
designated environmentally sensitive or geologic hazard areas;
      (11)   A note relating to a review of the local FIRM determining the
property’s inclusion in or exclusion from a special flood hazard area;
      (12)   Proposed and existing easements for utilities or other purposes;
      (13)   Areas of existing trees including those located along fence rows
and drainage areas;
      (14)   A statistical summary of all pertinent site data (this information
should be listed in acreage, square footage and/or percentage of the site as
applicable), including site area, zoning, proposed use, maximum building
coverage and floor area, parking and open space, and number of freestanding
signs;
      (15)   An owner certification as follows: “I (we) do hereby certify that
I am (we are) the only owner(s) of the property shown herein and do adopt this
as my (our) development concept for the property.” _______________ Owner
signature _____________ Date; and
      (16)   A Commission certification to be signed by the Planning Commission
Chair as follows: “I do hereby certify that this conceptual development plan
meets the requirements set by the City of Elizabethtown and is approved.”
_______________ Commission Chair or Department Director _____________ Date.
   (C)   Approval of the conceptual development plan allows the applicant to
begin preparation of plats, utility and other improvement plans, and a final
development plan. Before any building construction can commence, a final
development plan shall be submitted and approved.
   (D)   Conceptual development plan - expiration: Any approved conceptual
development plan shall become invalid if no preliminary plat, record plat,
development plan or master plan is filed within two years of plan approval. To
be reconsidered, a new conceptual development plan shall be resubmitted for
approval.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 3.8; Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-2011)
§ 154.114 AMENDMENTS TO DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   Amendments to approved development plans can be made only by the same
procedure required for original submission. However, minor amendments which
fully meet the requirements herein may be approved and certified by the
Director of the Department without further action by the Commission.
   (A)   Minor amendments.
      (1)   Defined minor amendments are intended to expedite approval in those
situations where amendments are of minor significance and generally relate to
the shifting of previously approved spaces.
      (2)   Such amendments:
         (a)   Shall not decrease the overall land area in yards or other open
space by more than 20%;
         (b)   Shall not increase building ground coverage, floor area, or
height, or number of dwelling units by more than 10%;
         (c)   Shall not increase the number or size of signs beyond what is
allowed by the zoning regulations;
         (d)   Shall not increase the number nor change the location of street
access points, except that shifts in the approved access location, not
exceeding 25 feet may be approved as a minor amendment where the access point
is not located on an arterial street and the city departments or other agency
with jurisdiction reviewing the request determine that such relocation will not
have a negative effect on traffic safety and movement; and
         (e)   May include a reduction in floor area or number of dwelling
units that would permit a lesser number of minimum required off-street parking
spaces than required for the original development plan. To qualify as a minor
amendment, this reduction may be equal to, but may not exceed, the difference
in minimum required parking between the original plan and the proposed minor
amended plan. For any case, where parking in excess of the minimum requirement
was approved on the original development plan, the same number of spaces shall
be provided in excess of the minimum requirement for the proposed minor
amendment.
   (B)   Procedures for amendments.
      (1)   Submission. The applicant shall file the following material with
the Department: a completed application form, a filing fee, and two copies of
the plan. After Departmental review, the applicant shall then provide an
original Mylar and four copies of the plan, signed by the applicant, for
approval.
      (2)   Review. The Department shall review the plan for compliance and
shall consult with city departments and other agencies as appropriate to ensure
proper plan review. Upon determination that all requirements have been met, the
Director of the Department shall certify the plan as approved. If any questions
arise as to compliance, however, the plan shall be referred to the full
Commission for action.
      (3)   Title content and format of amendments. Amendments shall have the
same content and format requirements as the original development plan except
that:
         (a)   The plan title shall be labeled to indicate the plan as an
“Amended Development plan For...”;
         (b)   A note shall be added, listing the exact nature of the
amendments; and
         (c)   All site statistical information shall indicate existing and
proposed information.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 3.9)
§ 154.115 MASTER PLAN, PLANNED DISTRICT.
   Projects developed under the PNR-1, PNR-2 and PNC require the submission of
a master plan for review and approval by the Commission.
   (A)   Content of master plan. Required plan information shall be as follows
(unless certain items are waived by the Commission):
      (1)   All plans shall be done by using an engineering drafting scale and
shall be a minimum of 18 inches by 24 inches. The plan’s scale shall be
approved by the Department upon submission but typically should be one inch
equals 100 feet or less. At least one full scale colored drawing shall be
provided. Smaller versions of the plan may be submitted for presentation
purposes;
      (2)   The title block shall be placed on the bottom right corner of the
sheet and shall contain the plan name, preceded by the words “Master Plan For
(name of development)” with a written and graphic scale, north arrow, the name
and address of the developer and plan preparer and the development address;
      (3)   The boundary of the subject property, its record plat designation
(if available) and a record plat name or owner’s name(s) of all adjoining
property;
      (4)   A vicinity sketch, oriented in the same direction as the design
scheme;
      (5)   Zoning classification of all abutting properties, including those
across any street, railroad or public way;
      (6)   Location of any proposed or existing streets within or abutting the
subject property;
      (7)   General location of the various land uses involved in the project,
including type of use, total area for each use and overall density designation;
      (8)   General location of screening, landscape buffering, recreational
and other open space areas;
      (9)   General location of special flood hazard areas, storm water
retention/detention areas and any other designated environmentally sensitive or
geologic hazard areas;
      (10)   Existing easements for utilities or other purposes;
      (11)   Areas of existing trees including those located along fence rows
and drainage areas;
      (12)   General notes listing development types, density and density
bonuses applicable;
      (13)   General circulation patterns for the development, including
streets, access locations, parking, sidewalks, paths, bike lanes, trails and
bridges;
      (14)   Information on architectural elements of the buildings, structures
and other physical features in the development;
      (15)   A statistical summary of all pertinent site data (this information
should be listed in acreage, square footage and/or percentage of the site as
applicable), including site area, zoning, proposed use(s), density, maximum
building coverage and floor area, open space, and park areas. Listing this
information by sections or phases of the development is acceptable;
      (16)   An owner certification as follows: “I (we) do hereby certify that
I am (we are) the only owner(s) of the property shown herein and do adopt this
as my (our) master plan concept for the property.” ______________ Owner
signature ______________ Date; and
      (17)   A Commission certification to be signed by the Planning Commission
Chair as follows: “I do hereby certify that this master plan meets the
requirements set by the City of Elizabethtown and is approved”. ______________
Commission Chair or designee signature, ______________ Date.
   (B)   Master plan - final plans. After approval of a master plan by the
Commission, the owner/developer shall prepare detailed plans for the
improvement of the property for approval by the appropriate agencies. These
detailed plans may include, but are not limited to, subdivision plats,
subdivision improvement plans, architectural design plans, development plans
for individual lots within the master plan development, landscaping plans,
erosion prevention and sediment control plans, and signage plans. These plans
should be submitted for final approval based on the phasing schedule approved
by the Commission.
   (C)   Master plan - binding elements. In addition to the master plan
indicating site features, a binding elements document shall be prepared in
written form for each planned district which shall include requirements,
provisions, restrictions or conditions imposed by the Commission and any
promises, covenants, agreements or restrictions agreed to by the owner/
developer. This document shall contain the phasing plan for development of the
project. The Commission and the owner/developer shall approve and execute the
binding elements document prior to any building permit being issued for
construction activity.
   (D)   Master plan - amendments. Amendments to approved master plans can only
be approved by the Commission after a public meeting is conducted following the
same procedures and criteria for the initial approval of the master plan.
   (E)   Master plan - expiration. Any approved master plan shall become
invalid if no preliminary plat, record plat, development plan, improvement
plan, architectural design plan, signage plan or binding elements is filed
within five years of plan approval. To be reconsidered, a new master plan shall
be resubmitted to the Department for approval.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 3.10; Ord. 20-2011, passed 10-17-2011)
§ 154.116 SUBSTITUTION OF SUBDIVISION PLAT FOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   In certain cases a preliminary or final subdivision plat would be more
appropriate to be considered in conjunction with a map amendment request than a
development plan. Generally, such situations involve developments where
placement of structures will be tightly controlled by the street, lot patterns
and requirements for placement of structures within the zone (typically in a
residential development); or involve development of a large tract of land. When
a developer is required to provide a development plan, and the developer
desires to file a subdivision plat in its place, the developer shall meet with
the Department in advance of filing the map amendment request to discuss the
appropriateness of a substitution. In any disputed case, the Planning
Commission shall have the final judgment as to whether a development plan or a
subdivision plat is required.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 3.11)
COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES
§ 154.130 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The following guidelines and regulations are intended to be used as a
design aid by developers proposing commercial developments in the community and
as an evaluation tool by the Department and the Commission in their review
processes. These guidelines and regulations shall apply to shopping centers,
malls and to all projects for retail establishments and restaurants. They are
to be used in conjunction with the subdivision regulations and other
regulations and standards found in the zoning regulations and other ordinances
of the city relating to the development and use of property and buildings.
   (B)   The purpose of requiring compliance with these guidelines and
regulations is to assure that projects are developed in a manner to promote
public safety, to assure orderly and compatible development with the
surrounding environment and neighborhoods and to implement the goals of the
city’s comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 4.0)
§ 154.131 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARCADE. An area contiguous to a street or plaza that is open and
unobstructed, and that is accessible to the public at all times. ARCADES may
include building columns, landscaping, statuary and fountains. ARCADES do not
include off-street loading/unloading areas, driveways or parking areas.
   ARTICULATE. To give emphasis to or distinctly identify a particular element.
An articulated facade would be the emphasis of elements on the face of a wall
including a change in setback, materials, roof pitch or height.
   BERM. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen
undesirable views, reduce noise or provide a buffer from adjoining uses.
   BREEZEWAY. A structure, for the principal purpose of connecting a main
building or structure on a property with other buildings, that is unenclosed.
   BUFFER. An area provided to reduce the conflict between two different land
uses. BUFFERS are intended to mitigate undesired views, noise and glare -
effectively providing greater privacy to neighboring land uses. Typical BUFFERS
consist of materials that serve this purpose and include, but are not limited
to, plant materials, walls, fences and/or significant land area to separate the
uses.
   BUFFER STRIP. A portion of a lot or property used to visually separate one
use from another through the use of vegetation, distance or other approved
method.
   BUILDING FACE, FRONT. Any building side, which can be touched by a line,
drawn perpendicular to a street (public or private).
   BUILDING FACE, PUBLIC. Any building side which is visible from a street and/
or the sides that contain a public entry.
   BUILDING MASS. The building’s expanse or bulk and is typically used in
reference to structures of considerable size.
   DESIGN GUIDELINES. Statements and graphics intended to direct the planning
and development of the built environment in a particular manner or style so
that the end result contributes positively to the overall development.
   DORMER. A window set vertically in a gable projecting from a sloping roof.
   FACADE. The portion of any exterior elevation on the building extending from
grade to the top of the parapet, wall or eaves and extending the entire length
of the building.
   FRONT YARD. The portion of the yard extending the full width of the lot and
measured between the front lot line and a parallel line across the front of the
building. Corner and double frontage lots shall adhere to the front yard
setback(s) for each frontage.
   GABLE. A triangular wall section at the end of a pitched roof, bounded by
the two roof slopes.
   HIP ROOF. Roof without gables.
   PARAPET. The portion of a wall that extends above the roofline.
   PEDESTRIAN ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT. Development designed with an emphasis
primarily on the street sidewalk and on pedestrian access to the site and
buildings/structures rather than on auto access. The buildings/structures are
generally located close to the street and the main entrance(s) is oriented to
the street sidewalk. There are generally windows or display cases along
building facades. Although parking is provided, it is generally limited in size
and location.
   PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY. A surfaced walkway, separate from the traveled portion
of a public or private right-of-way or parking lot/driving aisle.
   PORTICO. A porch or walkway with a roof supported by columns, often leading
to the entrance to a building.
   SCREEN. The sole purpose of a screen is to block views. A screen should be
constructed of opaque materials and whose height will be effective in
obstructing unwanted views.
   SETBACK.
      (1)   A prescribed distance or an area between one element and another
(i.e., a building and the street).
      (2)   Within these guidelines, the term also refers to:
         (a)   The minimum distance and the area measured from the property
line to the interior of a parcel where buildings may be constructed;
         (b)   The required distance and the area between the edge of the
parking lot pavement/curb and the property line or buildings/structures; and
         (c)   Placing a building face on a line to the rear of another
building line.
   STREETSCAPE. All elements of a development or area that are in view from
other points along a street, including, but limited to, trees, landscape
materials, benches, fountains and lighting.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 4.1)
§ 154.132 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Applicability. These guidelines apply to the following developments:
      (1)   Retail buildings;
      (2)   Restaurants;
      (3)   Shopping centers, as defined in §
154.009;
      (4)   Regional enclosed shopping centers (malls);
      (5)   Offices, contractors' offices, banks and financial institutions;
      (6)   Automobile, truck, motorcycle, or other vehicle, boat camper,
equipment or implement sales, rental, repair, service, or towing; and
      (7)   Residential storage facilities.
   (B)   Exception. Developments located within the National Register Historic
District Overzone within the C-5 Zoning District and subject to review by the
city’s Historic Preservation Commission.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 4.2; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 05-
2021, passed 4-19-2021; Ord. 03-2022, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 154.133 REQUIRED PLAN SUBMISSION.
   (A)   When these sidelines are applicable to a development the following
plans shall be submitted to the Planning Commission or Department as applicable
for approval:
      (1)   Development plan;
      (2)   Building elevation plans showing each building facade;
      (3)   Landscaping plan; and
      (4)   Signage placement and design plan.
   (B)   A pre-application conference is required for all developments
requiring commercial design review. The Department shall arrange the conference
which shall be held not less than five working days nor greater than three
months prior to the filing date. The Department shall keep a record of the
conference date and include the information in the record of the development
plan application. The Department shall not accept an application for a
development plan meeting the above criteria for which a pre-application
conference has not been held.
   (C)   All new construction projects requiring commercial design review under
this chapter must be submitted to the Commission for review. Existing buildings
requiring commercial design review may be reviewed by the Department as long as
no waivers are requested and the building lot coverage or floor area of the
existing building is not increased by 10%.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 4.3; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 154.134 DESIGN GUIDELINES, BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Materials and colors. Exterior building materials and colors comprise
a significant part of the visual impact of a building. Therefore, they should
be aesthetically pleasing and compatible with materials and colors used in
adjoining neighborhoods. Predominant exterior building materials shall be high
quality materials.
      (1)   Predominant building exterior materials include, without
limitation:
         (a)   Brick;
         (b)   Wood;
         (c)   Sandstone and limestone;
         (d)   Other native stone;
         (e)   Tinted, textured, concrete masonry units;
         (f)   Tilt-up concrete panels, with a finish similar to other allowed
materials; and
         (g)   Materials that are similar to these may be used with Commission
approval.
      (2)   Facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earth
tone colors. The use of high intensity colors, metallic colors, black or
fluorescent colors is prohibited.
      (3)   Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors,
including primary colors, but neon tubing shall not be an acceptable feature
for building trim or accent areas.
      (4)   Trim areas on exterior building materials as well as accents may
include the following:
         (a)   Smooth-faced concrete block;
         (b)   Metal panels; and
         (c)   Stucco, Dryvit.
      (5)   Prohibited exterior building materials include the following:
         (a)   PVC or similar plastic materials; and
         (b)   Pre-fabricated steel panels with a predominantly steel exterior
appearance.
   (B)   Facades and exterior walls.
      (1)   Facades should be articulated to reduce the massive scale and the
uniform, impersonal appearances of large retail buildings and provide visual
interest that will be consistent with the community’s identity, character and
scale. The intent is to encourage a more human scale.
      (2)   Developments with a facade over 100 feet in linear length which is
visible from a street shall incorporate wall projections or recesses a minimum
of three-foot depth for a minimum of 20 contiguous feet within each 100 feet of
facade length. Developments shall use animating features such as arcades,
display windows, entry areas, or awnings along at least 60% of the facade.
   (C)   Detail features.
      (1)   Buildings should have architectural features and patterns that
provide visual interest, at the scale of the pedestrian, reduce massive
aesthetic effects, and recognize local character. These elements of design
should be integral parts of the building fabric, and not superficially applied
trim or graphics, or paint.
      (2)   Building facades shall include a repeating pattern that shall
include the elements listed below. Buildings less than 15,000 square feet shall
include at least one of these elements, buildings between 15,000 square feet
and 40,000 square feet shall include at least two of these elements and
buildings greater than 40,000 square feet shall include no less than three of
the elements. At least one of these elements shall repeat horizontally. All
elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than 30 feet, either horizontally
or vertically:
         (a)   Color change;
         (b)   Texture change;
         (c)   Material change; and
         (d)    Expression of architectural or structural bay through a change
in plane no less than 12 inches in width, such as an offset, reveal, or
projecting rib.
   (D)   Ro ofs.
      (1)    Variations in roof lines should be used to add interest to, and
reduce the massive scale of large buildings. Roof features should complement
the character of adjoining neighborhoods.
      (2)   Roof lines shall be varied with a change in height every 100 linear
feet in the building length. Parapets, mansard roofs, gable roofs, hip roofs or
dormers shall be used to conceal flat roofs and roof top equipment from public
view. Alternating lengths and designs may be acceptable.
   (E)   Entryways.
      (1)   Entryway design elements and variations should give orientation and
aesthetically pleasing character to the building.
      (2)   Each principal building on a site shall have clearly defined,
highly visible customer entrances featuring the following:
         (a)   Canopies or porticos;
         (b)   Overhangs;
         (c)   Recesses/projections;
         (d)   Arcades;
         (e)   Raised corniced parapets over the door;
         (f)   Peaked roof forms;
         (g)   Arches;
         (h)   Outdoor patios;
         (i)   Display windows;
         (j)   Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are
integrated into the building structure and design; and
         (k)   Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped
areas and/or places for sitting Buildings less than 15,000 square feet shall
include at least one of these elements, buildings between 15,000 square feet
and 40,000 square feet shall include at least two of these elements and
buildings greater than 40,000 square feet shall include no less than three of
the elements.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 4.4; Ord. 27-2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord.
28-2014, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 154.135 DESIGN GUIDELINES, SITE DESIGN.
   (A)   Building entrances.
      (1)   Buildings should feature multiple entrances. Multiple building
entrances reduce walking distances from cars, facilitate pedestrian and bicycle
access from public sidewalks, and provide convenience where certain entrances
offer access to individual stores, or identified departments in a large store.
Multiple entrances also mitigate the effect of the unbroken walls and neglected
areas that often characterize building facades that face bordering land uses.
      (2)   Buildings less than 40,000 square feet shall include at least one
customer entrance, buildings greater than 40,000 square feet shall include at
least one customer entrance facing any abutting street. When a customer
entrance is located at the corner of a building facing two abutting streets,
this will be construed as meeting the multiple entrances requirement. Where a
principal building directly faces more than two abutting streets, this
requirement shall apply only to two sides of the building, one of which must be
the side of the building facing the primary street. Where additional stores
will be located in the principal building, each such store shall have at least
one exterior customer entrance, which shall conform to the above requirements.
   (B)   Site entrances.
      (1)   Access to the site should be clearly defined to assure that
customers can easily identify the proper traffic circulation for the
development for both vehicular and pedestrian traffic. It should also present a
pleasing, aesthetic entrance to the community.
      (2)   A principal entrance should be defined though the use of curbs,
appropriate traffic pavement markings, signage and extensive landscaping so
that the entrance to the development is predominant.
      (3)   Walkways should also be provided along the principal entrance with
a connection to the public sidewalk along the street.
      (4)   Walkway widths for convenience, neighborhood and community shopping
centers, restaurants and retail buildings less than 40,000 square feet should
be five feet. Walkway widths for regional shopping centers, regional enclosed
malls and retail buildings greater than 40,000 square feet should be six feet.
   (C)   Parking lot orientation.
      (1)   Parking areas should provide safe, convenient and efficient access
for vehicles and pedestrians. They should be distributed around buildings in
order to shorten the distance to other buildings and public sidewalks and to
reduce the overall scale of the paved surface. If buildings are located closer
to streets, the scale of the complex is reduced, pedestrian traffic is
encouraged, and architectural details take on added importance.
      (2)   The amount of off-street parking area for the entire property
located between the front facade within the front yard of the principal
building(s) and the primary abutting street shall be limited unless the
principal building(s) and/or parking lots are screened from view by out parcel
development and additional tree plantings and landscaping, which shall be a
minimum of 15% above the required vehicular use area (VUA) landscaping and
shall be located along the common property line of the principal building(s)
and the out parcel development.
      (3)   Principal front yard off-street parking area shall be limited to no
more than 80% of the provided parking area for convenience and neighborhood
shopping centers, restaurants and retail buildings up to 15,000 square feet; no
more than 70% for community shopping centers and retail buildings 15,000 square
feet to 40,000 square feet; and no more than 60% for regional shopping centers,
regional enclosed malls and large retail centers.
   (D)   Pedestrian walkways.
      (1)   Pedestrian accessibility opens auto-oriented developments to the
neighborhood, thereby reducing traffic impacts and enabling the development to
project a friendlier, more inviting image. Public sidewalks and internal
pedestrian circulation systems can provide user-friendly pedestrian access as
well as pedestrian safety, shelter and convenience within the development.
      (2)   Sidewalks at least five feet in width shall be provided along all
sides of the lot that abut a street, excluding interstates and limited access
state roads.
      (3)   Walkways, no less than six feet in width, shall be provided along
the full length of the building along any facade featuring a customer entrance,
and along any facade abutting off-street parking areas.
      (4)   All walkways shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through
the use of durable, low maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks,
or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as well as the
attractiveness of the walkways. Signs may be installed to designate pedestrian
walkways. Connections to community features and public spaces should be
provided.
   (E)   Landscaping.
      (1)   Landscaping is a visible indicator of quality development and must
be an integral part of every commercial project and not merely located in
remnant portions of the site. Landscaping a site enhances the overall
appearance of the development, helps to protect the environment by controlling
water runoff and by reducing heat effects caused by parking areas, helps clear
the air from the effects of vehicle emissions, and can be used to clearly
define the separation between vehicle and pedestrian.
Developments should be generously landscaped to provide a pleasing environment
for the customer and the community as a whole.
      (2)   All developments shall provide a continuous landscape area along
all street frontages which shall be a minimum of ten feet in width. The use of
a variety of plant materials and elevations is encouraged in these areas
through the use of differing materials, seasonal plantings, earth berms,
decorative walls/fences and the existing topography. For regional shopping
centers, regional enclosed malls and retail buildings greater than 40,000
square feet, at least 25% of the area must be in plant materials with one tree
for every 1006 lineal feet of street frontage. For community and neighborhood
shopping centers and retail buildings 15,000 square feet to 40,000 square feet,
at least 20% of the area must be in plant materials with one tree for every 100
lineal feet of street frontage and restaurants and retail buildings less than
15,000 square feet at least 15% of the area must be in plan materials with one
tree for every 100 lineal feet of street frontage.
      (3)   Vehicular use area (VUA) landscaping shall be provided in
conformance with the standards of this section and the standards found in §§
154.150 through
154.164. VUA landscaping shall be provided in convenience, neighborhood and
community shopping centers, restaurants and retail buildings up to 40,000
square feet, at a minimum of 50% of the parking stall aisle end areas. For
regional shopping centers, malls and retail centers greater than 40,000 square
feet, the end of each parking stall aisle must be provided with VUA
landscaping. Exception: landscaping shall not be required when handicap parking
spaces are located at the end of an aisle.
      (4)   All developments shall provide a continuous landscape area along
property boundaries, except street frontages, which shall be a minimum of ten
feet in width. The use of a variety of plant materials and elevations is
encouraged in these areas through the use of differing materials, seasonal
plantings, earth berms, decorative walls/fences and the existing topography.
For community, convenience and neighborhood shopping centers and retail centers
15,000 square feet or greater, at least 20% of the area must be in plant
materials with one tree for every 40 lineal feet of boundary. If the adjoining
property is zoned residentially the continuous landscape are shall be a minimum
of 20 feet in width and a continuous planting, berm and/or decorative walls/
fences shall be provided. The berm shall be installed, no less than six feet in
height, containing at a minimum, a double row of evergreen or deciduous trees
planted at intervals of 15 feet on center. Materials, colors and designs of
screening walls and/or fences shall conform to those used as predominant
materials and colors of the building. Exception: boundaries between parcels
within the development are not required to provide continuous landscaping but
are required to provide any otherwise required VUA landscaping.
   (F)   Outdoor storage, trash collection, and loading areas.
      (1)   Loading areas and outdoor storage areas exert visual and noise
impacts on surrounding neighborhoods. These areas, when visible from adjoining
properties and/or streets, should be screened, recessed or enclosed. While
screens and recesses can effectively mitigate these impacts, the selection of
inappropriate screening materials can exacerbate the problem. Appropriate
locations for loading and outdoor storage areas include areas between
buildings, where more than one building is located on a site and such buildings
are not more than 40 feet apart, or on those sides of buildings that do not
have customer entrances.
      (2)   Areas for outdoor storage, truck parking, trash collection or
compaction, loading or other such uses shall not be visible from a street.
      (3)   No areas for outdoor storage, trash collection or compaction,
loading, or other such uses shall be located within 20 feet of any street,
public sidewalk or pedestrian walkway.
      (4)   Loading docks, truck parking, outdoor storage, utility meters, HVAC
equipment, trash dumpsters, trash compaction and other service functions shall
be incorporated into the overall design of the building and landscaping so that
the visual and noise impacts of these functions are fully contained and out of
view from adjacent properties and streets, and no attention is attracted to the
functions by the use of screening materials that are different from or inferior
to the principal materials of the building and landscape.
      (5)   Temporary sales/displays, such as Christmas trees, landscape
materials and fireworks, shall be permanently defined and may not occupy more
than 20% of a site. Screening with walls and/or fences may be required to
assure pedestrian and vehicular safety. Materials, colors and designs of
screening walls and/or fences shall conform to those used as predominant
materials and colors of the building.
   (G)   Features and community spaces.
      (1)   Buildings should offer attractive and inviting pedestrian scale
features, spaces and amenities. Entrances and parking lots should be configured
to be functional and inviting with walkways conveniently tied to logical
destinations. Bus stops and drop-off/pick-up points should be considered as
integral parts of the configuration. Pedestrian ways should be anchored by
special design features such as towers, arcades, porticos, pedestrian light
fixtures, bollards, planter walls and other architectural elements that define
circulation ways and outdoor spaces. The features and spaces should enhance the
building and the center as integral parts of the community fabric.
      (2)   Community, neighborhood and regional shopping centers, regional
enclosed malls and retail buildings greater than 40,000 square feet shall
provide at least two of the following: patio/seating area; pedestrian plaza
with benches; transportation center; outdoor play area; kiosk area; water
feature; clock tower; steeple; or other such deliberately shaped area and/or a
focal feature or amenity. Any such areas shall have direct access to the public
sidewalk network and such features shall not be constructed of materials that
are inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscape. Retail
buildings less than 40,000 square feet, convenience centers, shopping center
outparcels and restaurants are not required to provide these features and
community spaces.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 4.5; Ord. 05-2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 28-
2014, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 154.136 WAIVER PROCEDURE.
   (A)   An applicant may request a waiver from the standards as contained in
this subchapter. As part of the waiver request, the applicant shall have the
burden of proof in showing that there will be no adverse impact upon the
neighborhood or general area by the granting of the waiver.
   (B)   In granting a waiver, the Commission shall consider the following:
      (1)   The special circumstances of the proposed use;
      (2)   Site constraints that would make compliance economically
unfeasible;
      (3)   The neighborhood and the general development patterns of the
surrounding properties and the prospects for development in the near future;
      (4)   Whether the development as proposed would serve the purpose of
enhancing the public welfare and safety; and
      (5)   The guidelines listed in the specific development criteria and
targeted planning areas of the comprehensive plan.
   (C)   The Commission may also consider other factors it may deem relevant in
making its decision. A waiver of any of the requirements of this chapter does
not exempt the development from any other requirements of the chapter.
   (D)   Waivers granted shall be for the specific use. Should the use be
substantially altered (greater than a 50% change in either the building,
parking, landscaping), the developer must obtain new waivers or comply with the
sections of this chapter.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 4.6; Ord. 08-2009, passed 7-6-2009)
GENERAL LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
§ 154.150 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The intent of this chapter is to improve the appearance of vehicular use
areas (VUAs) and property abutting public rights-of-way; to require buffering
and screening between incompatible land uses; to protect, preserve and promote
the aesthetic appeal, character and value of the surrounding neighborhood; and
to promote public health and safety through the reduction of noise pollution,
air pollution, visual pollution, air temperature and artificial light glare.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 5.0)
§ 154.151 SITES AFFECTED.
   (A)   New sites. No new site development, building or other structure shall
hereafter be constructed or vehicular use area created or used unless
landscaping is provided as required by the provisions of the zoning
regulations.
   (B)   Existing sites. No building or vehicular use area shall be expanded,
moved or removed and/or reconstructed unless minimum landscaping requirements
of the provisions of the zoning regulations is provided for the property to the
extent of its alteration or expansion, but not for the entire property, except
as hereinafter required.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 5.1)
§ 154.152 CHANGE IN USE.
   No use shall be changed to another use for which the zoning regulations
required additional parking over and above the previously required, unless
vehicular use area landscaping is provided for the additional parking. This
shall apply regardless of whether or not new construction is necessary to meet
the parking requirements of the new uses. Where new construction will not be
necessary to meet the parking requirements, such additional required parking
shall be deemed to be on the perimeter for as much as possible of the existing
vehicular use area. Interior landscaping shall not be required where only the
use of the property is changed and no new construction or reconstruction of
buildings or installation of additional parking is proposed.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 5.2)
§ 154.153 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   Unless otherwise provided, landscaping materials shall be installed to
provide a minimum of 50% winter opacity and 70% summer opacity between one foot
above the finished grade level to the top of the required planting, hedge,
fence, wall or earth mound within four years after installation. The required
landscaping shall be provided along the property perimeter in designated
landscape buffer areas or adjacent to the vehicular use area as required by the
zoning regulations. A planting manual and a plant materials list (Appendix A)
provides more detailed information on acceptable an unacceptable plant
material.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 5.3)
§ 154.154 WAIVER FOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.
   (A)   When a lot is submitted to the Department and the lot is a portion of
a larger development project, all perimeter landscaping requirements may be
waived along all adjoining property lines within the development project.
Perimeter landscaping shall be required along all adjoining property lines of
lots which are not a part of the development project, where applicable.
   (B)   When requesting a waiver for the perimeter landscaping requirements
between lots, the following information must be submitted to the Department:
      (1)   A conceptual design for all pieces of property involved in the
development showing the design layout for the entire site;
      (2)   Proof of single or joint ownership over all property in the
development; and
      (3)   A time frame for completion of the project.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 5.4)
§ 154.155 PLANTING LOCATIONS.
   In situations where a slope occurs along the boundary where perimeter
landscaping is required, the required landscape materials shall be placed (in
relation to the slope) where they will most effectively screen the more
intensive use from the adjoining property.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 5.5)
§ 154.156 PERVIOUS AREAS.
   Grass or ground cover shall be planted on all portions of landscape areas
not occupied by other landscape material.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 5.6)
§ 154.157 ENCROACHMENTS.
   When building or paving encroaches into required landscape buffer areas, the
overall required area of landscaping shall be maintained. To determine required
area of landscape buffer area, multiply required average width by length.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 5.7)
§ 154.158 EXISTING TREES/LANDSCAPING.
   Any existing trees or landscaping that is used to meet the requirements of
this subchapter shall be credited towards fulfillment of any landscaping,
screening or buffering provisions.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 5.8)
§ 154.159 PERIMETER LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Perimeter buffering required. Perimeter buffering shall be provided at
a minimum width as shown in §§
154.035 through
154.042,
154.055 through
154.075 and
154.085 through
154.091, Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area tables. The Commission may require
additional buffering width should it be determined that the minimums are not
adequate to buffer highly dissimilar uses. Plantings and other screening shall
be provided as shown in §§
154.035 through
154.042,
154.055 through
154.075 and
154.085 through
154.091, Perimeter Planting Density tables.
   (B)   Buffering use requirements. Perimeter buffering landscaping is
required when dissimilar uses are abutting. Buffering is based on the zoning
category in which the use would be permitted. Buffering landscaping shall be
required in conformance with the Buffering Requirements tables found in §§
154.035 through
154.042,
154.055 through
154.075 and
154.085 through
154.091.
   (C)   Landscaping in easements. The required landscape buffer area may be
combined with any easement as long as all easement requirements can be fully
met. Otherwise, the landscape buffer area shall be provided in addition to, and
separate from, any easement.
   (D)   Double frontage lots. When the rear wall of any building abuts any
collector or arterial street perimeter landscaping shall be required along the
rear lot line in conformance with the provisions of the buffering requirements
for that zone as found in the Buffering Requirements and Perimeter Planting
Density tables in §§
154.035 through
154.042,
154.055 through
154.075 and
154.085 through
154.091.
   (E)   Conflicts with utilities. When proposed perimeter screening conflicts
with utility installations, the Department may waive the requirement for the
use of plant materials only if more substantial screening such as brick, stone
or similar walls are constructed at a minimum of six feet in height. Brick or
stone columns with fencing materials between the columns may be acceptable.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 5.9; Ord. 08-2009, passed 7-6-2009)
§ 154.160 INTERIOR AND VEHICULAR USE AREA (VUA) LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Landscaping of parking area. A minimum buffer area of ten feet shall
be required along all street rights-of-way and common property boundaries. A
continuous three foot high planting, hedge shall be located within ten feet of
all parking lot pavement. A buffer area that exceeds ten feet in width shall
contain three-foot high plantings or serpentine earth mounds along 50% of the
boundary. If existing paving is less than ten feet from the property line then
additions to the parking area may be made that have the same setback as the
existing paving. The reduction in the landscape area shall be calculated and
additional landscaping equaling that amount of landscaping area shall be placed
elsewhere on site.
   (B)   Joint driveways and common vehicular use area. Vehicular use area
screening shall not be required between a vehicular use area and the adjoining
property where a property line divides a driveway used for common access to two
or more properties, or when both of the following conditions exist:
      (1)   VUAs are for the required parking for the properties or the common
use of the properties (as substantiated by reciprocal parking and access
agreements); and
      (2)   A final development plan for the properties has been approved.
   (C)   Interior landscaping for vehicular use areas. An open VUA (excluding
loading, unloading and storage areas in any regional commercial, general
commercial or industrial zone) shall provide interior landscaping in accordance
with §
154.164 Table 1. Interior landscaping shall be peninsular or island types.
Where a VUA is altered or expanded to increase the size to areas shown in §
154.164 Table 1, interior landscaping shall be provided to the extent of its
alteration or expansion. In industrial zones landscaping, including earth
berms, may be placed along the street frontage and may still be counted towards
meeting the required VUA landscaping.
   (D)   Minimum area. The minimum landscape area permitted shall be as found
in §
154.164 Table 2, with a four-foot minimum dimension to all trees from edge of
pavement where vehicles overhang.
   (E)   Maximum area. In order to encourage the required landscaped areas to
be properly dispersed, required landscaped area shall be as found in §
1
154.164 Table 2. In both cases, the least dimension of any required area shall
be a four-foot minimum distance to all trees from edge of pavement where
vehicles overhang. Landscaped areas larger than above are permitted. However,
area in excess of the maximum will not be counted towards fulfillment of VUA
landscaping requirements.
   (F)   Landscape area equivalents. Landscape areas will be calculated, for
purposes of meeting square foot requirements, as found in §
154.164 Table 7. Once area equivalents have been met, remaining areas may
consist of mulch, turf grasses or groundcovers.
   (G)   Minimum trees. Trees shall be required as shown in §
154.164 Table 7. Trees shall have a clear trunk of at least five feet above the
ground. For the purpose of this subchapter, trees are classified as shown in §
1
54.164 Tables 4 and
5. Trees of a species whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways
or other public improvements shall not be planted closer than 15 feet to such
public improvements.
   (H)   Minimum shrubs. Shrubs shall be of a minimum size as shown in §
154.164 Table 6.
   (I)   Species mix. To encourage variation and ensure that an entire
landscape is not susceptible to blight, disease or other disaster, the number
of species required as part of the required VUA landscaping shall be as found
in §
154.164 Table 3. No individual species may exceed 50% of the required number of
trees or shrubs for the entire landscape area.
   (J)   Other materials. All plant material shall be living plants (artificial
plants are prohibited) and shall meet the following requirements.
      (1)   Vines. Vines shall be at least 12 inches high at planting and are
generally used in conjunction with walls or fences.
      (2)   Grass. Grass of the fescue, bluegrass or rye family shall be
planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in the county and may be
sod, plugged, sprigged or seeded; except in swales or other areas subject to
erosion, here solid sod, erosion reducing net or suitable mulch shall be used.
Grass sod shall be clean and free of weeds and noxious pests or disease.
      (3)   Ground cover. Ground cover such as organic material shall be
planted not more than 15 inches on center and in such a manner as to present a
finished appearance and have 75% of complete coverage after two complete
growing seasons. In certain case, ground cover also may consist of rocks,
pebbles, sand and similar approved materials.
      (4)   Mulch. Mulch may consist of organic and/or inorganic materials such
as bark mulches, rocks, pebbles, sand or other similar materials.
   (K)   Plant quality. Plant materials in conformance with the provisions of
the zoning regulations shall conform to the standards of the American
Association of Nurserymen and shall have passed any inspection required under
state regulations. Bare root plants, with the exception of shrubs, hedges,
vines and ground cover shall be prohibited.
   (L)   Vehicular overhang. Parked vehicles may hang over the interior
landscaped area not more than two and one-half feet, as long as concrete
curbing or other wheel stops are provided to ensure no greater overhang or
penetration of landscaped area.
   (M)   Maintenance and installation. All landscaping materials shall be
installed in a sound, workmanlike manner and according to accepted, good
construction and planting procedures. The owner of the property shall be
responsible for the continued proper maintenance of all landscaping materials
and keep them in a proper, neat and orderly appearance, free from refuse and
debris at all times. All unhealthy or dead plant material shall be replaced
within one year or by the next planting season, whichever comes first, while
other defective landscape materials shall be replaced or repaired within three
months. Topping trees or the severe cutting of limbs to stubs larger than three
inches in diameter within the tree crown to such a degree as to remove the
normal canopy shall not be considered proper or permitted for the maintenance
of trees required by the zoning regulations. Violation of these installation
and maintenance provisions shall be grounds for the Department to refuse a
building occupancy permit, require a replacement of landscape materials or
institute legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of the zoning
regulations. Whenever the zoning regulations requires a continuous planting or
hedge, in addition to accepted planting procedures and size as prescribed
elsewhere in the zoning regulations, the landscape materials planted shall be
spaced a minimum of 24 inches apart at the time of planting, unless accepted
landscaping practice recommends a greater spacing requirement based on growth
rates or other conditions.
   (N)   Special provision, convenience markets, residential storage
warehouses. Convenience markets and residential storage warehouses must install
the minimum required square feet of interior landscaping. Because of the
greater number and intensity of vehicular trips, the landscaping may be placed
along the perimeter of the paved areas. All other landscaping requirements
remain in effect.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 5.10; Ord. 26-2011, passed 11-21-2011; Ord.
10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 154.161 PLAN SUBMISSION.
   Whenever property is affected by these landscape requirements, the property
owner or developer shall prepare a landscape plan for submittal to, and
approval by the Department. Landscape plans also may be submitted as part of
any development plan required by the Commission. Landscaping plans shall be
prepared by a qualified landscape professional unless prior approval from the
staff waiving this requirement is granted.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 5.11)
§ 154.162 PLANTING MANUAL AND PLANT MATERIALS LIST.
   Developers shall refer to the planting manual and plant materials list
(Appendix A) as a guideline for meeting the provisions of the zoning
regulations. Any materials which are not on the plant materials list shall be
considered on an individual basis to determine, based on the ability of the
unlisted plant to produce an effect similar to listed plants. A plant not on
the plant materials list shall be permitted only upon the express approval of
the Department.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 5.12)
§ 154.163 SCREENING REQUIREMENTS (SERVICE STRUCTURES, BASINS AND SATELLITE
DISHES).
   (A)   Screening required. All service structures shall be fully screened
except for those associated with one or two-family dwellings, or when located
more than 35 feet above the established grade. For the purpose of the zoning
regulations, service structures shall include propane tanks, dumpsters, air
conditioner units and condensers, electrical transformers and other equipment
or elements providing service to a building or site.
   (B)   Location of screening. A continuous fence or wall shall enclose any
service structure on all sides unless such structure must be frequently moved,
in which case, screening on all but one side is required. Exception: if the
opening of the service structure enclosure is visible from a public right-of-
way or public areas of the site, the service structure shall be screened on all
sides with a gate enclosing the opening. The average height of screening
material shall be one foot more than the height of the enclosed structure, but
shall not be required to exceed eight feet in height. Whenever a service
structure is located next to a building wall, such wall may fulfill the
screening requirements for that side of the service structure if that wall is
of an average height sufficient to meet the height requirements set out in the
zoning regulations. Whenever service structures are screened by additional
plant material, such material may count toward the fulfillment of required
interior or perimeter landscaping. No interior landscaping shall be required
within an area screened for service structures.
   (C)   Protection of screening material. Whenever screening material is
placed around any trash disposal unit or waste collection unit which is emptied
or removed mechanically on a regularly occurring basis, a fixed barrier to
contain the placement or the container shall be provided within the screening
material on those sides where there are such materials. The barrier shall be at
least 18 inches from the material and shall be of sufficient strength to
prevent possible damage to the screening when the container is moved or
emptied. The minimum front opening of the screening material shall be 12 feet
to allow service vehicle access to the containers.
   (D)   Screening of retention/detention basins. Retention/detention basins
shall be screened as follows.
      (1)   Basins with an overall average water depth of two feet or less
shall not require screening.
      (2)   Basins with an overall average water depth of more than two feet
shall be screened by a fence or railing a minimum of four feet in height where
they are within five feet of a public street or adjacent to a public sidewalk.
If the enclosure is chain link or similar fencing, landscaping shall be
installed. If the enclosure is of a decorative material, additional landscaping
will not be required.
   (E)   Screening for satellite dishes. All satellite dishes, larger than two
feet in diameter and not mounted on a building or other structure, shall be
screened so as to reduce the visual impact of the structure. This may include
shrubbery, fencing, trellis or other suitable material. The screening shall be
located on three sides while allowing enough area for the dish to rotate within
the reception range of satellites that are available at the time of
installation of the dish(es).
   (F)   Screening materials. The screening materials shall consist of the
following and are described in more detail in the planting manual and plant
materials list available at the Department.
      (1)   Walls and fences. Walls shall be constructed of natural stone,
brick or artificial material arranged in a linear, serpentine or other
alignment; fencing may include wrought iron, wood, vinyl, extruded polymer,
aluminum or similar materials. Materials other than those noted above require
Commission approval before installation. Chain link fencing may not be used to
meet the requirements of this chapter. Chain link fencing may be installed in
the required landscaped area only if it is in addition to the required
continuous planting, hedge fence wall or earth mound. All walls or fences shall
have a minimum opacity of 50%. Walls and fences allowed to meet the
requirements of this zoning chapter shall not be used for the erection or
display of any sign or other advertising device. Columns/posts may include
wrought iron, wood, vinyl, extruded polymer, aluminum, brick, natural or
cultured stone, split face masonry units or other similar materials.
      (2)   Earth mounds. Earth mounds shall be physical barriers which block
or screen the view similar to hedges, fences or walls. Mounds shall be
constructed with proper and adequate plant material to prevent erosion. A
difference in elevation between areas requiring screening does not constitute
an earth mound.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 5.14; Ord. 05-2011, passed 2-7-2011)
§ 154.164 LANDSCAPE TABLES.
 
Table 1: VUA Interior Landscape Area Requirements
VUA Size/# of Spaces Interior Landscape Trees Required       Maximum distance
                     Area                                    between ILAs
Less than 5 spaces   0%                 N/A                  N/A
5—10 spaces        2.5%               1/250 sq. ft. of ILA 120 ft.
11—50 spaces       5%                 1/250 sq. ft. of ILA 120 ft.
51—100 spaces      7.5%               1/500 sq. ft. of ILA 120 ft.
101+ spaces          10%                1/500 sq. ft. of ILA 120 ft.
 
Table 2: Maximum Landscape Island
VUA Size (# of spaces) Individual Landscaped Area (in square feet)
                       Minimum Maximum
6—50                 150     350
51 +                   150     1,500
 
Table 3: Species Mix
Number of Required VUA Trees/Shrubs Number of Species Required
0—10                              1
11—30                             2
31—50                             3
51 +                                4
Note: Individual species may not exceed 50% of required trees if more than 1
species required
 
Table 4: Deciduous Trees
Deciduous Tree Classification Trunk Caliper Mature Height
Small                         1.5 inches    10 ft.—25 ft.
Medium                                      26 ft.—50 ft.
Large                                       51 ft. +
 
Table 5: Evergreen Trees
Evergreen Tree Classification Minimum Planting Height Mature Height
Small                         5 ft.                   10 ft.—25 ft.
Medium                                                26 ft.—50 ft.
Large                                                 51 ft. +
 
Table 6: Shrubs
Shrub Classification Root ball/ Container size (In gallons) Mature Height
Low (Dwarf)          2                                      2 ft.—3 ft.
Small                                                       4 ft.—5 ft.
Medium               3                                      6 ft.—10 ft.
Large                                                       10—25 ft.
Table 7: Landscape Area Equivalents
Landscape Material Square Footage Equivalent
Table 7: Landscape Area Equivalents
Landscape Material Square Footage Equivalent
Large tree         300 sq. ft.
Medium tree        200 sq. ft.
Small tree         150 sq. ft.
Large shrub        100 sq. ft.
Medium shrub       50 sq. ft.
Small/low shrub    25 sq. ft.
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 26-2011, passed 11-21-2011)
GENERAL PARKING STANDARDS
§ 154.175 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The intent of this subchapter is to provide for safe and adequate off-street
parking, to protect, preserve and promote the safe movement of vehicles and the
occupants; and to promote public health and safety through appropriately
designed parking and maneuvering areas.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.0)
§ 154.176 PARKING/LOADING ESTABLISHED PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF CHAPTER.
   Any parking or loading spaces established prior to the adoption or amendment
of the zoning regulations which are used or intended to be used in connection
with any principal building or use shall hereafter be maintained so long as
said building, structure or other use remains unchanged.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.1)
§ 154.177 PARKING REQUIREMENTS FOR CHANGE IN PRINCIPAL USE.
   When the principal use is changed to a use for which additional parking is
required by the zoning regulations, it shall be unlawful to begin or maintain
such altered use until such time as the required off- street parking is
provided.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.2)
§ 154.178 SPECIAL ACCESS, SURFACE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No gasoline pump, oil drain pit or similar appliance for any purpose
shall be located within 15 feet of any right-of-way line; or within 15 feet of
the entrance or exit of the principal building; or within 50 feet of a
residential zone, except where such a pump, pit or appliance is within a
completely enclosed building and at a distance of at least 15 feet from any
vehicular entrance or exit of such building.
   (B)   Except for gasoline service stations, no gasoline pump shall be
permitted as an accessory use for another activity unless a development plan
showing the following is submitted and approved.
      (1)   A safe traffic pattern shall exist for vehicles to be served with
gas, including a safe entrance and exit to the area and traffic lanes are not
impeded by parked vehicles or other objects.
      (2)   A safe traffic pattern shall exist for pedestrians to ensure that
pedestrian flow for other purposes is not routed by the gasoline pumps, thereby
exposing pedestrians to unnecessary hazards.
      (3)   The gasoline pump shall be operated by employees of the activity,
or if others are permitted to operate them, the gas pumps shall be located so
it will be within an easily visible access of an employee at all times.
      (4)   Every parcel of land hereafter used as an automobile, truck, mobile
home, boat, trailer or camper sales lot, or as an automobile service station,
shall be considered a vehicular use area and subject to the requirements of the
zoning regulations concerning surfacing, lighting, landscaping and screening
and minimum yards and setbacks and shall be considered as the equivalent of a
parking area for more than five vehicles regardless of its size.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.3)
§ 154.179 STACKING AREAS.
   For any uses which utilize a drive-in or drive-through window or service
area, a vehicular stacking area shall be provided for a minimum of five
vehicles. Vehicular stacking areas shall not include any spaces located at the
windows or service area and shall be provided wholly on the property and not
include any right-of-way. Where menu boards or other stopping points are
utilized before moving to the window or service area, the vehicular stacking
area shall not include the space at the stopping point, or the spaces between
that stopping point and the window or service area. Vehicular stacking areas
shall be subject to all yard, paving, landscaping and other requirements for
vehicular use areas as contained herein.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.4)
§ 154.180 LOCATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF PARKING.
   The location of parking spaces shall be as set forth, and where distances
are specified, they shall be the walking distance measured from the nearest
point of the building to the nearest space.
   (A)   For one and two-family dwellings, on the same lot with the building
they are required to serve.
   (B)   For multi-family dwelling, not more than 200 feet from the building
they are required to serve.
   (C)   For uses located in or permitted in any business zone, and for
hospitals, nursing, convalescent and rest homes, orphanages, private clubs,
fraternity or sorority houses and churches, not more than 300 feet from the
building they are required to serve.
   (D)   For uses located in or permitted in any industrial zone and for uses
not specified herein above, not more than 700 feet from the building or other
place of assembly they are required to serve.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.5)
§ 154.181 MINIMUM DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Every parcel of land hereinafter used as a parking area shall be designed
and maintained in accordance with the following requirements.
   (A)   Off-street parking areas shall equal or exceed the number of spaces
required and shall be of usable shape and surface and have convenient ingress
and egress. Aisles and access drives shall be designed so as to provide
adequate vehicular maneuvering wholly on the property being served.
   (B)   All driveways shall be a minimum of five feet from a property line
except single-family residential units or as otherwise provided for in the
zoning regulations.
   (C)   Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be
arranged so as to reflect away from any adjoining residential zone or uses or
private right-of-way.
   (D)   Any off-street parking area having more than 2,000 square feet of area
and/or used by five or more vehicles shall be landscaped and screened as
required by the zoning regulations.
   (E)   All parking areas shall be paved and drained so as to dispose of all
surface water within the parking area without carrying said water accumulation
over a public sidewalk. Piping the water to a suitable out fall may be
required.
   (F)   Where parking areas are provided for five or more vehicles, or are
enlarged or expanded to provide five or more vehicles, they shall be paved with
asphalt, concrete, brick or other properly bound surface, so as to be durable
and dustless. Each parking space shall be physically delineated on the surface
of the parking area. All driveway aprons shall be concrete pavement.
   (G)   Permanent storm water retention, approved by the Storm Water
Department, shall be provided for all off-street parking spaces containing five
or more parking spaces and/or more than 2,000 square feet. For off-street
parking areas of 2,000 square feet or less, or less than five parking spaces,
permanent storm water retention may be required by the Storm Water Department
upon the determination that the lack of such retention would cause or aggravate
flooding or other drainage problems on surrounding property.
   (H)   All parking spaces located along the perimeter of a parking area or
adjacent to any structure on the lot shall be provided with concrete or other
wheel stops or a curb, so as to stop any vehicle and provide protection for any
landscape materials and pedestrians.
   (I)   Fire lanes shall be at least 20 feet in width with the road edge
closest to the building at least ten feet from the building. The designation,
use and maintenance of fire lanes on private property shall be accomplished as
specified by the Fire Marshal.
   (J)   The maximum distance between landscape areas in each row of parking
shall not exceed 120 feet in either direction. Areas must meet minimum size and
landscape material requirements found in §§
154.150 through
154.163.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.6; Ord. 08-2009, passed 7-6-2009)
§ 154.182 PARKING AREA DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Every parcel of land located within the city limits and containing or being
used as a parking area shall be required to meet the design standards found in
the tables and images in this subchapter.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.7)
§ 154.183 SINGLE PARKING AREAS FOR MULTIPLE USES.
   The required off-street parking for any number of separate uses may be
combined in one lot, but the off-street parking required by any use shall not
be counted in the off-street parking required for any other use or on any other
lot unless specifically permitted.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.8)
§ 154.184 JOINT USE OF PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   The Department may, upon application by all parties involved,
authorize the joint use of off-street parking facilities for uses whose normal
and regular hours of operation do not coincide or overlap.
   (B)   Joint use of off-street parking shall be subject to the following
limitations and conditions.
      (1)   Off-street parking areas required for residential use shall not be
included in any joint parking arrangement.
      (2)   Up to 100% of the off-street parking required for a church or
facilities incidental to a public or private school, and up to 50% of the off-
street parking required for any other use may be provided by a joint parking
arrangement.
      (3)   The joint parking areas shall be within 300 feet of all of the uses
being served by such facilities.
      (4)   The applicant shall submit sufficient data to the Department to
demonstrate that the normal and regular operating hours of the uses do not
coincide or overlap in any manner.
      (5)   All parties shall execute a properly drawn legal instrument for the
joint use of off- street parking areas. This instrument, having been approved
as to form and manner of execution by the legal counsel of the Commission,
shall be filed with the application.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.9)
§ 154.185 PARKING, LOADING AND UNLOADING, RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
   In every residential zone, there shall be provided at least two off-street
parking spaces per dwelling unit unless as otherwise provided for elsewhere in
the zoning regulations. No required parking or maneuvering shall be located
within any required front yard, with the exception of single-family and two-
family uses.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.10)
§ 154.186 PARKING, LOADING AND UNLOADING, NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
   In any zone other than a residential zone, off-street parking, loading or
unloading areas may be permitted within the required front yard if there is
sufficient depth between the street right-of-way line and the building line or
other barrier to accommodate all parking and maneuvering without the necessity
of backing over the street right-of-way line.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.11)
§ 154.187 LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACES.
   In any zone, every building or part thereof hereafter erected, having a
floor area of 10,000 square feet or more, which is to be occupied by
manufacturing, compounding, processing, storage, warehousing, goods or other
similar uses, requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material,
objects or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same
premises with such building, at least one off-street loading space for every
20,000 square feet or fraction thereof of floor area so used in excess of
20,000 square feet. Loading spaces shall be no smaller than 12 feet by 35 feet.
They shall not be included in calculating VUA landscaping requirements.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.12)
§ 154.188 VEHICULAR STORAGE AREAS.
   Areas for storage of commercial vehicles and items such as trailers, farm
machinery, construction equipment and similar items, when located in the C-4,
MAZ, I-1 and I-2 zones, shall not be required to be paved. However, they shall
be maintained in such a manner that they do not become a nuisance in terms of
dust, mud or drainage.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.13)
§ 154.189 WAIVER OF PARKING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Waiver of parking standards.
      (1)   A property owner may request a waiver from the off-street parking
requirements contained within the zoning regulations by filing and application
for parking waiver with the Commission. A request for a waiver may be made for
any permitted use in any zone. Waivers granted will be for the specific use
stated in the request only. Waivers will not run with the land and are not
transferable to other uses or other lots.
      (2)   A request for parking waiver shall be accompanied by a development
plan and completed application form. The application shall contain the name of
all adjoining property owners, so that notification of the waiver request may
be sent to those owners. As part of the waiver request, the applicant shall
have the burden of proof in showing that there will be no adverse impact upon
the neighborhood or general area by the granting of the waiver.
      (3)   In granting a waiver for parking, the Commission shall consider the
following:
         (a)   The special circumstance of the proposed use;
         (b)   The peak demand for parking that the proposed use would require;
         (c)   The potential for on street parking or public parking in the
general area: and
         (d)   The guidelines listed in the comprehensive plan.
      (4)   The Commission may also consider other factors it may deem relevant
in making its decision. In granting a waiver, the Commission shall not reduce
the number of parking spaces by more than 50% when 50 or fewer spaces are
required and shall not reduce the number of parking spaces by more than 30%
when 51 or more spaces are required. The Commission may not increase the number
of parking spaces by more than 50% of the required number of parking spaces as
provided by the zoning regulations. A waiver of the required number of parking
spaces does not exempt the parking area and development from any other
requirements of the zoning regulations.
   (B)   Waiver not required. A property owner does not have to request a
waiver from the off- street parking requirements when there is a reciprocal
(joint use) parking agreement on file with the Department, the properties
involved in the agreement are adjacent or are part of a shopping center or
other common development project and the properties involved in the agreement
jointly meet the minimum off-street parking requirements for all properties
involved in the agreement.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.14; Ord. 27-2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord.
10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 17-2023, passed
8-21-2023)
§ 154.190 LARGE VEHICLE PARKING IN IHSB OVERZONE.
   (A)   IHSB Zone. Within the Interstate Highway Service Business (IHSB)
Overzone, any hotel, motel, fast-food restaurant, museum, rest areas or
convention centers shall install on-site parking for buses, recreational
vehicles, or other large vehicles. There shall be one space for every 25
required spaces. Each space shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and 45 feet
in length. Aisle widths shall be determined by the Department.
   (B)   Parking prohibition. Within commercial zones large commercial vehicles
(e.g., buses, tractor/trailer rigs, recreational vehicles) may not park on or
across parking spaces overnight. Vehicles waiting to make deliveries or for
display for sale as part of the normal business operation are exempted from
this regulation.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.15)
§ 154.191 BICYCLE PARKING.
   Bicycle racks shall be required with the following uses when located along a
designated bicycle route: government parks; private parks; outdoor commercial
recreation facilities; schools; libraries; community centers; museums;
pharmacies; convenience stores; theaters; regional enclosed malls; shopping
centers; outdoor athletic facilities; and health clubs.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 6.16)
§ 154.192 ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENT.
   A minimum number of accessible parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the Kentucky Building Code or Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) Accessibility Guidelines, whichever is greater.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 27-2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 05-2015,
passed 5-4-2015; Ord. 17-2023, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 154.193 PARKING TABLES AND DIAGRAMS.
 
Table 1: Parking Spaces (Angle/Aisle Width)
Parking Angle (In Degrees)  90 degrees 60 degrees Parallel 0 degrees
Aisle width One-way traffic 24         18         11
Aisle width Two-way traffic 24         23         19
Parking angles other than those shown above shall be reviewed by the
Department and Engineering Department and may be approved.
 
(Ord. 17-2023, passed 8-21-2023)
GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS
§ 154.205 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The intent of this subchapter is:
      (1)    To encourage an attractive visual environment for business and to
promote a healthy economy through informing and directing the general public;
      (2)    To protect and enhance the physical appearance of the city;
      (3)    To ensure public safety along public and private streets within
the city; and
      (4)    To provide businesses with a format for on-premises street
advertising.
   (B)   In order to establish these objectives, the city has determined:
      (1)   Without adequate regulation and design standards, signs may become
a nuisance. Signs are a nuisance when they are excessive in number and are
unduly distracting to motorists and pedestrians, creating a traffic hazard and
in some places reduce the effectiveness of other signs needed to direct and
inform the public;
      (2)   The appearance of the community is marred by the excessive number,
oversized and poorly designed signs, so that both residential and business
property values are adversely affected; and
      (3)   The number of such distracting signs ought to be reduced and signs
that are permitted should comply with the standards of this subchapter in order
to reduce the aforementioned effects; and in view of the foregoing, all signs
not in conformance with the provisions of this subchapter are hereby declared a
nuisance.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 7.0; Ord. 12-2009, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.206 SIGN PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   No sign, except as specifically exempted herein, shall be displayed,
erected, relocated or altered until a permit has been issued by the Department.
Applications shall include, but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   A completed application form;
      (2)   A site plan and/or building elevations showing the location of the
proposed sign(s) on the lot and/or building, including setbacks;
      (3)   Detailed sign information including type of construction, method of
illumination, dimensions, copy, method of mounting and/or erecting and other
similar information. Note: The content of the message or speech displayed on
the sign shall not be considered when approving or denying a sign permit.
However, the content must be submitted to evaluate the sign copy area;
      (4)   The written consent of the owner of the underlying property or
authorized agent; and
      (5)   A permit fee.
   (B)   The Department shall maintain written records of all permits issued or
denied and any condition(s) attached to the approval of each permit request.
Signs may be erected or constructed only in compliance with the approved
permit.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 7.1)
§ 154.207 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   No light, sign or other advertising device shall be designed or
erected in such a manner or location as to imitate or resemble any official
traffic sign, signal or device, or use words, phrases, symbols or characters
implying the existence of danger, the need to stop or maneuver the vehicle or
create an unsafe distraction for the vehicle operator.
   (B)   No sign shall be placed or located in or extend over a street, right-
of-way, roadway, sidewalk, public or private access easement, or alley except
as provided herein.
   (C)   No sign shall be attached to or painted on the surface of any tree,
utility pole, streetlight standard or dilapidated structure.
   (D)   No sign shall be allowed to be illuminated except as expressly
provided herein. Signs which are otherwise allowed to be illuminated are not
allowed if it is determined that the lighting causes glare or otherwise
interferes with the vision of persons operating motor vehicles on any public
way or interferes with any adjacent property.
   (E)   Neon lighting and tubing and other exposed light sources may be used
in signs where signs are permitted to be directly illuminated.
   (F)   No sign may be located or constructed so as to obstruct sight lines
for persons using streets, alleys, pedestrian rights-of-way and driveways.
   (G)   Signs accessory to non-conforming uses shall be permitted and shall be
subject to the regulations for the use.
   (H)   Where more than one freestanding sign is permitted on a lot, such
signs shall be located and oriented to the distinct street frontage by which
the signs are permitted. Signs may not be closer than 75 feet from each other
as measured in a straight line.
   (I)   On lots with multiple street frontages, and/or where multiple
freestanding signs are permitted, the total square footage in area per side of
a freestanding sign may be increased by 50% over the maximum permitted square
footage if only one freestanding sign is erected.
   (J)   Sign materials should coordinate with building materials.
   (K)   Wall mounted tenant signs must be placed on the wall of the tenant’s
leased space.
   (L)   Signs placed on fences are considered to be and are counted as
freestanding signs.
   (M)   Residential signs should use more natural or earth tones in their
colors to lessen impact on the surrounding uses.
   (N)    All residential signs may be externally illuminated only except as
expressly permitted within the zoning district regulations.
   (O)    All freestanding signs shall contain the numerical street address of
the business on the sign. The street address shall be displayed in numbers in
contrast to the sign at least six inches in height.
   (P)   Sign permits shall become null and void if not installed within six
months from the original issue date of the permit.
   (Q)   Additional provisions for message boards.
      (1)   No more than one message board may be permitted on a property.
      (2)   Message boards may be electronic or manual copy change.
      (3)   Message boards must be accompanied by a permanent business
identification sign if on a freestanding pole or monument sign.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 7.2; Ord. 12-2009, passed 9-8-2009; Ord. 10-
2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 18-2025, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 154.208 SIGNS EXEMPT FROM PERMIT.
   The following signs shall not require a permit; however, such signs are
subject to applicable restrictions contained within the zoning regulations:
   (A)   Changing copy of off-premises signs, attraction board, marquee or
electronic message display system;
   (B)   Church directional signs;
   (C)   Community identification signs and community beautification project
signs;
   (D)   Construction signs;
   (E)   Government signs, including, but not limited to, traffic signs and
traffic control signs;
   (F)   Historic markers;
   (G)   Incidental signs;
   (H)   Nameplates;
   (I)   Non-commercial signs;
   (J)   On-site real estate signs, including auction signs;
   (K)   Public utility warning signs for the safety and welfare of the public,
including, but not limited to, signs identifying high voltage, public telephone
or underground cable;
   (L)   Signs not visible from the public right-of-way provided however that
if the sign becomes visible from the right-of-way at any time, it shall meet
all the applicable requirements of this chapter;
   (M)   Special events signs associated with community festivals or events of
a cultural, civic or educational nature;
   (N)   Tract signs; and
   (O)   Booth (flea market and farmers market) signs.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 7.3; Ord. 12-2009, passed 9-8-2009; Ord. 24-
2016, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 154.209 PROHIBITED SIGNS, ALL ZONES.
   The following signs and/or sign features shall be prohibited in all zones:
   (A)   Abandoned signs;
   (B)   Any sign which emits any noise, odor or visible matter for the purpose
of attracting attention to the sign;
   (C)   Flashing or blinking signs, except for permitted informational signs;
   (D)   Mobile or portable signs;
   (E)   Off-site real estate signs;
   (F)   Rotating or moving signs;
   (G)   Signs attached or placed on a tent structure, where the placement of
such signs adversely affects the fire resistance rating of the structure;
   (H)   Streamers, pennants, balloons, inflatables and similar signs or
devices;
   (I)   Tag signs;
   (J)   Temporary signs; and
   (K)   Vehicle signs, when attached to a vehicle not normally driven daily.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 7.4; Ord. 12-2009, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.210 PERMITTED SIGNS, ALL ZONES.
   The following signs shall be permitted within all zones subject to the
restrictions specified:
   (A)   Church directional signs;
   (B)   Community identification signs and community beautification project
signs;
   (C)   Construction signs;
   (D)   Government signs and historic markers;
   (E)   Incidental signs;
   (F)   Non-commercial signage, including, but not limited to, political
signs;
   (G)   On-site real estate signs, including auction signs;
   (H)   Signs associated with temporary structures when the sign is
permanently attached to the temporary structure and not exceeding 15% of the
exposed building face of the wall to which it is attached. Each installation of
a temporary structure and the associated signage shall require the issuance of
all applicable permits;
   (I)   Special events signs associated with community festivals or events of
a cultural, civic or educational nature;
   (J)   Subdivision identification sign/signature entrance; and
   (K)   Tract signs.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 7.5; Ord. 12-2009, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.211 TEMPORARY BANNER SIGNS.
   (A)   Temporary banners shall be allowed in all commercial, industrial and
specialized use zones. Any business shall be allowed one temporary banner, not
to exceed 50 square feet in area, to be placed on the premises. No person shall
place a banner on his or her business premises without first receiving a permit
from the Department. Permits shall be for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive
days and for a cumulative period not to exceed 120 days in any calendar year.
Immediately upon expiration of the permit, the applicable temporary banner
shall be removed. The permit for the temporary banner shall be kept on the
business premises and shall be available for inspection by the Department.
Temporary banners shall be securely installed and properly maintained the
entire time period of their display. Failure to properly maintain a temporary
banner or if the temporary banner is determined to cause a safety hazard for
pedestrians or vehicles is reason for the department to order removal of the
temporary banner or to cite the property owner.
   (B)   Special provisions. A principal structure with a minimum height of 50
feet may be allowed a temporary banner covering a maximum of 15% of the wall
area to which it is attached. The banner is restricted to a special event,
announcement, or other activity of a noncommercial nature. It cannot advertise
a product or sale to the general public. The banner can only be placed on the
principal structure. The time period for display will be determined by the
Department based on the timeliness of the message on the banner.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 7.6; Ord. 03-2022, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 154.212 SCENIC PARKWAY SIGNAGE.
    It is the intent of this regulation to implement the goals of the
comprehensive plan through the recognition that certain entryways/roadways to
the city are determined to be scenic in nature and therefore should be
protected from visual blight from excessive signage. To meet this community
concern, no off- premises signs shall be permitted along a designated scenic
parkway. Scenic parkways include Veterans Way, KY 3005 (Ring Road), KY 61
(Lincoln Parkway), KY 361 (Patriot Parkway), US 31W between Miles Street and
New Glendale Road, and US 62 between Ring Road (near I-65 exit 94) and College
Street Road.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 7.7; Ord. 27-2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord.
18-2025, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 154.213 INTERSTATE OFF-PREMISES SIGNS.
   (A)   In addition to other off-premises signage allowed elsewhere in the
zoning regulations, there is to be the provision for off-premises signage along
and adjacent to Interstate 65, within 100 feet of the right-of-way and oriented
towards I 65 traffic. Signage shall be allowed in areas zoned C-3, C-4, I-1 or
I-2 as of 7-1-2008.
   (B)   Off-premises signs may be located:
      (1)   Not closer than 2,000 feet from any other such sign as measured
along the near curbside of any adjacent street in either direction from the
sign;
      (2)   Not closer than 250 feet from any other such sign as measured from
a point across the street from the sign along the opposite curbside in either
direction; and
      (3)   For signs located on lots at intersections, the measurement of
divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above shall apply to both intersection streets,
regardless of sign face orientation.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 7.8)
§ 154.214 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   Every sign shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the state’s Building Code and standards and guidelines adopted
by the Department. Every sign, including those for which a permit is not
required, shall be maintained in good condition at all times. The Department
shall have the authority to order the repair, repainting, alteration or removal
of any sign which is a nuisance to the community by reason of dilapidation,
obsolescence or inadequate maintenance.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 7.9)
§ 154.215 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   The following provisions shall apply to non-conforming signs.
   (A)   Continuation, off-premises signs. With the exception of those signs
which are prohibited, a non-conforming off-premises sign may continue in
existence and shall be properly maintained in good condition but it shall not
be:
      (1)   Changed to another non-conforming sign;
      (2)   Structurally altered (except to meet safety requirements) so as to
prolong the life of the sign;
      (3)   Altered so as to increase the degree of non-conformity of the sign;
      (4)   Expanded or enlarged;
      (5)   Reestablished after its discontinuance of 90 days;
      (6)   Moved to a new location on the same building lot; or
      (7)   Reestablished after substantial damage or destruction.
   (B)   Continuation, on-premises sign. With the exception of those signs
which are prohibited, a non-conforming on-premises sign may continue in
existence and shall be properly maintained in good condition. Should a legal
non-conforming sign be replaced, the sign may not increase its degree of non-
conformity, but may decrease in degree of non-conformity.
   (C)   Continuation, status change. When a legal on-premises sign becomes an
off-premises sign due to the sale of the property on which the sign is located
it may continue to exist if all the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The sign may only advertise a single business and it shall be the
business that was formerly located on the property;
      (2)   The business to which the sign pertains is located within 750 feet
of the sign as measured along the near curbside of the adjacent street;
      (3)   The sign is less than 100 square feet in area;
      (4)   The sign is located within a commercial zoning district;
      (5)   The sign is in conformance with the spacing requirements for off-
premises signs as found in this chapter;
      (6)   The sign shall be located on the existing pole or monument; and
      (7)   The sign shall be properly maintained in good condition.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 7.10; Ord. 12-2009, passed 9-8-2009; Ord.
10-2014, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 154.216 DISCONTINUATION, NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   Any prohibited sign as defined in the zoning chapter shall be removed within
two days of notification of violation. Failure to remove the sign may result in
the issuance of a citation to the town’s Code Enforcement Board (CEB) or other
enforcement action that may be appropriate.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 7.11)
§ 154.217 SIGN TYPES.
   The following sign types are permitted by this chapter.
Table 1: Other Sign Types
     Allowed               Maximum Sign Maximum Location Lighting Additional
Type Types   Maximm Number Area         Height  Require- Allowed  Requirements
                                                ments
Table 1: Other Sign Types
               Allowed  Maximm   Maximum    Maximum Location     Lighting
Type           Types    Number   Sign Area  Height  Require-     Allowed  Additional Requirements
                                                    ments
               Wall     1                           Must be      No       May not be attached to light poles, flag
Banners        Pole     1        50 sq. ft. N/A     securely              poles, utility poles
                                                    attached
                                                    Must be
Booth (Flea    Wall-                                located
Market and     mount    1        15 sq. ft. 3 ft.   directly     No       Cannot block pedestrian access
Farmers Market                                      adjacent to
                                                    booth space
Canopy                 1/canopy 15% of     N/A                 Yes       
                        face     face
                                                    Monument: 10
               Monument                             ft. off
                                                    paved
Constructio n           1/street 64 sq. ft. 8 ft.   surface      No       No permit required
                                                    Pole: 10 ft.
               Pole                                 off paved
                                                    surface
               Monument                             May not
Directional ,                                       project into
Commercial     Pole     2/ent.   6 sq. ft.  3 ft.   right-of-wa  Yes      May contain corporate logo
                                                    y

Directional ,  Monument                                                   May only contain directional information
Industrial     Pole     2/ent.   50 sq. ft. 10 ft.               Yes      and corporate logo

                                                    At
                                                    intersection
Directional ,                    100 sq.            of arterial           Sign erected by city; spaces on sign
Travelers      Monument 1        ft.        25 ft.  and          Yes      filled on a first come, first served basis
                                                    commercial
                                                    collector
                                                    streets
               Wall                                                       No permit required; maximum of two signs
Incidental     Monument N/A      10 sq. ft. N/A     N/A          No       displayed at any time
               Pole
Industrial     Monument 1/ent.                      10 ft. off
Park                    to ind.  150 sq.    25 ft.  paved        Yes      May contain tenant signs
Identification Pole     area     ft.                surface

               Wall     Wall: 1                                 Yes
                                 Not to exceed 50%  Monument: 10
               Monument Mon.: 1  of total allowed   ft. off
Message Board                    sign face when     paved                 See §
                                 pole or monument,  surface               154.207(Q) for additional requirements
                                 maximum of 75 sq.  Pole: 10 ft.
               Pole     Pole: 1  ft.                off paved
                                                    surface
               Monume   1        150 sq.    16 ft.  20 ft. of    Yes
               nt                ft.                paved
                                                    surface; in           Off-site directional signs shall count
Off-Site                                            areas zoned           toward the total allowable signs permitted
Directional    Pole     1        150 sq.    35 ft.  C-3, C-4,    Yes      on a lot.
                                 ft.                I-1, I-2,
                                                    PNC

                                                    Cannot
Projecting     Wall     1/wall   15% of     20 ft.  project into Yes      Bottom of sign must be minimum 7 ft. above
                                 wall face          right- of-            finish grade
                                                    way
               Monument          16 sq.
               Pole              ft.,
                        1 per    residentia                               Removed within 10 days of completion of
Real Estate             street   l; 32 sq.  6 ft.                         sales or lease activity; no permit
               Wall     frontage ft. comm./                               required
                                 ind.

                                                    No less than
                                                    10 ft. from
Subdivision             2/street                    paved        Yes,     Additional requirements are located in §
Identificati   Monument entrance 48 sq. ft. 16 ft.  surface of   externa  154.232
on                                                  primary      l only
                                                    intersecting
                                                    street
               Monument                             Mon. and
                        1/street                    F.S. 10 ft.           Total not to exceed 4 signs; no permit
Tract Sign     Pole     frontage 72 sq. ft. 12 ft.  off paved    No       required
                                                    surface

               Pole                                 Must be
                                                    located
Sidewalk Food           1        15 sq. ft. 5 ft.   directly     No       Cannot block pedestrian access and must be
Vendors        Cart                                 adjacent to           removed each day
                                                    vending cart

Temporary      Wall     1/wall   15%                           No        
Structure
Table 2: Off-Premises Sign
Type Allowed Types Maximum Sign Maximum Height Location     Lighting Allowed
                   Area                        Requirements
Table 2: Off-Premises Sign
Type     Allowed Maximum Sign Area                                     Maximum Location     Lighting
         Types                                                         Height  Requirements Allowed
         Mon.                                                                  20 ft. off-
                                                                               street right
Off-             300 sq. ft. excluding structural supports; may be             of way; in
Premises Pole    placed back to back or in a “V” type construction 45 ft.  areas zoned  Yes
                                                                               C-3, C-4, I-
                                                                               1, I-2

Additional Requirements
Spacing:
1.   No closer than 2,000 ft. from any other off-premises sign as measured along the near curbside
of any adjacent street in either direction from the sign
2.   No closer than 2,000 ft. from any other such sign as measured from a point across the street
from the sign along the opposite curbside in either direction
3.   For signs located at intersections, the measurements of requirements 1. and 2. above apply to
both intersecting streets, regardless of sign face orientation
4.   No closer than 500 ft. from any residential zone as measured in a radius from the sign
 
Table 3: IHSB Signs
Interstate Highway Service Business Overzone
Type       Allow ed  Maximum   Maximum      Location     Lighting Additional
           Types     Sign Area Height       Requirements Allowed  Requirements
                                                                  1. One
                                                                  additional
                                                                  sign, at a
                                                                  height no
                                                                  greater than
                                                                  45 ft.
                                                                  (replaces 1
                                                                  permitted
                                                                  freestanding
                                                                  sign); and
                                                                  2. Two
                                                                  adjacent
                     225 sq. ft. for signs                        parcels,
                     between 45 ft. and 74                        either
Interstate           ft. in height          In areas              sharing a
Highway              325 sq. ft. for signs  within the            boundary
Service    Mon. Pole between 75 ft. and 99  IHSB as      Yes      line or
Business             ft. in height          found on the          those
                     400 sq. ft. for signs  zoning map            separated by
                     between 100 ft. and                          a public or
                     125 ft. in height                            private
                                                                  right-of-
                                                                  way, may
                                                                  place
                                                                  signage on
                                                                  one pole, on
                                                                  either
                                                                  parcel;
                                                                  allowed
                                                                  square feet
                                                                  requirements
                                                                  remain in
                                                                  effect
                                                                  When one
                                                                  parcel
                                                                  restricted
                                                                  to access
                                                                  through
                                                                  adjacent
                                                                  parcel and
                                            In areas              a) lots
                                            within the            share
Restricted                                  IHSB as               ingress/
Access     Mon. Pole Based on  Based on use found on the Yes      egress;
Parcels              use                    zoning map            b) Located
                                            (on either            on
                                            parcel)               commercial
                                                                  collector or
                                                                  arterial
                                                                  street; and
                                                                  c)
                                                                  reciprocal
                                                                  parking
                                                                  agreements
                                                                  are executed
 
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 7.12; Ord. 12-2009, passed 9-8-2009; Ord.
passed 9-6-2011; Ord. 27-2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014;
Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 05-2017, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 15-2017,
passed 9-18-2017; Ord. 03-2022, passed 2-7-2022; Ord. 25-2024, passed 11-18-
2024; Ord. 18-2025, passed 8-18-2025)
FENCE AND WALL REGULATIONS
§ 154.230 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The intent of this subchapter is to improve the appearance and safety of
property by ensuring that fences are erected in a manner so that they do not
become a visual nuisance or safety hazard and to promote public health and
safety.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 8.0)
§ 154.231 FENCES AND WALLS.
   (A)   Walls and fences shall not be permitted any closer to the street than
the yard setback as established by the record subdivision restrictions or any
closer than the house/principal structure when no private subdivision
restrictions are recorded in a residential or business zone, except for
permitted schools, cemeteries and government buildings. Permitted side and rear
yard fencing and walls shall not contain any barbed wire or electric fencing
when in a residential zone. Maximum fence height shall not exceed eight feet.
   (B)   Where a lot abuts a publicly dedicated alley, a wall or fence shall be
permitted to be located on the property line in the yard that abuts the alley,
provided any gate swings in toward the property.
   (C)   Walls and fences shall be permitted in any yard in an industrial zone.
There shall be no height restriction placed on any wall or fence erected or
maintained in industrial zones, and any barbed wire construction shall be not
less than six feet above ground level.
      (1)   Walls and fences, corner lots.
         (a)   When a lot is a corner lot, it shall have two front yards. For
the purposes of fencing regulations only, the yards are defined as follows: the
primary front yard (the front yard adjacent to the principal exposure of the
principal structure) and the secondary front yard (the front yard adjacent to
the side exposure of the principal structure).
         (b)   Fences may be allowed in the secondary front yard in conformance
with the following provisions:
            1.   No closer to the street than the yard setback as established
by the record subdivision restrictions or any closer than one-half the distance
between the house/principal structure and the lot line, whichever is less
restrictive;
            2.   Permitted secondary front yard fencing and walls shall not
exceed six feet in height and shall not contain any barbed wire; and
            3.   No fencing or walls shall be allowed in the primary front yard
unless meeting the requirements for primary front yard fencing as found
elsewhere in this chapter.
      (2)   Walls and fences, double frontage lots.
         (a)   When a lot is a double frontage lot, it shall have two front
yards. For the purposes of fencing regulations only, the yards are defined as
follows: the primary front yard (the front yard adjacent to the principal
exposure of the principal structure) and the secondary front yard (the front
yard adjacent to the rear exposure of the principal structure).
         (b)   Fences may be allowed in the secondary front yard in conformance
with the following provisions:
            1.   No closer to the street than the yard setback as established
by the record subdivision restrictions or any closer than one-half the distance
between the house/principal structure and the lot line, whichever is less
restrictive;
            2.   Permitted secondary front yard fencing and walls shall not
exceed six feet in height and shall not contain any barbed wire; and
            3.   No fencing or walls shall be allowed in the primary front yard
unless meeting the requirements for primary front yard fencing as found
elsewhere in this chapter.
      (3)   Decorative/ornamental fences. Decorative/ornamental fencing may be
placed in the primary and secondary front yards under all the following
conditions.
         (a)   Maximum height shall not exceed 42 inches, measured from the
adjacent finished grade to the top of any vertical or horizontal slat/picket or
similar member. No variance from this maximum restriction may be obtained.
         (b)   Corner posts and/or columns may have a maximum height of 48
inches, measured from the adjacent finish grade to the top of the post or
column. Lighting fixtures are exempted from this maximum height. No similar
ornamental features may exceed this height.
         (c)   Fencing material may not block access to any public sidewalk or
way.
         (d)   Fencing material may not project into any sight triangle as
defined elsewhere in this chapter.
         (e)   Decorative ornamental fencing may include wrought iron, wood,
vinyl, extruded polymer, aluminum or similar materials. Materials other than
those noted require Commission approval before installation may take place.
         (f)   Columns/posts may include wrought iron, wood, vinyl, extruded
polymer, aluminum, brick, natural or cultured stone, split face masonry units
or other similar materials. Materials other than those noted require Commission
approval before installation may take place.
         (g)   Materials not approved as decorative fencing include chain link,
vinyl coated chain link, rolled (welded) wire, chicken wire, warning barrier,
rabbit guard, garden netting, poultry netting or other similar materials.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 8.1; Ord. 08-2009, passed 7-6-2009)
§ 154.232 SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN/SIGNATURE ENTRANCE.
   (A)   Each entrance to the subdivision or section of the subdivision may
have no more than two signs per entrance.
   (B)   A subdivision identification sign/signature entrance is any wall(s),
fence(s), guard house or similar structure at an entrance to any subdivision.
      (1)   The sign/entrance shall not obstruct the natural roadside drainage
or through drainage facilities and allow for adequate sight distance. The
Engineering Department may require the location of the proposed sign/entrance
be staked in the field and approved prior to construction.
      (2)   Signs/entrances shall not be permitted within utility or drainage
easements without prior approval from the agency to which the easement has been
dedicated.
      (3)   Signs/entrances shall not be permitted within the right-of-way of
an arterial or collector street except those collector streets functioning as
the primary entrance to the proposed development and provided that approval
from the Engineering Department and any other appropriate authority is
obtained.
      (4)   Signs/entrances may be located within the right-of-way of a local
street if approved by the Engineering Department.
      (5)   Encroachment permits and proof of permanent maintenance must be
received for any sign/entrance to be located within a right-of-way prior to
permit approval.
      (6)   Prior to construction of any sign/entrance within a right-of-way,
an indemnity agreement must be provided by the developer or owner to the city.
Such agreement shall conform to the format approved by the Commission.
      (7)   Any public agency responsible for maintenance of facilities within
the right-of-way may require, for any reason, the removal of a sign/entrance
located within the right-of-way. The removal shall be done at the owner(s)
expense and within 30 days from receiving written notice.
      (8)   Length: the maximum length of a sign/signature entrance shall not
exceed 100 feet on each side of the entrance roadway. Any structure extending
beyond this length shall be considered a fence or wall and the requirements for
walls and fences shall apply.
      (9)   Proximity to structure on lot and driveways: signs/entrance shall
be constructed a minimum of 20 feet from any dwelling or driveway entrance.
      (10)   Landscaping: in order to mitigate the visual impact of sign
structures on adjacent vehicular corridors and land uses, any sign/entrance
equal to or greater than eight feet in height shall have plantings adjacent to
at least 50% of its exterior facade. Such plantings shall conform to the
standards of size, materials and quality as set forth in the landscaping
regulations of the zoning chapter.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 8.2)
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
§ 154.245 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The intent of this subchapter is to set minimum and maximum requirements for
lots, yards, heights of buildings and other structures, protect environmentally
sensitive and geologic hazard areas and to promote public health and safety
through the provision of adequate public facilities.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 9.0)
§ 154.246 MINIMUM LOT AREA.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided, no principal building shall
hereafter be erected on a lot which has less than the minimum area or width
specified for the respective zone, and no building shall hereafter be erected
or converted for dwelling use on a lot containing less than the minimum lot
area so specified. The total gross floor area in all buildings on the lot shall
be considered in determining the adequacy of lot area.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 9.1)
§ 154.247 YARDS.
   Except as otherwise specified herein, every lot shall have a front yard and
a rear yard the least depths of which shall not be less than those specified
for the respective zone and every lot shall have a side yard on each side,
which shall not be less than a side yard as specified for this respective zone.
   (A)   Front yards.
      (1)   All lots require a front yard to be provided along each street lot
line.
      (2)   Where the front wall of a building is not parallel with the front
lot line or is broken or otherwise irregular, the average depth of the front
yard shall not be less than the otherwise required front yard; provided,
however, that such front wall shall at all points be within five feet of the
otherwise required front yard depth.
      (3)   Large commercial or industrial developments consisting of a
structure containing 40,000 square feet or more, having a height of 25 feet or
more at street grade on major arterial streets may be required to provide
additional building setbacks to reduce visual impact of the large buildings on
the surrounding landscape.
   (B)   Side yards.
      (1)   In any zone where a side yard is required, the least width of each
side yard shall be increased by six inches for each foot where the side wall of
a building exceeds 50 feet in height.
      (2)   In the case of attached dwelling units, the entire structure shall
be considered as a single building with respect to side yard requirements.
      (3)   Where the side wall of a building is not parallel with the side lot
line or is broken or otherwise irregular, the average width of the side yard
shall not be less than the required side yard; provided, however, that the side
yard shall not be narrower at any point than three feet.
   (C)   Rear yards. Where the rear wall of a building is not parallel with the
rear lot line or is otherwise irregular, the average depth of the rear yard
shall not be less than the required rear yard; provided however, that the rear
yard shall not be narrower at any point than ten feet.
   (D)   Yard requirements for shopping centers and regional enclosed shopping
centers. For shopping centers and regional enclosed shopping centers which are
designed to be one continuous structure and placed on two or more lots, it
shall be permitted to place the structure on or above the side lot line of two
adjoining properties. To qualify, the structure must project onto the adjoining
lot no less than ten feet. The developer shall provide a reciprocal parking
agreement and any common area agreements along with satisfying all other
section of this chapter as required.
   (E)   Special yard requirements. It is recognized that in certain
developments, it is beneficial to create larger side and rear yard setbacks, in
order to buffer land uses of differing density and intensity, which abut along
the side and rear lot lines. In such developments, if a 75-foot or greater yard
setback is provided, development shall be permitted through the highest density
allowed in this chapter. Density determinations will be based on the lot area
less the increased yard area.
   (F)   Open space yard requirements. When a lot or parcel is subdivided for
the purpose of creating a permanent open space, or becoming a conservation
area, or nature preserve, or linear greenbelt park, then the minimum
requirements for lot criteria standards of this chapter shall not apply. The
exception to these standards is only for land purchased by the city, an
organization or entity created by the city, a not for profit organization or a
neighborhood association recognized by the city.
   (G)   Public utility lots.
      (1)   When a lot or parcel is subdivided for the purpose of creating a
lot for the location of a public utility, including, but not limited to,
natural gas regulating station, potable water storage facility, electrical
substation, rail facility, storm water storage facility, the following
requirements apply:
 
Minimum Areas and Setbacks
Minimum lot area           No minimum lot area
Minimum street frontage    50 ft.
Minimum front yard setback 20 ft.
Minimum side yard setback  10 ft.
Minimum rear yard setback  15 ft.
 
      (2)   These lots may only be used for locating public utility facilities.
No habitable structures shall be permitted on any of these parcels.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 9.2; Ord. 08-2009, passed 7-6-2009; Ord.
passed 9-6-2011)
§ 154.248 HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Maximum. Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure, or
part thereof, shall hereafter be erected or altered to a height greater than
the maximum specified for the respective category.
   (B)   How measured.
      (1)   For the purpose of this chapter, the HEIGHT of a wall or structure
or a part of a building is the mean vertical distance from the average
established grade in front of the lot, or from the average natural grade at the
building line, if higher, to the average height of the top of the cornice of
flat roofs, or roof line, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the
middle height of the highest gable or dormer in a pitched or hipped roof, or if
there are no gables or dormers, to the middle height of such pitched or hipped
roof.
      (2)   Where a lot abuts on two or more streets or alleys of different
average established grades in front of the lot, the higher of such grades shall
control only for a depth of 120 feet measured perpendicularly back from the
line of the higher street or alley.
      (3)   On a corner lot the height of the mean vertical distance from the
average natural grade at the building line, if higher, in the street of
greatest width, or if two or more such streets are of the same width, form the
highest of such grades. The height limitations as controlled by the wider
street shall govern for a distance of 120 feet measured at right angles back
from such wider street, except on parts of such 120 feet as may be within a
more restricted height.
   (C)   Exceptions of height limits.
      (1)   Notwithstanding other regulations in this chapter or the maximum
specified for the respective category, the height limits of this chapter shall
not apply for the following: barns, silos or other farm structures on farms;
church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes; monuments; water towers;
observation towers; transmission towers; windmills; chimneys; smokestacks;
derricks; conveyors; flag poles; radio towers; masts and aerials; bulkheads;
elevator penthouses; fire towers; hose towers; cooling towers; grain elevators;
and other structures, where the manufacturing process requires a greater
height; provided, however, that all such structures above the limiting heights
specified in this zoning chapter shall not be closer than 25 feet from every
lot line not a street lot line, and shall be set back one foot from the
otherwise required setback at the limiting height, for each foot of vertical
height above the limiting height; and
      (2)   Solar heating and solar collection devices, provided such devices
do not exceed by more than five feet the otherwise permitted maximum height for
the zone in which they are located.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 9.3; Ord. 14-2018, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 154.249 ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AND GEOLOGIC HAZARD AREAS.
   It is recognized that certain areas in the city, due to environmental or
geologic conditions, may pose problems providing safe development where such
conditions are encountered on the land to be developed. These areas are defined
and described as follows.
   (A)   Environmentally sensitive area. This term applies to any area which,
due to its natural or physical setting, may have environmental problems with
regard to their development. This is not to say that the land cannot be
developed, but if it is determined that development can occur, then some
safeguards such as detailed site planning will be necessary to overcome the
physical limitation of the land. Lands in question shall include, but not be
limited to, areas of poor soils, improper fill, wetlands, significant areas of
tree stands, aquifer recharge areas, well-head protection areas, riparian
areas, streams, creeks, lakes and other natural waterways.
   (B)   Geologic hazard areas.
      (1)   A geologic hazard area differs from an environmentally sensitive
area in that the environmental problems are so numerous that development, even
with severe limitations, would pose a severe problem to the immediate area or
the surrounding areas. Examples of these areas are areas of excessive
floodplain, areas that have clustering of sinkholes, areas of severe slope
(over 20%) and areas that have potential collapse problems due to caves
underneath the rock strata but close to the surface.
      (2)   Location of most of the environmentally sensitive and geologic
hazard areas are shown in the Hardin County Soil Survey prepared by the U.S.
Soil Conservation Service. Additional maps and other information regarding such
areas are on file with the city.
   (C)   Procedures. The developer shall submit the following materials to the
Department for any development involving an environmentally sensitive or
geologic hazard area: an application, containing a general statement of
development activity and mitigation plans; a development plan or subdivision
plat as required by the zoning regulations, which shall locate and identify
such areas. Additionally, the following materials may be required after initial
review by the Department: engineering studies of sub- surface conditions,
erosion and sedimentation control plans, drainage plans, soil analysis or
grading plans.
   (D)   Standards. Whenever a development is proposed on land containing such
areas the following requirements shall apply.
      (1)   Environmentally sensitive areas.
         (a)   All such areas shall be protected by special design measures
taken by the developer to attempt to minimize the developments impact.
         (b)   Acceptable design measures are:
            1.   Non-disturbance of area;
            2.   Provisions of additional building setbacks (at a minimum, a
50-foot setback), so that site disturbance is minimal;
            3.   Provision of easements in such areas as may be appropriate, so
that an open space area is provided;
            4.   Provision of storm water retention areas; and
            5.   Re-contouring and excavation of the area, only when an erosion
control plan is approved by the Storm Water Management Department and when
appropriate performance surety has been posted with the city.
      (2)   Geologic hazard areas. All such areas shall be protected by
generously designing the development such that a geologic hazard area shall be
left in its natural state as a permanent open space for a distance of 100 feet
from such areas.
   (E)   Commission review. After review of the applications general statement
and applicable plans, if the Department finds that questions remain concerning
the developments impact on the environmentally sensitive area or the health and
safety of future users of the area, the plan will be referred to the Commission
for action. The Commission shall refuse to fully approve a plan or plat until
it is satisfied that the hazards have been eliminated or adequate safeguards
have been provided to ensure the least negative impact on the area.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 9.4)
§ 154.250 PUBLIC FACILITIES.
   (A)   Water supply system. Every development shall be provided with a
complete water distribution system adequate to serve the proposed development,
including adequate fire protection facilities (as required by the city’s fire
protection and prevention ordinance). The entire water system shall be provided
by the developer and shall be designed and constructed to meet the approval of
the city and/or appropriate utility.
   (B)   Storm water drainage system. Provisions shall be made for satisfactory
drainage of storm water by means of underground pipes and/or surface ditches.
The storm water drainage system shall be provided by the developer and shall be
designed to standards adopted by the city and in all aspects shall meet the
approval of the city’s Storm Water Management Department.
   (C)   Sanitary sewage disposal system. Provisions shall be made for
satisfactory sanitary sewer in all developments. The developer shall provide a
complete public sanitary sewer system designed and constructed according to the
specifications of the city, unless it is determined by the Engineering
Department that sanitary sewer is not readily available. If public sanitary
sewer service is not readily available, then a private sanitary sewer (septic
system) shall be provided in conformance with the requirements of the County
Health Department and the requirements listed in this section.
   (D)   Natural gas system. Where natural gas service is desired in a
development, application must be made to the city. Gas line extension shall
conform to the policies of the Gas Department and shall be designed and
constructed according to the specifications of the city.
   (E)   Electric and telephone supply system. Provisions shall be made in
every development for satisfactory electrical and telephone supply system
approved by the appropriate utility.
   (F)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with the
following requirements.
      (1)   Installation requirements.
         (a)   No new site development or building shall hereinafter be
constructed without the provision of a sidewalk across or adjoining the site.
These requirements shall apply to any and all residential and commercial uses,
regardless of their zoning classification.
         (b)   Excepted from this requirement is:
            1.   Suburban Residential-1 (R-1) zoned property with 200 feet or
greater street frontage;
            2.   Industrial uses; and
            3.   Single-family residential uses when more than 75% of the lots
in the applicable section of the subdivision are developed without sidewalks.
         (c)   If sufficient right-of-way or easements do not exist, an
easement shall be dedicated by the owner of record to the city for the
provision of public access for the sidewalks.
      (2)   Construction standards. Sidewalks shall be constructed to comply
with the design improvement standards for sidewalks as listed in the city’s
Subdivision Regulations Design and Improvement Standards. However, the sidewalk
width may be increased to allow for safer pedestrian access along high volume
streets or to provide for handicap accessibility, upon determination of such
need by the reviewing authority.
      (3)   Waiver of sidewalk installation.
         (a)   A property owner may request a waiver from the requirement of
sidewalk installation contained within the zoning regulations by filing an
application for sidewalk installation waiver with the Commission. A request for
a waiver may be made for any permitted use in any zone.
         (b)   If waivers have been granted previously on a parcel on the same
street within 250 feet of the site, the staff may grant the waiver
administratively. Should the waiver not be granted administratively, an
application may still be filed with the Commission as set out in section (F)(3)
(a) above.
      (4)   Waiver process.
         (a)   As part of the waiver request, the applicant shall have the
burden of proof in showing that there will be no adverse impact upon the
neighborhood or general area by the granting of the waiver.
         (b)   In granting a waiver, the Planning Commission shall consider the
following:
            1.   The desirability to preserve natural topography or vegetation
pre-existing the proposed project, provided that pedestrian traffic can be
sufficiently and safely accommodated internally on the project or on the
opposite side of the street.
            2.   Installation of the sidewalk is technically infeasible due to
site features or conditions (includes exceptional topographic conditions,
environmental or wetland impacts, or unique site conditions) as confirmed by
the City Engineer or other staff of the city or the Kentucky Transportation
Cabinet.
            3.   Extraordinary reasons which are reviewed on a case-by-case
basis. Lack of a connection to an existing sidewalk is not in and of itself
justification for a waiver.
            4.   Granting a waiver will result in the development being more in
keeping with the Comprehensive Plan and the intent of the Zoning Ordinance and
Subdivision Regulations.
            5.   The Commission may also consider other factors it may deem
relevant in making its decision.
         (c)   If a waiver request is approved, the developer must pay into a
fund dedicated exclusively to the construction of sidewalks an amount
equivalent to the estimated cost of the waived sidewalks at the unit price
established by the City Engineer. A waiver of the requirement for sidewalk
installation does not exempt the development from any other requirements of the
zoning chapter.
      (5)   Delayed sidewalk installation. If a required sidewalk is likely to
be damaged or replaced as part of a project included in the city's Capital
Improvements Plan, the developer may pay into a fund dedicated exclusively to
the construction of sidewalks an amount equivalent to the estimated cost of the
sidewalk at the unit price established by the City Engineer. The city will
install the sidewalk as part of the planned capital project.
      (6)   Exemptions.
         (a)   The following rights-of-way are exempted from the requirement of
sidewalks:
            1.   Interstate 65;
            2.   Western Kentucky Parkway;
            3.   US 31W Bypass; and
            4.   Bluegrass Parkway.
         (b)   Also exempted are frontages adjacent to the above named rights-
of-way where access control fences are present.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 9.5; Ord. 08-2009, passed 7-6-2009; Ord. 27-
2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 05-2021, passed 4-19-2021; Ord. 25-2023, passed
11-20-2023)
§ 154.251 SIGHT TRIANGLE.
   The sight triangle is an area formed by joining with a straight line, points
along intersecting street rights-of-way, from their intersection, a clear area
is hereby created and no plant materials or human- made objects may be
constructed which obstruct visibility from 30 inches high upwards to the sky.
Along arterial and commercial collector streets, the triangle shall be 50 feet
and will be measured along the back of curb/edge of street pavement. Along
residential collector and local streets, the triangle shall be 25 feet and will
be measured from the back of curb/edge of street pavement.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 9.6; Ord. 27-2012, passed 12-3-2012; Ord.
10-2014, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 154.252 ENTRANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Entrance widths.
      (1)   Entrance widths shall be as follows:
 
Single-family and two-family       No minimum, 30ft. maximum
Multi-family residential complexes 20 ft. minimum, 30 ft. maximum
Commercial                         20 ft. minimum, 50 ft. maximum
Industrial                         24 ft. minimum, 60 ft. maximum
 
      (2)   The Commission or its designee shall review all proposals for
entrances and encroachments using the standards set forth in the comprehensive
plan, for spacing, location and safe traffic movement.
      (3)   Entrances shall be from the street having the lower classification
and/or average daily traffic (ADT). In the event that both streets are of the
same classification, the entrance shall be located on the street with the lower
ADT.
      (4)   Through the encroachment permitting process entrances with a
greater width than listed above shall be submitted to the Engineering
Department for review and may be approved when extenuating circumstances exist.
   (B)   Entrance distance from street intersections.
      (1)   Residential entrances. The minimum distance from the intersection
of two or more streets to an entrance shall be 50 feet on local streets and 100
feet on collector streets, measured from the nearest edge of the pavement/curb
line. Entrances with spacing less than these minimums shall be submitted to the
Engineering Department for review and may be approved when extenuating
circumstances exist.
      (2)   Multi-family, commercial and industrial entrances. The minimum
distance from the intersection of two or more streets to an entrance shall be
150 feet, measured from the nearest curb lines. Entrances with spacing less
than 150 feet shall be submitted to the Engineering Department for review and
may be approved when extenuating circumstances exist.
   (C)   Entrance grade. The maximum grade for an entrance to a multi-family,
commercial or industrial use shall be no greater than 10%. When an entrance
grade at its intersection with the public street exceeds 3%, a leveling area
shall be provided with grades no greater than 3% for a distance of 50 feet from
the intersection with the street.
   (D)   Entrance, limited access. Limited access entrances (e.g., right in/
right out, right in only) shall be permitted only when there is a non-mountable
median present that prohibits illegal turns from being executed.
   (E)   Entrance location. Entrances shall be designed and located to provide
an exiting vehicle with an unobstructed view. Entrances along acceleration or
deceleration lanes and tapers are discouraged and may only be approved when
extenuating circumstances exist.
   (F)   Entrance visibility time. Entrances shall be located to provide for
the minimum visibility time sight distance of six seconds. The six second rule
is to be calculated based on standards established by AASHTO.
   (G)   Entrance traffic control. All entrances shall be provided with traffic
control measures to assure safe access onto the public right-of-way. Traffic
control measures shall include, but are not limited to, stop signs, stop bars,
curbs and yield signs.
   (H)   Gated entrances. Access to private developments may be controlled or
limited by gates or other mechanical devices but shall be accessible by
emergency personnel and the access device shall be approved by the city’s Fire
Marshal and the city’s Police Chief. Public streets or access to developments
that also provides access by easement to other properties may not be gated or
limited in any manner.
   (I)   Entrances and access to developments shall comply with minimum
standards of the National Fire Code as published by the National Fire
Protection Association.
   (J)   When the City Engineer determines that vehicles turning into a
proposed development will adversely affect the capacity of the existing
streets, the developer shall dedicate sufficient right-of-way and construct a
turning lane as necessary to maintain the capacity of existing streets.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 9.7; Ord. 08-2009, passed 7-6-2009; Ord. 05-
2011, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 28-2014, passed 12-
15-2014; Ord. 25-2023, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 154.253 RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH.
   Developments shall dedicate additional right-of-way necessary to meet the
minimum width requirements specified in the Subdivision Regulations. Additional
right-of-way may be required as necessary to accommodate necessary future
improvements within the right-of-way. This requirement may be reduced or waived
by the City Engineer and the Director of Planning and Development if the
existing right-of-way is found to be sufficient to accommodate all necessary
public improvements, or if the possibility exists to obtain additional right-
of-way on the opposite side of the right-of-way.
(Ord. 25-2023, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 154.254 CONNECTIVITY STANDARDS.
   (A)   Existing stub streets or rights-of-way shall be extended through the
development site to adjacent vacant properties or streets.
      (1)   This requirement may be waived by the City Engineer and the
Director of Planning and Development if the extension is infeasible due to
physical constraints or if the extension would create an inappropriate
connection between incompatible uses.
      (2)   If the extension is waived by the City Engineer and the Director of
Planning and Development, the street shall be terminated in an appropriate
manner to adequately serve all lots.
   (B)   Residential developments adjacent to vacant parcels shall provide
street connections that stub into the vacant parcels to provide future
connections.
      (1)   This requirement may be waived by the City Engineer and the
Director of Planning and Development if the extension is infeasible due to
physical constraints.
   (C)   Commercial developments shall provide for vehicular and pedestrian
connections to adjacent commercial developments. If the adjacent property is
already developed, the proposed development shall provide for the future
connection through easements or other appropriate measures.
   (D)   Industrial zoned properties shall not be required to provide
connections to adjacent properties.
   (E)   Waiver procedure. If these standards are not waived by the City
Engineer and the Director of Planning and Development, an applicant may request
a waiver from the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall consider
the following:
      (1)   The special circumstances of the proposed use.
      (2)   Whether the waiver will have an adverse impact on the public
health, safety and welfare.
      (3)   Whether site constraints make the improvements economically
unfeasible.
(Ord. 25-2023, passed 11-20-2023)
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES/BUILDING PROJECTIONS
§ 154.265 ACCESSORY STRUCTURE LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The following provisions shall regulate the location of accessory structures
with respect to required yards.
   (A)   Accessory structures shall be prohibited in any front yard, in any
recorded or platted easement in side or rear yards and shall be a minimum of
five feet from a side or rear lot line if no easements exist.
   (B)   Accessory structures shall be no less than five feet from any lot
line, except that additions to accessory structures may be made which have the
same yard setback as the original structure.
   (C)   Accessory structures shall not exceed the maximum height restriction
for the zone in which they are located.
   (D)   Accessory structures in residential zones shall not exceed the total
square footage of the principal structure to which it is accessory. The total
square footage shall be an aggregate square footage of all accessory structures
on the residential lot.
   (E)   For lots with multiple front yards, accessory structures may be
located in the functional rear yard. The Department shall determine which yard
area(s) is/are the functional rear yard and the applicable setback
requirements.
   (F)   It shall be prohibited to use any manufactured home, mobile home,
trailer or motor vehicle as an accessory structure for storage purposes in any
zone.
   (G)   Storage containers, associated with a permitted commercial or
industrial use shall be screened from any adjacent property and not inhibit
fire and other emergency personnel.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 10.1; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014; Ord.
24-2016, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 154.266 PORCHES, STAIRWAYS AND TERRACES.
   (A)   When open and unenclosed, these types of features may project into a
required front, side or rear yard not more than eight feet and provided that
such covered porches, stairways, terraces or other similar features conform to
the provisions of the zoning regulations. Steps and overhangs shall be measured
as part of the projection into the yard (setback).
   (B)   Exception: when adjacent properties have structures with existing
porches or other similar projections, the porch may be placed with setbacks
similar, but no closer to the property line than the existing structures.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 10.2; Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 154.267 CHIMNEYS, EAVES, ORNAMENTAL FEATURES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Chimneys, flues, belt courses, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental
features, cornices, eaves, gutters and similar features, may extend not more
than 24 inches into any required yard.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of the zoning regulations, no
projection as listed in division (A) above shall extend into any required side
yard more than one-half the width of such yard, not within ten feet of the
front lot line, not within five feet of the rear lot line, not within three
feet of any accessory structure; provided, however, that such limitations shall
not apply to terrace and steps, or to a loading dock or tailboard in connection
with an industrial use.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 10.3)
§ 154.268 HANDICAP RAMPS.
   Any ramp or similar feature used to provide accessibility to persons with
disabilities is exempt from this regulation and may project into any yard to
the extent necessary to provide access to structures in compliance with
building or other applicable codes.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 10.4)
§ 154.269 CANOPIES.
   Canopies, as defined in the zoning regulations, shall be a minimum of five
feet from any property line but shall not be located within any easement areas.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 10.5)
§ 154.270 TEMPORARY STRUCTURE SETBACKS.
   (A)   The following provisions shall regulate the location of temporary
structures unless otherwise regulated in this zoning chapter.
      (1)   Temporary structures may not be placed in any required front yard.
      (2)   Temporary structures may not be placed in any recorded easement
area.
      (3)   Temporary structures may not be placed so as to obstruct any
ingress/egress from the site and shall not inhibit fire and other emergency
personnel.
      (4)   Temporary structures must be a minimum of five feet from any lot
line.
      (5)   Temporary structures shall be located in designated areas if
located in a shopping center or other planned development. Designated areas to
be shown on development plan or master plan.
   (B)   Final location of temporary structures shall be reviewed and approved
by the Department prior to issuance of a permit.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 10.6)
§ 154.271 NEIGHBORHOOD STRUCTURES.
   Structures used for neighborhood recycling drop-off bins, composting,
cluster mailboxes, neighborhood/subdivision message boards or other similar
neighborhood subdivision improvements and any associated enclosure or roof over
such structures may be permitted in the front yard and may be subject to other
restrictions for accessory structures as outlined in this chapter. The
location, design, construction materials and appearance of such structures may
be approved by the Department or may be approved by the Commission at the time
of preliminary plat approval for new subdivisions. Such structures shall comply
with applicable construction codes and other city ordinances.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 10.7; Ord. 10-2014, passed 4-7-2014)
NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
§ 154.285 NON-CONFORMING USE PROVISIONS.
   The provisions as set forth in the following section are to ensure the
viability of uses and structures by setting standards whereby non-conforming
uses, structures and lots are allowed to continue in their present state, but
their survival is not encouraged. It is expected that they will be eliminated
over the course of time.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 11.0; Ord. 09-2020, passed 8-3-2020)
§ 154.286 KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES REQUIREMENTS.
   As mandated by Kentucky Revised Statutes, non-conformities shall not be
enlarged or extended beyond their scope and areas of operation at the time of
the adoption of this chapter and shall not be used as the basis for adding
additional structures or uses not permitted in the same zone. Non-conforming
uses are declared by the zoning regulations to be incompatible with permitted
uses in the zones and districts in which they are located.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 11.1)
§ 154.287 REGULATION OF NON-CONFORMING USES.
   A non-conforming use shall be permitted to continue provided it remains
otherwise lawful and shall be regulated as follows.
   (A)   A non-conforming use shall not be enlarged or extended, so as to
occupy a greater area of the land than was occupied at the date of the adoption
or amendment of the zoning regulations, nor altered in any way so as to extend
or enlarge the scope or area of its operation.
   (B)   When a non-conforming use is replaced by a permitted use for any
period of time, it shall thereafter conform to the zoning regulations.
   (C)   A non-conforming use shall not be permitted to change from one non-
conforming use to another non-conforming use unless the new use is in the same
or more restrictive classification and the new non-conforming use is not an
enlargement or extension of the scope of the existing non-conforming use.
   (D)   When a non-conforming use is abandoned or non-use is continued for a
period of 12 months, or if non-use is continued through a lack of diligence as
to the amount of abandonment, then it shall thereafter conform to the zoning
regulations.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 11.2; Ord. 09-2020, passed 8-3-2020)
§ 154.288 REGULATION OF NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   A non-conforming structure may continue to exist provided it remains
otherwise lawful and shall be regulated as follows.
   (A)   On any non-conforming structure, or portion of a structure, work may
be done for ordinary repairs of walls, fixtures, wiring, plumbing or other
parts of the building, and additions made, provided that the extent of the non-
conformity shall not be increased. The zoning regulations shall not be
construed to prevent the strengthening, repairing or restoring to a safe
condition of any structure or parts thereof.
   (B)   Should a non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of a
structure be demolished by any means, it shall not be reconstructed except in a
manner to make it a conforming structure under the zoning regulations.
   (C)   A structure may be altered to decrease its non-conformity.
   (D)   Should a non-conforming structure be moved for any reason, for any
distance, it shall thereafter conform to the zoning regulations.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 11.3; Ord. 09-2020, passed 8-3-2020)
§ 154.289 REGULATION OF NON-CONFORMING LOTS.
   A non-conforming lot shall be permitted to continue and shall be regulated
as follows.
   (A)   (1)   A non-conforming lot shall not be further subdivided or
consolidated, in whole or in part, with another parcel, in a manner which
increases its non-conformity. It may, however, be altered so as to decrease its
non-conformity.
      (2)   However, the Commission may approve the subdivision of a lot which
has two or more legally constructed principal structures into separate parcels
for the purpose of the sale or transfer of the individual structures, if the
Commission finds that the properties have been used in a separate and distinct
manner with separate utilities and other facilities so that the resulting re-
subdivision will not constitute a material change in use of the property.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any portion of the zoning regulations, a non-
conforming lot may be used for construction of any otherwise lawfully permitted
structure in a zone in which the lot is located. Such a non-conforming lot must
be in separate ownership and not in contiguous frontage with other lots in the
same ownership.
   (C)   If two or more lots with continuous frontage are in single ownership,
and if any of the lots have less than 50 feet of street frontage, the land
involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel. No subdivision or
consolidation in whole or in part with another lot shall be made of such
parcels which reduce the parcel below the requirement for a permitted lot in a
zone in which the parcel is located. However, the Commission may permit the
sale or transfer of lots where each has a legally constructed principal
structure.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 11.4; Ord. 05-2011, passed 2-7-2011)
§ 154.290 CONDITIONAL USES ARE NOT NON-CONFORMING USES.
   Any existing principal use at the date of the adoption or amendment of the
chapter which would thereafter require a conditional use permit shall be deemed
a conforming use, but any enlargement or replacement of such use shall require
a conditional use permit as provided by the zoning regulations.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 11.5)
§ 154.291 PROCEDURE FOR DETERMINATION OF NON-CONFORMING.
   To meet the intent of KRS Chapter 100 in determining non-conforming use and
to allow all affected parties fair due process, it is declared that the non-
conforming use status for property in the city shall be determined through the
following procedures.
   (A)   Determination of non-conforming use status.
      (1)   To request a determination of non-conforming use, an application
shall be filed with the Department in such form and accompanied by such
information necessary to make a determination, which includes, but is not
limited to, property ownership, length of operations/occupancy, building
design/construction and zoning history.
      (2)   (a)   The Department shall review all pertinent information for the
request and make a written determination of the non-conforming use status.
         (b)   Notice of an administrative determination by the Department will
be given in the following manner:
            1.   Written notice to the applicant and owner, if different from
applicant;
            2.   Written notice to adjoining property owners;
            3.   Notice to the general public by placing a notice in the local
newspaper of largest circulation in the city; and
            4.   Written notice to the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
         (c)   Any aggrieved party may appeal the administrative determination
to the Board, pursuant to the procedures of KRS 100 and upon a hearing before
the Board may submit information into evidence to be considered.
   (B)   Determination for change in non-conforming use status. To request a
determination for a change in use for property with non-conforming use status,
an application shall be filed with the Department in such form and accompanied
by such information necessary to make a determination. The Department shall
review the application for compliance with the submission requirements of the
chapter and the policies of the Board. Upon determination that all submission
requirements have been met, a public hearing shall be scheduled before the
Board. The Board shall review the change in use request through the
consideration of the requirements of KRS Chapter 100. Upon determination and
final action by the Board, any aggrieved party may appeal the action pursuant
to the procedures of KRS Chapter 100.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 11.6)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violation of the conditions and safeguards
established in connection with granting of a map amendment, development plan
approval, variance or conditional use permit) shall constitute a violation.
   (B)   Any person who so violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of
its requirements or fails to comply with any official notice of violation
issued under its requirements shall be subject to a fine as detailed in the
city’s code of ordinances. The Department may choose to seek enforcement for
any violations through the city’s Code Enforcement Board, enacted by Ord. 09-
2003.
(Ord. 06-2008, passed 6-16-2008, § 1.15)
APPENDIX A: PLANT MATERIALS LIST
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cfa1911bfa0ab5e9746785b7ab63422cfaa1ec4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1864.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cfa1911bfa0ab5e9746785b7ab63422cfaa1ec4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1866.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4cfa1911bfa0ab5e9746785b7ab63422cfaa1ec4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1868.png]
 
(Ord. 06- 2008, passed 6-16-2008)
CHAPTER 155: EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Section
   
155.01   Introduction; purpose
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   Permits
   
155.04   Review and issuance
   
155.05   Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan
   
155.06   Design requirements
   
155.07   Inspection
   
155.08   Enforcement
§ 155.01 INTRODUCTION; PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard persons, protect property
and prevent damage to the environment in the city. This chapter will also
promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating and controlling the design,
construction, use and maintenance of any development or other activity that
disturbs the soil or results in the movement of earth within the city.
   (B)   During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to erosion
by wind and water. Eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing water
quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other
desirable species. Left unchecked, eroded soil migrates through the entire
storm water system and necessitates the early maintenance and/or repair of
inlet boxes, storm sewers, ditches, creeks and other storm water features.
Streets with sediment deposits are slick and hazardous to the motoring public.
Clearing and grading during construction cause the loss of native vegetation
necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat.
   (C)   Through the Clean Water Act (CWA), the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) and the Kentucky Division of Water (KYDOW) established
Phase II regulations and mandated Erosion Protection and Sediment Control
(EPSC) procedures for construction within the commonwealth.
(Prior Code, § 157.01) (Ord. 01-2007, passed 3-5-2007)
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP). A measure that is implemented to protect
water quality and reduce the potential for pollution associated with storm
water runoff.
   BLUE LINE STREAMS. Streams that are represented on the United States
Department of the Interior Geological Survey 1:24,000 quadrangle maps.
   CHANNEL. A natural or constructed/human-made watercourse with definite bed
and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
CHANNEL FLOW is that water which is flowing within the limits of the defined
channel.
   CITY. The City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
   CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA). Federal regulation that prohibits the discharge of
pollutants to Waters of the United States unless said discharge is in
accordance with an NPDES permit.
   CLEARING. Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover to expose
erodible soil.
   CRITICAL AREA. A site difficult to stabilize due to exposed subsoil, steep
slope, extent of exposure or other conditions.
   DETENTION. The temporary delay of storm runoff prior to its discharge into
receiving waters.
   DEVELOPER. Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership or
trust involved in commencing proceedings to effect development of land.
   DRAINAGE BASIN. A part of the surface of the earth that is occupied by and
provides surface water runoff, consisting of a surface stream or a body of
impounded surface water together with all tributary surface streams, bodies of
impounded surface water and contributing land area.
   DRAINAGE WAY. Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site.
   DRAINAGE/DRY WELL. A bored, drilled, driven, dug or naturally occurring
shaft or hole with a depth greater than the largest surface dimension; used to
drain surface water into a subsurface formation.
   EPHEMERAL STREAM. A stream or part of a stream that flows only in direct
response to rain, other forms of precipitation and snowmelt. Its channel is
above the water table at all times.
   EROSION. The wearing away of land surface by the action of wind, water,
gravity, ice or any combination of those forces.
   EPSC. Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control.
   EPSC CONTRACTOR. A person or other entity responsible for the installation,
inspection, recordkeeping and maintenance of erosion and sediment control BMPs.
   EPSC PLAN. A set of plans indicating the specific measures and sequencing to
be used to control sediment and erosion on a development site during and after
construction.
   EXCAVATION. Any portion of land surface or area from which earth has been
removed or will be removed; the depth below original ground surface to
remaining surface.
   EXISTING GRADE. The slope or elevation of existing ground surface prior to
cutting or filling.
   FILL. Portion of land surface or area to which soil, rock or other materials
have been or will be added; height above original ground surface after the
material has been or will be added.
   FINISHED GRADE. The final slope or elevation of the ground surface after
cutting or filling.
   FLOODPLAIN. The relatively flat or lowland area adjoining a watercourse or a
body of water which has been or may be covered temporarily by flood water.
FLOODPLAINS are often found along rivers, streams, creeks, ditches and storm
water piping systems and in proximity to lakes, ponds and sinkholes.
   GRADING. Any stripping, cutting, filling or stockpiling of earth or land,
including the land in its cut or filled condition, to create new grades.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A term applied to any ground or structural surface that
water cannot penetrate or through which water penetrates with great difficulty.
   KYDOW GENERAL PERMIT (KGP). An agreement between the KYDOW, the city and the
permittee which specifies conservation practices that shall be implemented in
conjunction with the construction activities specified in the terms and
conditions of the general permit.
   LAND DISTURBANCE. The purposeful act of clearing, grubbing, excavating or
grading; disrupting ground surface by or for construction activities, including
construction access/roads, staging and storage sites producing significant
areas of exposed soil and soils piles.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). The EPA’s program
to control the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States. NPDES is
a part of the Federal CWA, which requires point and non-point source
dischargers to obtain permits. These permits are referred to as NPDES permits
nationally and KPDES permits within the state.
   NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI). A formal notice to the EPA or the KYDOW that a
construction project seeking coverage under a general permit is about to begin.
   NOTICE OF TERMINATION (NOT). A formal notice to the KYDOW that construction
project is complete and seeking release for the EPSC and the state general
permit.
   PERIMETER CONTROL. A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by
filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin.
   PERMIT PHASING. Clearing a parcel of land sequentially in distinct phases,
with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next.
   PERMITTEE. The person responsible for the land disturbing activity.
   PLOT PLAN. A limited plan depicting proposed improvements and other physical
features of the site.
   PUBLIC STORM DRAIN. Drainage system that is maintained by the city.
   SEDIMENT. Solid materials, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water
or gravity as a product of erosion.
   SEDIMENT CONTROL. Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving a site.
   SITE. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land where grading work is performed
that is subject to erosion of sediments as a result of cutting, filling,
grading or other disturbance of the soil.
   sMS4. Small municipal separate storm sewer system, as established in the
state’s Pollution Discharge Elimination System (KPDES).
   STABILIZATION. The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The first land-disturbing activity associated with a
development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling;
stockpiling topsoil; installation of streets and sidewalks; utilities
installation; excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations;
erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as
garages.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWMP). A plan based on hydrologic and hydraulic
calculations that determines flood stage and required improvements to minimize
impact from development. The SWMP shall be prepared by or under the direction
of a licensed professional engineer.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A plan required by storm
water regulations or permits that includes site map(s), an identification of
construction/contractor activities that could cause pollutants in the storm
water and a description of measures or practices to control these pollutants.
This is synonymous with the term BMP PLAN used in the KYDOW general permit. The
SWPPP shall be prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional
engineer.
   TEMPORARY PROTECTION. Short-term stabilization of erosive or sediment
producing areas.
   VEGETATIVE PROTECTION. Stabilization of erosive or sediment producing areas
by covering the soil with any of the following materials: permanent seeding for
long-term vegetative cover, short-term seeding for temporary vegetative cover,
sodding, producing areas covered with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass,
tree planting or other planting.
   WATERCOURSE. Any body of water, including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds,
rivers, streams, and other bodies of water as delineated by the city, state or
federal government.
   WATERWAY. A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the
public storm drain.
(Prior Code, § 157.02) (Ord. 01-2007, passed 3-5-2007)
§ 155.03 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits through the city are required for site construction projects
and/or land disturbances. Depending on the amount of disturbed area, various
permits are necessary. Permit levels and parameters are as follows.
      (1)   Level 1. Site construction less than one disturbed acre, increased
impervious area less than or equal to 6,000 square feet, and slopes less than
6% requires filing for a permit. This permit shall be accompanied by a plot
plan with erosion prevention and sediment control measures indicated. All
permits for commercial, industrial and multi-family residential sites shall
include a grading plan. All permits in proximity to a major storm water
feature, such as a creek or storm water culvert, shall include a grading plan
showing the proposed minimum finished floor (opening) relative to the
anticipated high water elevation.
      (2)   Level 2. Site construction less than one disturbed acre and
increased impervious area greater than 6,000 square feet or with slopes greater
than or equal to 6% requires filing for a permit. The permit shall be
accompanied by a grading plan and an erosion prevention and sediment control
plan.
      (3)   Level 3. Site construction of one disturbed acre or greater,
including a linear disturbance from utility construction, requires filing for a
permit accompanied by a grading plan, an erosion prevention and sediment
control plan, a SWPPP plan and a copy of the state’s Division of Water notice
of intent (NOI) for the site.
      (4)   Level 4. Utility companies shall apply for a general permit from
the city for land disturbance operations. This permit must be renewed every
five years. A NOI shall be obtained from the KYDOW for disturbance of one acre
or greater.
   (B)   Notice to the city is required that the contractor has coordinated
with the KYDOW and the US Army Corps of Engineers to determine whether permits
are required from those agencies before construction begins.
   (C)   No permit through the city is required for the following activities:
      (1)   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources; or
      (2)   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a
permitted main or accessory use. However, permitting through regional, state
and federal agencies may be required.
   (D)   Each application shall bear the name, address and telephone
information for the following parties: the owner; the developer of the site;
the general contractor for the site; the EPSC contractor; and any engineering
consultant retained for work on the site.
   (E)   Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing,
construction or development involving the movement of earth shall be in
accordance with the EPSC plan and the EPSC contractor shall be responsible for
implementing and maintaining all aspects of the plan.
   (F)   The application shall be accompanied by the permit fee as established
by this chapter:
      (1)   Level 1: $25;
      (2)   Level 2: $50;
      (3)   Level 3: $100; and
      (4)   Level 4: in accordance with the existing franchise agreement.
(Prior Code, § 157.03) (Ord. 01-2007, passed 3-5-2007)
§ 155.04 REVIEW AND ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The city will review each permit application to determine its
conformance with the provisions of this chapter. Acceptance indicates that
minimum requirements or intent are met and does not imply a guarantee of
performance. Based on the review of the permit application, the city will:
      (1)   Accept the permit application;
      (2)   Accept the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions
as may be necessary to meet the requirements or intent of the objectives of
this chapter and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
      (3)   Deny the permit application, indicating the reason(s) and procedure
for submitting a revised application and/or submission.
   (B)   The city reserves the right to inspect the site prior to any
construction activity in furtherance of the review process.
   (C)   The city acceptance of the permit is for general compliance with the
KPDES sMS4 program. The designer is ultimately responsible for the specific
details of design of the EPSC plan. The property owner remains responsible for
the implementation, maintenance and compliance recordkeeping for the EPSC plan.
(Prior Code, § 157.04) (Ord. 01-2007, passed 3-5-2007)
§ 155.05 EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN.
   (A)   The EPSC plan shall include the following:
      (1)   A natural resources map identifying soil types, forest cover,
topography and other natural features of concern. This map should be to scale
equivalent to balance of submittal;
      (2)   A schedule of events for the construction of the development site,
including stripping and clearing, rough grading, construction of utilities,
infrastructure, final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the
expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure
of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary EPSC measures
and establishment of permanent vegetation;
      (3)   All EPSC measures necessary shall be shown on the plan by location
and referred to by a legend for all phases of construction. Depending upon the
complexity of the project, the drafting of interim plans may be required at the
close of each season. Multiple EPSC plan sheets may be necessary to best convey
requirements for each phase;
      (4)   Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed
preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer
application and type and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent
vegetative control measures; and
      (5)   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including
easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance.
   (B)   Modification to the plan shall be processed and accepted or denied in
the same manner as §
155.04 of this chapter and authorized by the city by written authorization to
the permittee, and shall include:
      (1)   Major amendments of the EPSC plan shall be submitted to the city
for acceptance; and
      (2)   Field modifications of a minor nature shall require authorization
by the city and shall be noted and dated on the EPSC record drawings. Where
minor modifications prove to be ineffective, the EPSC contractor shall return
to the intent of the original plan within seven days of notification by the
inspector.
(Prior Code, § 157.05) (Ord. 01-2007, passed 3-5-2007)
§ 155.06 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The plan for any permitted land disturbance operation shall be
designed using sound engineering practice and shall met the minimum criteria
set forth in the most recent version of the city’s subdivision regulations,
Storm Water Manual and other city storm water design guidelines. The plan, when
implemented, shall be sufficient to control erosion and prevent sediment from
leaving the site. Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than three to one (3:
1), except as approved by the city to meet other community or environmental
objectives.
   (B)   Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forests and
wetlands, and other natural features of concern shall not be permitted, except
when in compliance with all section this chapter as well as any regional, state
and federal regulation. Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation,
drainage patterns, and buffers along streams as described by the city’s Storm
Water Manual, shall be used where possible.
   (C)   Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices,
shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have
been stabilized.
   (D)   Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than 50
acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and
approved by the city.
   (E)   Erosion prevention BMP requirements.
      (1)   Soil stabilization shall be completed within 14 days of final grade
work. If an area is left inactive for 21 days or more the area shall have
temporary stabilization.
      (2)   If seeding or other vegetative erosion prevention methods are used,
vegetation shall become established within three weeks. If a satisfactory stand
of vegetation is not established, the site shall be reseeded or an approved
non-vegetative employed.
      (3)   Special techniques such as rip rap, turf reinforcement, armoring
and other stabilization methods that meet the design criteria outlined in the
city’s Storm Water Manual shall be used on steep slopes or in drainage ways to
ensure stabilization.
      (4)   Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered and have sediment
control measures in place to control sediment movement. Stockpiles left for 21
days or more shall have temporary stabilization or vegetation established.
      (5)   When no construction is planned during the winter months, the
entire site shall be stabilized at the close of the construction season. A
heavy mulch layer or other approved stabilization method that does not rely on
seed germination, shall be placed to control sediment and prevent erosion.
      (6)   Minimize clearing and grading to the smallest possible area.
Preserve existing vegetation and trees to the maximum extent possible.
      (7)   Areas to be left undisturbed by the proposed construction shall be
clearly noted and delineated on the plans and protected with temporary fencing,
or other approved barrier, on the site.
      (8)   Vegetative buffer strips in combination with other perimeter
controls shall be used for the protection of adjacent properties, watercourses
and rights-of-way.
      (9)   Measures shall be implemented to control sedimentation deposits
into drainage structures and features, receiving water bodies, streets, street
rights-of-way, adjacent properties and natural karst features.
      (10)   In no case shall the placement of temporary or final seeding
exceed 120 days after the original disturbance.
   (F)   Sediment control BMP requirements.
      (1)   Dust control techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of
dust by air movements during land disturbance, demolition and other
construction activities.
      (2)   Diversion of upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be
implemented when effective.
      (3)   Settling basins, sediment traps, tanks and/or perimeter controls
shall be implemented as required to control sediment, consistent with the
city’s Storm Water Manual.
      (4)   Effective debris and trash management shall be required.
   (G)   Waterway, watercourse, ephemeral stream and public storm and public
storm drain protection requirements shall include the following:
      (1)   When a watercourse will be crossed regularly during construction,
install a temporary stream crossing as approved by the state’s Division of
Water and/or the city;
      (2)   Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during and after
any in-channel work;
      (3)   Design of all on-site storm water conveyance channels in accordance
with criteria outlines in the city’s Storm Water Manual, the subdivision
regulations, other city storm water design guidelines, and sound engineering
practice; and
      (4)   Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion at the inlets and outlets
of all pipes and paved channels.
   (H)   Construction site access requirements designed to minimize the deposit
of sediment or other materials on public streets and rights-of-way shall
include:
      (1)   Continuous access via a stabilized rock entrance, constructed in
accordance with the city’s Storm Water Manual; and
      (2)   A tire wash rack shall be required by the city as necessitated by
site traffic.
(Prior Code, § 157.06) (Ord. 01-2007, passed 3-5-2007)
§ 155.07 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Plans accepted by the city for site earthwork, including grading,
stripping, excavating and filling, shall be maintained at the construction site
throughout the duration of the work. After EPSC measures have been installed,
the contractor shall contact the city to request a preconstruction inspection.
   (B)   Upon completion of the preconstruction inspection and approval of EPSC
measures, the permit will be issued and site construction may commence.
   (C)   The city shall make inspections as deemed necessary to ensure the EPSC
measures are being properly implemented and maintained during construction. If
minimum requirements for the EPSC are not met, the permittee shall be notified
and enforcement actions shall be taken.
   (D)   The permittee or his or her agent shall make regular inspections of
all control measures to determine the overall effectiveness of the EPSC plan
and the need for additional control measures. The frequency of these
inspections shall be once every seven calendar days and before and after storm
events of a half-inch of precipitation or more. All inspections shall be
documented in written form and kept on the construction site by the EPSC
contractor. Reports should be available for city, state or federal inspections
to review upon request during a site inspections.
   (E)   The city or designated agent shall, by execution of the permit, be
granted the right to enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to
make regular inspections and to assure the validity of the reports filed under
division (D) above.
(Prior Code, § 157.07) (Ord. 01-2007, passed 3-5-2007)
§ 155.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Stop-work order; revocation of permit. In the event that any person
holding a site development permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms
of the permit or implements site development in such a manner as to materially
adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of the public near the
development site or vicinity so as to be materially detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity, the city may
suspend or revoke the site development permit.
   (B)   Violation and penalties.
      (1)   No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any
grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any terms of this chapter. Each day of violation of this chapter
may be considered a separate occurrence. Any person, partnership or corporation
violating this chapter may be cited for a civil offense pursuant to the Code
Enforcement Board Ordinance and Fine Schedule. The civil fine shall be paid
directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of
notification, then the city may recover said fine in a civil action in a court
of proper jurisdiction.
      (2)   The citing officer may at his or her discretion cite the offender
to appear before the Code Enforcement Board. The city may also obtain
injunctions or abatement orders to insure compliance with this chapter.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall negate the ability of the city to
pursue applicable civil or criminal penalties as prescribed by law.
      (4)   It shall also constitute a violation of this chapter to damage or
vandalize site erosion prevention and sediment control measurers that are in
place. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person,
partnership or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration.
(Prior Code, § 157.08) (Ord. 01-2007, passed 3-5-2007)
CHAPTER 156: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
156.01   Title
   
156.02   Purpose
   
156.03   Jurisdiction
   
156.04   Exemption
   
156.05   Definitions and acronyms
   
156.06   Program objectives and general approach
   
156.07   Authority and right of entry
   
156.08   Post-construction storm water management
   
156.09   Storm Water Quality Management Plan permit inspections
   
156.10   Post-construction qualified professionals
   
156.11   As-built requirements
   
156.12   Stop-work order; revocation of permit
 
   
156.99   Penalty
§ 156.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Storm Water Quality Management
Ordinance” for the city and may be so cited.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 156.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations and measures that will
address storm water quality in the city and to establish procedures by which
these requirements are to be administered and enforced.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 156.03 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The laws of the commonwealth shall apply to this chapter.
   (B)   This chapter shall govern all properties within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the city.
   (C)   This chapter is applicable to all new development and redevelopment
activities that result in the disturbance of one acre or more of land,
including disturbance of less than that if part of a larger common plan.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 156.04 EXEMPTION.
   Agricultural activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 156.05 DEFINITIONS AND ACRONYMS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDER. A person, partnership, contractor or corporation constructing one
or more buildings for occupancy or any other use.
   CITY. The City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
   CITY REPRESENTATIVE. The Director of Storm Water Management or person or
persons currently designated by the Mayor to administer the storm water program
and any related permit activities.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.).
   DETENTION BASIN. A drainage facility constructed to restrict the runoff of
storm water to a prescribed maximum rate and to detain for a specified period
of time the excess waters that accumulate upstream from the outlet structure.
   DEVELOPMENT. The planning or construction project involving substantial
property improvement and, usually, a change of land-use character within the
site; the act of using land for building purposes.
   DRAINAGE AREA. The surface area from which water drains to a point of
consideration.
   ENGINEER. A person licensed as a professional engineer in the commonwealth
in accordance with KRS Ch. 322.
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any area inundated by a 100-year flood or as determined by the
FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) or an engineering study.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to KPDES Industrial Permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   KDOW. The Kentucky Division of Water.
   KENTUCKY POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (KPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Kentucky Division of Water (KDOW)
under designated authority by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(USEPA), whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general
area wide basis.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains, that is
designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water; not privately owned;
not a combined sewer; and not part of a publicly-owned treatment works (POTW).
   OUTFALL. The point or location where storm water runoff discharges from a
BMP, conduit, stream or drain, storm sewer, channel or detention/retention
facility.
   PERSON. Except to the extent exempted from this chapter, any individual,
partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation,
trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility,
cooperative, city, town or other political subdivision of the state, any
interstate body or any other legal entity conducting land-disturbing activities
subject to this chapter.
   POLLUTANT. Any thing of a chemical component or nature which causes or
contributes to pollution.
   POLLUTION. The contamination or other alteration of any water’s physical,
chemical or biological properties by the addition of a constituent.
   POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (P-SWPPP). A plan
that illustrates how the pollutants or pollution will be prevented, treated and
otherwise managed in the long-term, beyond that of construction phases.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved.
   QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL. An individual who is trained and experienced in
storm water treatment techniques and related fields as may be demonstrated by
state licensure, professional certification, experience or completion of
coursework, as accepted according to this chapter, that enable the individual
to make sound, professional judgments regarding storm water control or
treatment and monitoring, pollutant fate and transport and drainage planning.
   REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS. Classified as any activity at a current site that
requires the submittal of a development plan. Existing single-family structures
are exempt from redevelopment requirements.
   STOP WORK ORDER. An order by the city directing a permittee to suspend all
construction and/or operations, except for work related to remediation of the
violation.
   STORM SEWER. Channel, ditch, catch basin, inlet pipe, culvert, conduit or
other conveyance used for the purposes of collecting and conveying storm water.
   WATER QUALITY RETENTION BASIN. A drainage facility constructed to contain
the runoff of storm water to a prescribed maximum rate/volume to pass into the
ground water system without discharging the retained volume to surface waters,
except through an emergency bypass under conditions beyond the designed
capacity.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 156.06 PROGRAM OBJECTIVES AND GENERAL APPROACH.
   (A)   Program objectives.
      (1)   Protection of the short-term and long-term public health, safety
and general welfare. This objective will be achieved by the following:
         (a)   Providing for regulation and management of the city’s storm
water system, including public and private facilities in the city’s service
area;
         (b)   Protecting, and preserving storm water quality and thereby fish
and wildlife habitat within the city and in downstream receiving waters; and
         (c)   Protecting those downstream and adjacent properties from storm
water quality impairment.
      (2)   Compliance with state and federal storm water regulations developed
pursuant to the Clean Water Act amendments of 1987 and subsequent amendments.
This objective will be achieved by the following:
         (a)   Benefitting storm water quality to a level of “designated use”,
as defined by the Clean Water Act §§ 305(b), being 33 U.S.C. § 1315(b), and 303
(d), being 33 U.S.C. § 1313(d), and minimizing the impacts from new development
and/or areas of significant redevelopment;
         (b)   Managing the quality of storm water discharged to the MS4 by
controlling the contribution of pollutants associated with new development and
redevelopment;
         (c)   Minimizing damage to public facilities and utilities;
         (d)   Managing the use of the public and private storm water/drainage
system that will not result in excessive maintenance costs;
         (e)   Encouraging the use of natural and aesthetically-pleasing
designs that maximize the preservation of natural areas;
         (f)   Guiding the construction of storm water management facilities by
developing comprehensive master plans that address storm water quantity,
quality, design, operation and maintenance;
         (g)   Encouraging the preservation of floodplains, floodways and open
spaces to protect and benefit the community’s quality of life and natural
resources; and
         (f)   Encourage the planning for and use of regional BMPs.
   (B)   General approach for development.
      (1)   To most effectively achieve the program objectives, the city
promotes an approach that encourages the consideration and use of:
         (a)   Regional BMPs;
         (b)   Low-impact development design principles, where consistent with
good civil engineering design;
         (c)   Waterway buffers;
         (d)   Low maintenance on-site BMPs; and
         (e)   A series of multiple BMP treatment systems.
      (2)   The city will encourage a primary preference for regional BMPs
through:
         (a)   Enabling and facilitating private partnerships where on-site
storm water quantity and/or quality requirements may be achieved or offset by
watershed- based solutions; and
         (b)   Enabling and supporting private/public partnerships, regional
basin approaches and in-lieu fee funds.
      (3)   In support of this approach, the city integrates into the planning
and construction plan review processes, when and where available, the use of:
         (a)   Adopted watershed studies;
         (b)   Adopted master plans;
         (c)   The city’s Storm Water Design and Water Quality Manual; and
         (d)   FEMA floodplain delineations.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 156.07 AUTHORITY AND RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Upon request to the person, the city shall have safe and easy access to the
areas to be inspected and/or monitored.
   (A)   The city shall have the right-of-entry on or upon the project site.
The city shall be provided access to all parts of the premises subject to this
chapter for the purposes of inspection, monitoring, sampling and for the
performance of other duties necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter.
   (B)   Where a project site has security measures in place which require
proper identification and clearance of individuals before entry into its
premises, the person shall make necessary arrangements with its security
personnel so that, upon presentation of suitable identification and written
request, the city will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of
performing specific responsibilities.
   (C)   The city shall have the right to set up on a project site such devices
necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the storm water operations or
discharges.
   (D)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
areas to be inspected and/or monitored that can reasonably be moved shall be
removed promptly by the person at the written or verbal request of the city.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the person.
   (E)   The city or its designated representative may inspect the facilities
of any user in order to ensure compliance with this chapter. Such inspections
shall be made with the consent of the owner, manager or signatory official. If
such consent is refused, denied or not promptly addressed, the city may seek
issuance of a search warrant.
   (F)   The city has the right to determine and impose inspection schedules
necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Inspections may include,
but are not limited to, the following: an inspection to determine the
effectiveness or operational viability of a permanent or long-term storm water
quality management practice(s).
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 156.08 POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Storm water quality management. The permittee shall complete a permit
application that includes a post-construction storm water pollution prevention
plan (P-SWPPP) to be completed, sealed and signed by a licensed professional
engineer and submitted to the city representative.
   (B)   Post-construction storm water pollution prevention plan. The P-SWPPP
shall include the following information:
      (1)   A description of the proposed land use including amount of
impervious area, directly connected impervious area and nature of the
development;
      (2)   Location, dimensions, detailed specifications and construction
details of all post- construction storm water quality best management practices
(BMPs), as defined in the city guidance documents;
      (3)   A sequence describing when each post-construction storm water
quality BMP will be installed;
      (4)   A long-term operation and maintenance agreement containing
maintenance guidelines for all post-construction storm water quality measures
to facilitate their proper long-term function. This agreement shall be made
available to future parties, including property owners, who will assume
responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the post-construction storm
water quality measures;
      (5)   The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for waterway buffers:
         (a)   The waterway buffer will be used to define areas where land
disturbance activities shall be permitted, but construction of any building or
structure shall not be permitted;
         (b)   A waterway buffer shall be applied to all waterways serving more
than 25 acres of tributary area or presented on a United States Geological
Survey map as a blue line stream;
         (c)   The waterway buffer shall be defined as the greater of:
            1.   Area contained within a boundary established by the floodplain
boundary as defined by FEMA or city master planning: or
            2.   The buffer will be 25-feet on each side from the top of
waterway bank as defined by geomorphic shape (not by the current water surface
elevation).
         (d)   The waterway buffer and floodplain may be used for application
of storm water quality devices. This may only be permitted if erosion
prevention and sediment control, water quality and floodplain cut fill policies
are adequately addressed as determined by the city;
         (e)   Exemptions may be granted at the discretion of the city for:
            1.   Roads and utilities crossing waterways;
            2.   Pedestrian trails and walkways proximate to waterways; and
            3.   Other exemptions.
      (6)   A licensed professional engineer in the commonwealth shall stamp
all construction plans and long-term maintenance documentation. This shall
include all proposed improvements or modifications to existing or new storm-
water infrastructure and other related improvements or modifications; and
      (7)   The city may require the posting of a maintenance bond to secure
the structural integrity of said facilities as well as the functioning of said
facilities in accordance with the approved post-construction SWPPP for a term
of 24 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. An irrevocable letter
of credit can be used as the financial assurance in lieu of a maintenance bond
although the contribution shall be equivalent to the amount that would be
estimated for the maintenance bond. The maintenance bond shall be calculated as
20% of the estimated construction cost and may be reduced to 10% after 12
months if there are no concerns by the city representative.
   (C)   BMP design requirements and criteria.
      (1)   The city reserves the right to develop or adopt other guidance
documents to serve as design and implementation standards. Other guidance
documents distributed by the city should be reviewed and considered when
preparing the post-construction SWPPP. These documents may be applied as
standards by which designs are to be prepared and controls implemented.
      (2)   The city shall have authority to implement this chapter by
appropriate regulations, guidance or other related materials. In this regard,
technical, administrative or procedural matters may be modified as needed to
meet the objectives defined herein, so long as such modifications as to
technical, administrative or procedural matters are not contrary or beyond the
intent of the objectives defined above.
         (a)   Regulations, guidance or other related materials that may be
given authority by this chapter may include, but are not limited to: best
management practice (BMP) manuals, design regulations and requirements,
submittal checklists, review checklists, inspection checklists, certifications,
storm water management manuals, in lieu fee schedule, and operation and
maintenance manuals.
         (b)   Materials may include information deemed appropriate by the city
including and specifications for the preparation of grading plans, guidance
selecting environmentally sound practices for managing storm water, minimum
specifications and requirements, more complete definitions and performance
standards.
         (c)   The above referenced documents may restrict or prevent the use
of specific products, techniques or management practices (that are to be
accepted by the public or are deemed to have a negative impact on public
infrastructure or the MS4) that have been identified as unacceptable for
performance, maintenance or other technically based reasons.
         (d)   Documents referenced above may be updated periodically to
reflect the most current and effective practices and shall be made available to
the public. However, the failure to update the manual shall not relieve any
applicant from the obligation to comply with this chapter, and shall not
prevent the city from imposing the most current and effective practices.
      (3)   The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for storm water quality BMPs
functioning independently or in combination. Acceptable storm water quality
BMPs shall be defined by policy and guidance documents as approved by the city.
      (4)   The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for storm water quality BMPs
that are designed to achieve the following design/performance objectives:
         (a)   Development shall be designed with management measures that are
built and maintained to treat, filter, flocculate, infiltrate, screen, evapo-
transpire, harvest and reuse storm water runoff, or otherwise manage the storm
water quality produced from an eightieth percentile precipitation event (0.75-
inch rainfall). At least 80% of the average annual post-construction total
suspended solids (TSS) load shall be removed.
         (b)   Reduce or buffer increases in storm water runoff temperature
caused by contact with impervious surfaces.
         (c)   Reduce or buffer increases in storm water runoff volume and flow
rate caused by increases in impervious area.
         (d)   Storm water detention/retention facilities shall be designed to
address the rate at which flow is released over the entire runoff discharge
period and the volume of discharge over the critical design-storm period as
defined by city storm water master plans. The outlet structure shall be
designed as a v-notch weir or other multiple stage configurations capable of
controlling (limiting) the discharge rates for the two-, ten-, 25- and 100-
year, 24-hour, SCS Type II distribution, design storm events to pre-developed
levels for all new developments. The approved P-SWPPP may require the first
flush (0.75-inch rainfall) to be retained in the basin without discharge.
Redevelopment shall reduce the discharge from their site to meet this same
standard. This may require the redesign and reconstruction of existing basins
at the site to meet the current standard.
         (e)   Culvert and storm sewer improvements shall be designed to
minimize scour. The FHWA HDS No. 5 design methodology (latest edition)
considering inlet and outlet control shall be used. For major culverts and
storm sewers, as designated by the city, a 100-year, SCS Type II, 24-hour
design flow shall be used with a HW/d less than or equal to one. For minor,
subdivision level culverts and storm sewers, a 25-year SCS Type II 24-hour
storm and a HW/d less than or equal to one shall be used. In this instance, a
check of the 100-year SCS Type II 24-hour flow with a HW/d less than or equal
to 1.2 shall also be performed. Pipe outlets shall be protected with channel
lining or permanent turf reinforcement mat, as supported by sound civil
engineering design.
         (f)   Storm water hotspots are areas that often produce higher
concentration of certain pollutants, such as hydrocarbons or heavy metals, than
are normally found in urban runoff. These sites shall be required to provide
effective removal of the particular pollutant(s) which they discharge.
Effective removal shall be deemed as that which existed prior to development of
the site or in the case of redevelopment that which existed prior to any
development to the site. Review and approval is required prior to commencement
of construction.
            1.   Examples of storm water hotspots include:
               a.   Gas/fueling stations;
               b.   Restaurants;
               c.   Vehicle repair facilities;
               d.   Vehicle washing/steam cleaning facilities (including mobile
operations);
               e.   Auto and metal recycling facilities;
               f.   Outdoor material storage areas;
               g.   Loading and transfer areas;
               h.   Landfills;
               i.   Industrial sites; and
               j.   Industrial rooftops.
            2.   Storm water hotspots shall have treatment on site and cannot
rely on regional solutions offered by the city or the larger development to
meet their individual treatment requirement.
         (g)   Soil bioengineering, “green” and other “soft” slope and stream
bank stabilization methods shall receive preference over rip rap, concrete and
other hard armoring techniques, except where necessitated by sound civil
engineering design.
         (h)   Retention-supportive data must be submitted to justify the type
of facility selected. If the facility is designed to retain (volume control)
all or a significant portion of runoff (as opposed to temporarily detain), then
appropriate soils analyses findings shall be submitted to the city. This
submission shall also discuss the impacts the facility will have on karst
topography if found through inspection or a geotechnical investigation of the
site. The facility may be designed to infiltrate runoff to groundwater rather
than transmit it downstream under conditions up to a 100-year storm event.
Injection wells shall not generally be permitted due to the relationship
between subterranean and surface flows.
         (i)   Each P-SWPPP shall be evaluated for consistency with the storm
water master plan or watershed study for the major watershed or watersheds
within which the project site is located. The individual project evaluation
will determine if storm water quantity and quality management practices can
adequately serve the property and limit impacts to downstream public and
private properties. The presence of a regional facility(s) will be considered
in determining the extent to which storm water quantity and/or quality controls
will be necessary.
         (j)   The city reserves the right to require superseding or additional
treatment criteria or objectives for specific pollutant(s) as necessary to meet
overall storm water quality management program objectives or directives under a
watershed improvement or total maximum daily load (TDML) program as
administered by the USEPA or commonwealth.
         (k)   On-site BMP coordination with regional BMPs:
            1.   All properties are expected to implement on-site storm water
quality control measures, but the extent of application may be reduced given
the availability, proximity and nature of regional storm water quality BMPs;
and
            2.   The extent and type of on-site storm water quality management
practices implemented shall be proportionate to the land use and proximity to
regional storm water quality management practices.
   (D)   BMP ownership and easement.
      (1)   Any storm water management facility or BMP which services
individual property owners shall be privately owned. General routine
maintenance (controlling vegetative growth, seeding, regrading and removing
debris) shall be provided by the owner(s).The owner shall establish a public
utilities and drainage easement over the locality for access for inspection and
emergency maintenance by the city. The city, or its designee, has the right,
but not the duty, to enter premises for emergency repairs.
      (2)   Any storm water management facility or BMP which services an
individual residential subdivision in which the facility or BMP is within
designated open areas or serves as an amenity with an established homeowners
association shall be privately owned and maintained consistent with provisions
of this chapter. The owner shall maintain a public utilities and drainage
easement which allows access for inspection and emergency maintenance by the
city. The city, or its designee, has the right, but not the duty, to enter
premises for emergency repairs.
      (3)   Any storm water management facility or BMP which services
commercial and industrial development shall be privately owned and maintained.
The owner shall maintain a public utilities and drainage easement which allows
access for inspection and emergency maintenance by the city. The city, or its
designee, has the right, but not the duty, to enter premises for emergency
repairs.
      (4)   All regional storm water management control facilities proposed by
the owners, if approved and accepted by the city for dedication as a public
regional facility, shall be publicly owned and/or maintained. All other storm
water management control facilities and BMPs shall be privately owned and/or
maintained unless accepted for maintenance by the city.
      (5)   The city may require public dedication of privately-owned storm
water facilities which discharge to the city storm water system. This shall be
at the approval of the City Council.
   (E)   Regional facilities management.
      (1)   The objective of a regional storm water management facility, pond,
lake or other device, is to address the storm water management concerns in a
given watershed with greater economy and efficiency than possible through
individual facilities. The intended result is fewer storm water management
facilities to maintain in the affected watershed while sustaining efficiency.
      (2)   The city encourages regional storm water quantity and/or quality
management practices, which may be consistently and efficiently managed and
maintained. These types of practices will be encouraged in order to replace or
reduce the implementation of on-site storm water quantity and/or quality
management practices, as determined to be appropriate by the city.
      (3)   Where a regional storm water management facility has been
established by the city, or by an authority operating on behalf of the city, a
development or subdivision, unless excepted by the city, may participate in
said regional program in lieu of constructing site runoff control required by
this chapter. This may be permitted; provided that:
         (a)   Runoff from the development or subdivision is benefited by an
approved existing or proposed public regional storm water management facility
that is currently operational or will be operational within one year;
         (b)   Participation in the form of contribution of funds, contribution
of land, contribution of storm water management facility construction work, or
a combination of these, the total value of which shall be in accordance with a
fee schedule adopted by the city;
         (c)   The city finds that the storm water quality management plans are
in compliance with all other applicable requirements and ordinances;
         (d)   Fiscal or other contribution shall be used for acquisition,
design, construction or maintenance of one or more regional storm water
management facilities with the Valley Creek Watershed; and
         (e)   Detention facilities may, and are encouraged to, be designed to
serve multiple purposes. For example, runoff may be detained under wet-weather
conditions, but also serve as common or recreational areas during dry weather
conditions. Where multi-purpose facilities are provided, or where flat grades
or poorly draining soils are encountered, provisions for adequate low-flow
storm water management system may be required. Where the retention/detention
facility is planned to be used as a lake, pond or storm water quality
management practice with a permanent pool, calculations shall be performed and
submitted to demonstrate that an adequate permanent pool depth is expected
during dry summer months without vegetative growth issues.
   (F)   Long-term operation and maintenance agreements.
      (1)   General. Long-term operation and maintenance agreements shall
include a maintenance plan for all storm water quality BMPs in new development
or redevelopment that require more than general maintenance (e.g., periodic
mowing).
         (a)   The plan will be developed to ensure that the storm water
quality BMP(s) is (are) kept functional. The maintenance agreement will specify
minimum operation and maintenance requirements and intervals to be performed by
the property owner.
         (b)   The plan shall address schedules for inspections and techniques
for operation and maintenance, including vegetation clearing or mowing and
removing accumulated trash, debris, sediment pollutants and other forms of
pollution.
         (c)   The agreement shall be noted on the final plat with the
appropriate notation on the particular lot(s).
         (d)   The agreement shall be included with property ownership title
documents and shall be binding on the owner, its administrators, executors,
assigns, heirs and any other successors in interest.
         (e)   The format for the long-term operational and maintenance
agreement shall be provided through example by the city, or through guidance
documents.
         (f)   Care must be taken to ensure that any required facilities do not
become nuisances or health hazards. Detention and retention facilities should
be designed to require minimal maintenance, and maintenance expectations must
be clearly stated in the long-term operation and maintenance agreement.
         (g)   When a storm water quality BMP serves more than one parcel, a
binding contract for the purpose of operation and maintenance is required. A
property or home owners association shall be responsible for operation and
maintenance of the BMP(s) as directed by this chapter.
      (2)   Single entity ownership. Where the permanent storm runoff control
facilities are designed to manage runoff from property in a single entity
ownership, the maintenance responsibility for the storm water control
facilities shall be with the single entity owner.
         (a)   A single entity shall be defined as an association, public or
private corporation, partnership firm, trust, estate or any other legal entity
allowed to own real estate exclusive of an individual lot owner.
         (b)   The stated responsibilities of the entity shall be documented in
the long-term operation and maintenance agreement. Terms including owning,
operating and maintaining the facilities shall be submitted with plans in
application for a SWQMP Permit for an adequacy determination. Approval of a
SWQMP shall be conditioned upon the approval of these terms. These terms shall
be in writing, shall be in recordable form, and shall, in addition to any other
terms deemed necessary by the city, contain a provision permitting inspection
at any reasonable time by the city of all facilities deemed critical in the
public welfare.
         (c)   Upon approval of the storm water quality BMPs by the city, the
facility owner(s) shall demonstrate the ability to guarantee and apply the
financial resources necessary for long-term maintenance requirements. The
funding mechanism shall be in a form approved by the city. The city will only
approve funding mechanism(s) for long-term maintenance responsibilities that
can be demonstrated to be permanent or transferable to another entity with
equivalent longevity.
         (d)   In the event that proposed funding is through an owners
association, then it must be demonstrated that the association may not dissolve
unless long-term operation and maintenance activities are accepted by another
entity with equivalent longevity and adequate funding. Furthermore, the owners
association’s responsibility must be stated in the association’s declaration,
covenants or by-laws, as appropriate.
         (e)   Unless made specifically clear in the preliminary stages of the
site design and construction plan review procedure, it will be assumed that all
storm water detention, retention, treatment or storage facilities and/or
devices shall be owned, operated and maintained by a single entity, as defined
above.
      (3)   City ownership. Where the city has accepted an offer of public
dedication of the permanent storm water quality BMPs, the city shall be
responsible for operation and maintenance.
   (G)   Special watersheds.
      (1)   Special watersheds may be designated by the city with unique goals
and requirements. The minimum measures outlined in this chapter shall be met at
all times. Additional requirements, unique to the specific watershed, shall be
required to meet the specific needs of the watershed.
      (2)   Special watersheds designated:
         (a)   Hawkins Drive; flow quantity limitation. The post-developed flow
rate and quantity from the development cannot exceed the pre-developed flow
rate and quantity in this unique watershed. The karst feature that receives the
flow from this watershed has no predictable capacity. Therefore site storage,
reuse and other innovative methods to abate both rate and volume increases due
to development shall be required; and
         (b)   Current and future listings by KDOW.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 156.09 STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN PERMIT INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Permittee-performed inspections.
      (1)   The permittee-performed inspections (self inspections) shall be
performed by a qualified professional.
      (2)   Documentation of owner performed inspections and inspection
findings shall be kept on site, if appropriate facilities are available.
      (3)   Documentation of owner performed inspections and inspection
findings shall be made available within two business days for construction and
seven days for post-construction of a request by the city or designated
representative. Failure to timely submit documentation, as requested, will be
assumed to indicate that inspections were not performed and may result in
corresponding enforcement procedures.
      (4)   Post-construction inspections: inspection and maintenance shall be
performed at storm water quality BMPs on at least an annual basis and as
otherwise determined in the long-term operation and maintenance agreement.
   (B)   Oversight inspections.
      (1)   The city, or the city’s designated representative, has the
authority to randomly and periodically inspect the storm water quality BMPs.
The city may make inspections of the site at its discretion and shall either
approve the condition of the BMP or shall notify the Permittee wherein the
condition fails to comply with the approved SWQMP.
      (2)   The city or its designated representative’s inspections and
findings will be presented and reviewed with the permittee at the time of
inspection (if site personnel are available), and be available in the city
public records.
      (3)   The city shall identify in writing any measures with deficiencies
or that are not in compliance with the objectives of this chapter and the SWQMP
permit. A sight inspection will be mailed to the responsible person for the
site listing all deficiencies for the sight. The permittee shall repair all
deficiencies within seven calendar days after deficiencies or failures have
been identified.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 156.10 POST-CONSTRUCTION QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL.
   Possess a license as a professional engineer in good standing in the
commonwealth with demonstrated knowledge and experience in:
   (A)   Storm water quality treatment practices and BMPs;
   (B)   Operational standards;
   (C)   Cause and failure indicators; and
   (D)   Maintenance measures used to prevent and correct failures.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 156.11 AS-BUILT REQUIREMENTS.
   Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, recording of the final plat
or final release of bond, the as-built condition (including: invert elevations,
size, shape and location) of critical storm water features must be identified,
approved and provided in a electronic form to the city representative.
   (A)   The volume, slopes, configuration, condition and topographic
information of all detention, retention and water quality practices shall be
certified by a professional engineer licensed in the commonwealth. This
information shall be provided to the city, in the form of an as-built drawing
or other electronic form accepted by the city. The as-built certification shall
indicate if final conditions are consistent with, or exceed, the goals of the
storm water plan.
   (B)   If it is determined that information provided in the as-built drawing,
certification, inspection or survey of the site does not meet or exceed the
SWQMP provisions, the city reserves the right to withhold certification of
occupancy or final bond release. Furthermore, other enforcement mechanisms may
be applied to the permittee or persons making certifying statements.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 156.12 STOP-WORK ORDER; REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   In the event that any person holding a permit pursuant to this chapter
violates the terms of the permit or implements site development in such a
manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of the
public near the development site or vicinity so as to be materially detrimental
to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity,
the city may suspend or revoke the site development permit.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   No person shall improperly construct, alter, repair, or maintain any BMP, or
cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this
chapter. Each day of violation of this chapter may be considered a separate
occurrence. Any person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter may
be cited for a civil offense pursuant to the Code Enforcement Board Ordinance
and fine schedule. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the
fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of notification, then the city
may recover said fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The
citing officer may, at his or her discretion, cite the offender to appear
before the Code Enforcement Board. The city may also obtain injunctions or
abatement orders to ensure compliance with this chapter. Nothing in this
section shall negate the ability of the city to pursue applicable civil or
criminal penalties as prescribed by law. In addition to any other penalty
authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted
of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to bear
the expense of such restoration.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 4-2-2012)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   STREET CLOSINGS
      
III.   SEWER ALLOCATIONS
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
   Editor’s note:
      * Contains portion of description for current corporate boundary
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.     Date Passed  Description
-            8-7-1939     Bardstown Road Addition
-            11-6-1939    Bardstown Road Addition; final adoption
-            8-7-1939     West Dixie Addition
-            11-6-1939    West Dixie Addition; final adoption
-            8-7-1939     Valley Creek Addition
-            11-6-1939    Valley Creek Addition; final adoption
-            9-12-1944    Athletic Field
-            11-6-1944    Athletic Field; final adoption
1-1948       2-2-1948     Grand View Addition
2-1948       2-2-1948     Helmwood Addition
3-1948       2-2-1948     North Miles Street; Green Hills Addition
4-1948       2-2-1948     South Dixie Addition
Annex Ord. 1 3-15-1948    Grand View Addition; final adoption
Annex Ord. 2 3-15-1948    Helmwood Addition; final adoption
Annex Ord. 3 3-15-1948    N. Miles Street; Green Hills Addition; final adoption
-            3-15-1948    Repealing Ord. 4; South Dixie Addition
7-2-51A      7-2-1951     Ryan Subdivision Addition
9-5-51A      9-5-1951     Pennsylvania Avenue to St. John Road
9-12-51A     9-12-1951    Kennedy Avenue to REA
9-5-51A      1-16-1952    Pennsylvania Avenue to St. John Road
9-12-51A     1-16-1952    Kennedy Avenue to REA
3-17-52A     3-17-1952    Beginning with Merritt Kerrick and Green Hills
4-7-52A      4-7-1952     Beginning with Merritt Kerrick and Green Hills
4-7-52A      6-16-1952    Beginning with Merritt Kerrick and Green Hills
3-17-52A     6-16-1952    Beginning with Merritt Kerrick and Green Hills
9-15-52      9-15-1952    Grandview Subdivision to Alameda Manor Subdivision
                          and Shepherdsville Road
9-15-52      12-15-1952   Grandview Subdivision to Alameda Manor Subdivision
                          and Shepherdsville Road
3-16-53      3-16-1953    Woodland Heights Subdivision
4-14-53      4-14-1953    Helmwood Homesites
3-16-53      7-20-1953    Woodland Height Subdivision
4-14-53      7-20-1953    Helmwood Homesites
9-26-56      9-26-1956    Leitchfield Road and Helm Road
-            10-20-1958   Indian Hills Subdivision
-            12-1-1958    Indian Hills Subdivision
-            7-20-1959    Indian Hills Subdivision
-            8-24-1959    Highlands Subdivision
-            9-21-1959    Indian Hills Subdivision
-            10-5-1959    Highland Subdivision; boundary corrected
-            3-7-1960     E’town Time Corporation
-            5-2-1960     E’town Time Corporation
-            8-21-1961    Edgewood Heights, Forest Hills Subdivision, Mercer
                          Drive and rear of Cedar Drive and College Property
-            11-6-1961    Edgewood Heights, Forest Hills Subdivision
-            3-21-1962    City Park
-            4-1-1963     City Park; amended and section south thereof French
                          Street
-            10-21-1963   * Hodgenville Road Intersection, Hawkins Drive, Dow
                          Corning, Chandler Heights and Milby Subdivision
-            1-6-1964     * Hodgenville Road Intersection, Hawkins Drive, Dow
                          Corning, Chandler Heights and Milby Subdivision
-            10-5-1964    Section of Glendale Hill
-            1-4-1965      
            6-3-1968     Gates Rubber Company and Westview Subdivision
-            9-3-1968      
                          Freeman Lake Area, Bon Aire Subdivision, Gateway
            5-17-1971    Villa Subdivision, Fountainbleau Subdivision, Section
                          on Glendale Hill
-            8-2-1971     * Areas north, south, east and west of present city
                          limits (including Glendale Hill)
-            11-3-1971    De-annexation
-            7-21-1975     
            9-8-1975     * Two tracts on Bardstown Road and area between 31 W
                          and Pear Orchard Road
5-1976       2-23-1976    Remainder of Strickler Farm on U.S. 62 West
11-1976      4-19-1976    Remainder of Strickler Farm on U.S. 62 West Final
27-1976      10-18-1976   Proposed Industrial Park and Airport; west of city
4-1977       1-17-1977    Proposed Industrial Park and Airport; amended
6-1977       2-21-1977    Proposed Industrial Park and Airport; amended
11-1977      4-4-1977     * Proposed Industrial Park and Airport; final
5-1978       2-22-1978    Two areas west of U.S. 31 W, including University
                          Estates
25-1978      8-14-1978    Repealing Ord. 5-1978
11-1979      4-2-1979     Annexing Camelot Subdivision and Cardinal Creek,
                          Section 2
14-1979      6-4-1979     * Camelot Subdivision and Cardinal Creek, Section 2;
                          final
49-1980      11-3-1980    Annexing three tracts on U.S. 62 West
1-1981       1-19-1981    * Annexing three tracts on U.S. 62 West; final
13-1981      4-6-1981     Annexing approximately 25 acres at northwestern
                          boundary off Old 31 W (intent to annex)
42-1981      9-21-1981    Intent to annex along U.S. 31 W South
43-1981      9-21-1981    Intent to annex area at intersection of KY 251 and
                          Ring Road
63-1981      12-21-1981   Annexing area on east side of 31 W South
5-1982       2-1-1982     * Amending annexation of area on east side of 31 W
                          South
12-1982      3-15-1982    Intent to annex Pleasant Acres and Convenient Acres
23-1982      5-17-1982    Intent to annex area at KY 251 and Ring Road
26-1982      6-7-1982     * Annexing Pleasant Acres and Convenient Acres
38-1982      10-4-1982    Annexing approximately 25 acres at Northwestern
                          boundary off old 31 W
42-1982      10-18-1982   * Annexing city-owned property at Ring Road and KY
                          251
32-1983      10-3-1983    Intent to Annex Robert L. Hall property at Ring Road
                          and KY 251
33-1983      11-21-1983   Annexing the Robert L. Hall property at Ring Road and
                          KY 251
5-1984       4-2-1984     Intent to annex W.C. Routt property on KY 447 North
                          of present city limits
7-1984       6-4-1984     Annexing the W.C. Routt property on KY 447 North of
                          present city limits
8-1984       6-4-1984     Intent to annex additional property on KY 447 North
                          (W.C. Routt property)
8A-1984      6-18-1984    Intent to annex certain property on Jackie Street
12-1984      7-23-1984    Intent to annex certain property on U.S. 62 East
14-1984      8-6-1984     Annexing additional W.C. Routt property on KY 447
17-1984      9-4-1984     * Annexing certain property on Jackie Street
21-1984      10-15-1984   * Annexing certain property on U.S. 62 East
33-1985      10-7-1985    Intent to annex property between Pear Orchard Road
                          and Airport Road and north of Towne Mall
3-1986       1-20-1986    Annexing 20 acres north of Towne Mall
9-1986       2-17-1986    * Annexing 125 acres between Pear Orchard Road and
                          Airport Road
8-1987       5-4-1987     Intent to annex Pine Valley Drive and Mouser Property
                          (31 W)
11-1987      5-18-1987    Intent to annex 90-acre tract on Lincoln Parkway and
                          Sportsman Lake Road; Schlatter Farm
10-1987      5-18-1997    Intent to annex area on KY 1600 and Timber Lane
15-1987      6-15-1987    Intent to annex Pine Valley Drive and Mouser Property
                          (31 W)
16-1987      6-15-1987    Intent to annex 90-acre tract on Lincoln Parkway and
                          Sportsman Lake Road; Schlatter Farm
17-1987      6-15-1987    Intent to annex area on KY 1600 and Timber Lane
20-1987      9-8-1987     Annexing property on KY 1600 (Cardinal Drive) and
                          Timber Lane
21-1987      9-8-1987     * Annexing Pine Valley Drive and Mouser property on
                          31 W
22-1987      9-8-1987     Annexing 90 acres on Sportsman Lake Road and Lincoln
                          Parkway
7-1988       3-7-1988     Intent to annex Moore property; KY 251 and Ring Road
8-1988       3-7-1988     Intent to annex Rogers property; KY 251 and Ring Road
6-1988       3-7-1988     Intent to annex Briarwood/Beechwood (KY 1600)
16-1988      5-16-1988    * Annexing Moore property (KY 251 and Ring Road)
20-1988      6-6-1988     Annexing Joseph Rogers property (KY 251 and Ring
                          Road)
21-1988      6-6-1988     * Annexing Briarwood/Beechwood (KY 1600)
25-1988      6-20-1988    Intent to annex 75 Botto Avenue (Steve Johnson
                          property)
26-1988      6-20-1988    Intent to annex 2108 North Dixie (Adrian Ray
                          property)
29-1988      7-18-1988    * Annexing 75 Botto Avenue (Steve Johnson property)
33-1988      9-19-1988    Intent to annex Clyde Hunt property (KY 251 and Ring
                          Road)
34-1988      10-17-1988   Annexing 2108 North Dixie (Adrian Ray property)
38-1988      12-5-1988    * Annexing Clyde Hunt property (KY 251 and Ring Road)
2-1989       1-3-1989     Intent to annex Pine Valley Golf Course
5-1989       2-6-1989     * Annexing Pine Valley Golf Course
33-1989      11-20-1989   Intent to annex 600-800 block of Pine Valley Drive
34-1989      11-20-1989   Intent to annex real property located along North
                          Dixie Avenue (31 W) and Pear Orchard Road NW
4-1990       2-19-19,1990 * Annexing property located along 600-800 block of
                          Pine Valley Drive
7-1990       2-19-1990    * Annexing property along North Dixie Avenue (31 W)
                          and Pear Orchard Road NW
22-1990      8-6-1990     Intent to annex real property known as approximately
                          100 acres on west side of 31 W South
30-1990      10-1-1990    Intent to annex real property known as approximately
                          15 acres, part of Skyline Heights Subdivision
31-1990      10-15-1990   Intent to annex real property known as approximately
                          100 acres on the east and west sides of 31 W South
3-1991       1-7-1991     * Annexing real property known as approximately 107
                          acres on the west side of 31 W South
11-1991      2-18-1991    Annexing real property known as approximately 15
                          acres and being a part of Skyline Heights Subdivision
                          * Annexing real property located on both sides of
5-1992       4-13-1992    U.S. 31 W North, the major part being on the east
                          side of U.S. 31 W and located adjacent to the present
                          city boundaries in and around Pine Valley Drive
                          Intent to annex real property located on the south
6-1992       4-13-1992    side of U.S. 62, known as the Leitchfield Road
                          Annexation
14-1992      7-13-1992    * Annexing property located on the south side of U.S.
                          62, known as the Leitchfield Road Annexation
29-1993      12-6-1993    Intent to annex territory in the Cardinal Drive and
                          Ring Road Area
30-1993      12-6-1993    Intent to annex territory in the St. John Road and
                          Ring Road area
5-1994       2-21-1994    * Annexing territory in the Cardinal Drive and Ring
                          Road area
6-1994       2-21-1994    * Annexing territory in the St. John Road and Ring
                          Road area
15-1995      6-19-1995    * Annexing territory along southern boundary of
                          Elizabethtown and U.S. 31 W
24-1996      11-4-1996    * Annexing property located off Bewley Hollow Road
                          and Stonemill Drive
30-1998      12-7-1998    * Annexing territory located at 459 Sportsman Lake
                          Road
31-1998      12-7-1998    * Annexing territory located at 2900 South Dixie
                          Avenue
01-1999      1-4-1999     * Annexing territory located on South Wilson Road
02-1999      1-4-1999     * Annexing territory located along Ring Road
                          * Annexing territory located North Black Branch Road
38-1999      11-1-1999    containing 300 acres and owned by the Elizabethtown
                          Industrial Foundation
                          * Annexing an approximately 60-acre tract, known as
16-2001      8-6-2001     Casteel Subdivision and being located along
                          Shepherdsville Road and owned by Kipper Homes, Inc.
26-2003      9-2-2003     * Annexing property located in the 4600 block of
                          Leitchfield Road
15-2005      6-20-2005    Annexing property located at 2659 Shepherdsville Road
16-2005      6-20-2005    * Annexing property located at 2682 Shepherdsville
                          Road
29-2005      10-17-2005   * Annexing property located on New Glendale Road
02-2006      1-3-2006     * Annexing property located on Tunnel Hill Road
08-2006      3-20-2006    * Repealed Ord. 02-2006 and annexed property located
                          on Tunnel Hill Road
11-2006      6-5-2006     Intent to annex property along Hayden School Road
17-2006      8-21-2006    * Annexing an 85-acre tract located along Hutcherson
                          Lane
18-2006      9-5-2006     * Annexing property along Hayden School Road
25-2006      10-16-2006   * Annexing property located at 1411 St. John Road
30-2006      12-4-2006    * Annexing property located at the intersection of
                          St. John Road and Stratmoor Drive
20-2007      4-16-2007    * Annexing 399.062 acres along Ring Road
                          (RatliffLewis/Cox)
26-2009      12-21-2009   * Annexing property located at 2886 and 2950
                          Shepherdsville Road
01-2010      2-16-2010    * Annexing property located in the 700 block of Ring
                          Road
18-2010      12-20-2010   Annexing property located along Rineyville Road
19-2010      12-20-2010   Annexing property located along Hutcherson Lane
11-2011      6-6-2011     Annexing property located at 40 Burr Oak Court
4-2013       4-15-2013    Annexing property at 2635 Rineyville Road
5-2013       4-15-2013    Annexing property at 71 Fontaine Drive
8-2013       6-3-2013     Annexing property at 211 Jackie Street
23-2013      11-18-2013   Annexing property located at 2875 Shepherdsville Road
26-2013      12-2-2013    Annexing property located at 1305 Pear Orchard Road
                          and 2320 Ring Road
11-2014      5-19-2014    Annexing property located along Patriot Parkway near
                          Ring Road
21-2014      10-20-2014   Annexing property located at 2011 Bardstown Road and
                          adjacent to U.S. 62 East
24-2014      12-1-2014    Annexing property located at Ring Road and Western
                          Kentucky Parkway
04-2015      5-4-2015     Annexing property located at 4101 North Dixie Avenue
11-2015      9-8-2015     Annexing property at the intersection of South Ring
                          Road and Western Kentucky Parkway
22-2015      12-14-2015   Annexing property located at 2617 Stonemill Drive
11-2018      4-16-2018    Annexing property located at 2580 Bardstown Road
15-2018      6-4-2018     Annexing property located at 4200-4600 block of
                          Leitchfield Road
32-2018      --2018       Annexing property located on Jackie Street
34-2018      12-17-2018   Annexing property located at 215 Deerbrook Lane
                          (Jackie Street)
27-2019      12-2-2019    Annexing property located at 7231 South Wilson Road,
                          Wise Lane, 398 Wise Lane and 596 Wise Lane
15-2020      9-28-2020    Annexing property located at 401 South Ring Road
22-2020      11-16-2020   Annexing property located at 5207 Leitchfield Road
03-2021      3-1-2021     Annexing property located at 1205 St. John Road
12-2021      6-21-2021    Annexing property located at 7100 South Wilson Road
25-2021      11-1-2021    Annexing property located along Tunnel Hill Road and
                          1600 Tunnel Hill Road
12-2022      5-23-2022    Annexing portions of properties located at 1151 Pear
                          Orchard Road, 2111 Ring Road and 2101 Ring Road
16-2022      6-13-2022    Annexing property located at 554 Pine Valley Drive
18-2022      7-11-2022    Annexing property located at the intersection of
                          Hutcherson Lane and South Wilson Road
31-2022      11-7-2022    Annexing property located at South Dixie Avenue
03-2023      3-6-2023     Annexing property located at 1203 St. John Road
11-2023      6-12-2023    Annexing property located at 6796 South Wilson Road
12-2023      6-12-2023    Annexing property located at 204 Jackie Street
23-2023      10-16-2023   Annexing property located at the intersection of
                          South Ring Road and the Western Kentucky Parkway
02-2024      4-8-2024     Annexing property located at 1751 and 2501 Gaither
                          Station Road
09-2024      5-20-2024    Annexing property located along a portion of South
                          Wilson Road
01-2025      1-13-2025    Annexing property located at 1750 Gaither Station
                          Road
02-2025      1-13-2025    Annexing property located at 2031 Bardstown Road
03-2025      1-13-2025    Annexing property located at 1001 Ring Road and
                          Patriot Parkway
05-2025      2-18-2025    Annexing property located along Gaither Station Road,
                          South Ring Road and Leitchifield Road
07-2025      4-7-2025     Annexing property located at 204 Jackie Street
08-2025      4-7-2025     Annexing property located at 320 Pear Orchard Road
                          Northwest
09-2025      4-7-2025     Annexing property located at 7019 South Wilson Road
22-2025      8-18-2025    Annexing property located at 1331 Hayden School Road
                         
 
TABLE II: STREET CLOSINGS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        5-12-1950   Closing Poplar Street over L&N RR Tracks
-        8-7-1950    Closing Warfield between Peachtree and Maple
-        10-1-1951   Closing street on the W. Side of L&N RR between Crutcher
                     and Poplar Streets (West Railroad Avenue)
-        3-3-1952    Closing alley between Mantle and Sycamore about 225 feet
                     northwest of Poplar Street
-        5-16-1955   Closing parts of Crutcher Lane and Mallory Street
-        5-16-1955   Closing a portion of Wilson Avenue
-        5-20-1957   Closing a portion of Fair Avenue
-        6-16-1969   Closing Marion Court and Cherry Alley
-        3-5-1973    Closing alley on north side of Athletic Court
22       9-4-1979    Closing part of Plum Alley
15       5-4-1981    Closing Wathen Alley
30       8-3-1981    Closing unnamed street adjacent to Fair Avenue
41       9-8-1981    Closing unnamed alleyway adjacent to Skyline Drive
34       9-7-1982    Closing RR crossing at Williams Street and East RR Avenue
                     and Nicholas Street adjacent to Knight Chemical Company
43       10-18-1982  Closing streets, public ways and unnamed alleyways on
                     Glendale Hill
50       12-6-1982   Closing unnamed street, public way or alleyway in Thomas
                     Heights Subdivision on Glendale Hill
24       6-20-1983   Closing a portion of Nicholas Street
28       8-15-1983   Closing unnamed alleys (one between 508-510 East Dixie and
                     two between 407-409 Pierce Street)
10       4-18-1985   Closing Governor’s Drive
23       7-1-1985    Closing portion or Cathy Street
10       2-17-1986   Closing portions of NE Second Avenue and NE First Avenue
                     and all NE Second Street
33       12-15-1986  Closing Ehert Avenue
24       9-17-1987   Closing unnamed street contained in lots numbered 182 and
                     183 Oak Grove Manor Subdivision
5        3-7-1988    Closing a portion of Pear Orchard Road
6        2-6-1989    Closing Gerrard Court in Glendale Hill Neighborhood
                     Subdivision
7        2-6-1989    Closing a portion of Hagans Alley lying between W. Dixie
                     and Mock Alley
18       7-3-1989    Closing two unnamed passageways in Franklin Heights
36       12-4-1989   Closing a portion of Birch Drive and Red Bud Drive in
                     Foxborough Estates Subdivision
16       5-21-1990   Closing Cromer Court in the village, Secton 1 in Pine
                     Valley Country Club
19       6-4-1990    Closing Pembrooke Circle and an unnamed right-of-way in
                     Wellington Place Subdivision
26       9-17-1990   Closing portion of Glencrest Avenue
12       2-18-1991   Closing portion of Towne Drive
15       3-4-1991    Closing Valley View Avenue
25       5-20-1991   Closing alley rimning from South Main Street to South
                     Mulberry Street
24       6-3-1991    Closing parts of French Street, Pear Orchard Road and Bon
                     Aire Drive
29       8-5-1991    Closing Woodfield Drive located on west side of E-town and
                     on north side of U.S. Highway 62
30       8-17-1991   Repealed ordinance closing a portion of Towne Drive and
                     enacting new ordinance closing a portion of Towne Drive
39       12-4-1991   Closing College Avenue Alley
15       8-17-1992   Closing Hunter Drive off St. John Road
17       9-13-1993   Closing a part of Black Branch Road
16       5-2-1994    Closing portion of Hisham Court (aka Helmwood Plaza Drive)
22       9-6-1994    Closing right of way of Anniston Drive in Pine Valley
                     Subdivision
16       6-26-1995   Closing unnamed streets in Thomas Heights Subdivision
19       9-18-1995   Closing unnamed alley in Haycraft’s addition
23       10-2-1995   Closing several rights- of-way in the Northridge
                     Development on Dolphin Hills Subdivision
27       11-6-1995   Closing a section of Nicholas Street
18       8-19-1996   Closing rights-of-way in Skyline Heights Subdivision
23       11-4-1996   Closing portion of right-of-way of Regency Way in the
                     Crowne Point Section of Dolphin Hills
7        3-17-1997   Closing a portion of Strawberry Alley
9        4-7-1997    Closing undeveloped street; Concorde Circle in Wellington
                     Place Subdivision
12       4-21-1997   Closing a part of the right-of-way of Heartland Drive
27       11-17-1997  Closing undeveloped portion of Birch Drive
30       12-1-1997   Closing a portion of Quince Alley
05-1998  3-16-1998   Closing a portion of right-of-way of Corporate Drive in
                     Madison Park Subdivision
26-1998  10-19-1998  Closing a portion of right-of-way for Heartland Drive as
                     requested by Atria
04-1999  1-4-1999    Closing Northeast Second Terrace and Northeast Sixth
                     Street in Skyline Heights Subdivision
11-1999  3-1-1999    Closing a portion of Savannah Avenue
12-1999  3-15-1999   Closing a portion of the right-of-way of Pear Orchard Road
13-1999  5-17-1999   Closing a portion of the right-of-way known as Cottrell
                     Lane
14-1999  4-5-1999    Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Brown Street
                     Alley #2
03-2000  2-11-2000   Closing a portion of right-of-way known as University
                     Drive
11-2000  7-18-2000   Closing CSX railroad crossings on North Crestwood Street,
                     Selbert Drive and Hawkins Drive
12-2000  8-7-2000    Closing a portion of Black Branch Road
23-2000  10-16-2000  Closing a portion of Helm Avenue between West Dixie Avenue
                     and Strawberry Alley
06-2001  3-19-2001   Closing the unimproved right-of-way of Lakeside Drive in
                     Lakeview Subdivision (off Pear Orchard Road)
12-2001  6-18-2001   Closing a portion of right-of-way known as North Black
                     Road
15-2002  8-19-2002   Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Cardin Street
                     (never published)
22-2002  11-4-2002   Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Cardin Street
24-2002  11-18-2002  Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Cambridge Way
                     in Winchester Park Subdivision
03-2003  1-6-2003    Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Fort Knox
                     National Company Drive
21-2003  8-4-2003    Closing a portion of right-of-way known as South Park Road
14-2004  7-19-2004   Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Buffalo Creek
                     Drive
23-2005  9-19-2005   Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Window Lane
26-2005  10-3-2005   Closing an unimproved alley off Park Avenue
30-2005  11-7-2005   Closing a portion of Helm Alley
08-2007  2-20-2007   Closing a portion of right-of-way off Veterans Way (access
                     road to Wise Lane)
09-2007  2-20-2007   Closing a portion of Henry Street
11-2007  3-5-2007    Closing a portion of right-of-way of Iqbal Drive
02-2008  4-7-2008    Closing a portion of right-of-way of Fairview Avenue
04-2008  4-7-2008    Closing Woodfield Drive
02-2009  2-2-2009    Closing new alley
03-2009  2-17-2009   Closing Old College Street Road
07-2009  6-15-2009   Closing former right-of-way of Saint John Road
24-2009  12-7-2009   Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Frontage Road
                     No. 1-L
08-2011  3-31-2011   Closing the right-of- way of W. Park Road
19-2011  9-19-2011   Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Towne Drive and
                     Waterford Place
21-2011  11-7-2011   Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Brittany Avenue
17-2012  8-20-2012   Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Vega Alley
21-2012  9-4-2012    Closing the right-of- way of Headquarters Court
1-2013   1-22-2013   Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Green Lane
7-2013   5-6-2013    Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Altec Drive
15-2014  8-18-2014   Closing/transferring a potion of the right-of- way of
                     Access Road No. 2
20-2014  10-13-2014  Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Scholar Drive
27-2015  12-15-2014  Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Nicholas Street
06-2015  5-4-2015    Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Sandlewood Court
08-2015  7-20-2015   Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Woodland Drive
09-2015  8-17-2015   Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Helm Court
19-2016  9-19-2016   Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Waterworks Drive
22-2016  11-21-2016  Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Strawberry Alley
                     (Lane) and entire unnamed alley off of Thomas Street
03-2017  5-15-2017   Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Washington Street
01-2018  1-18-2018   Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Long Avenue
02-2018  1-18-2018   Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Woodland Drive
24-2018  8-20-2018   Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Winterberry Drive
31-2018  11-5-2018   Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Altec Drive
18-2019  9-16-2019   Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Wedgewood
06-2020  5-11-2020   Closing/transferring the right-of-way of Altec Drive
18-2021  8-16-2021   Closing the right-of-way of an unnamed alley between North
                     Miles Street and Henry Street
02-2022  2-7-2022    Closing a portion of the right-of-way of Starlite Drive
14-2022  5-23-2022   Closing a portion of the right-of-way of Clifton Avenue
                    
 
TABLE III: SEWER ALLOCATIONS
Ord. No. Date Approved Location
Ord. No. Date Approved Location
28-1997  12-15-1997    North Dixie/Pine Valley
33-1998  12-21-1998    North Dixie/Pear Orchard Road NW
29-1999  9-7-1999      North Boundary
02-2004  2-24-2004     White Oak Drive/Ring Road/Pear Orchard Road
20-2004  10-4-2004     Rineyville Road
10-2006  5-15-2006     Addington Field/Hayden School Road
15-2007  4-16-2007     Sells-Robbins
16-2007  5-7-2007      Pear Orchard Road 1200 Block
21-2007  5-7-2007      Brittany Avenue
33-2007  11-5-2007     White Oak/Brett Drive
02-2011  2-22-2011     Billy Creek
                      
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES
KRS Cites Code Section
KRS Cites                                 Code Section
13B                                       120.06 ;
                                          120.99
15.380                                    35.38
15.402                                    35.38
15.520                                    35.37
18A                                       113.02
18A.225(2)                                113.02
18A.228                                   113.02
61                                        32.16
61.100                                    30.01
61.165                                    37.17
61.805                                    34.064
61.810                                    33.17;
                                          33.64
61.810 et seq.                            33.64
61.810(1)(f)                              35.37
61.815                                    33.17
                                          33.60;
61.870 through 61.884                     33.67;
                                          33.68;
                                          117.13
61.872 to 61.884                          33.20;
                                          34.035
61.878                                    118.41
62.020                                    31.01
62.060, et seq.                           120.06
65.205 to 65.209                          53.02
65.206(2)(b)                              53.08
65.206(2)(c)2                             53.07
65.207                                    53.06
65.207(4)(a)                              53.07
65.8801 to 65.8839                        34.030;
                                          34.031
65.8815(5)                                34.035
67.773                                    110.14
67.750(7)                                 110.01
82.082                                    33.03;
                                          151.01
82.600                                    72.99
82.600 through 82.640                     72.43;
                                          72.99
82.620                                    72.99
82.625                                    72.43
83A                                       31.15,
                                          32.15
83A.010(5)                                10.02
83A.010(6)                                10.02
83A.010(7)                                10.02
83A.010(8)                                10.02
83A.010(9)                                10.02
83A.010(10)                               10.02
83A.010(11)                               10.02
83A.030(1) and (2)                        30.02
83A.040(1), (3), (4), (7), (8), (9), (10) 31.16
83A.040(4)                                32.01
83A.060(5)                                Adopting Ordinance;
                                          10.16
83A.060(6)                                32.17
                                          10.02 ;
83A.065                                   120.27;
                                          120.99
83A.070                                   31.02
83A.075                                   31.02
83A.080                                   33.01
83A.080(1), (2)                           31.30
83A.080(3), (4)                           31.15
83A.130(1)                                30.01
83A.130(5)                                32.15
83A.130(11)                               32.16
83A.130(11), (12), (13)                   32.03
83A.175                                   32.02
90.260                                    35.37
90.300 through 90.410                     35.30
90.320(3)                                 35.38;
                                          35.39
90.350(1)                                 35.38;
                                          35.39
90.380                                    35.03
91A.360 et seq.                           34.089
91A.390                                   34.080
91A.010(8)                                10.02
91A.080                                   110.03
91A.390                                   121.03
91A.400                                   121.01
92.300                                    110.03
95.762(5)                                 35.38;
                                          35.39
95A.230                                   35.38;
                                          35.39
                                          152.01;
                                          152.02;
                                          154.001;
                                          154.009;
100                                       154.016—
                                          154.019;
                                          154.040;
                                          154.041;
                                          154.091
100.133 et seq.                           152.02
100.193                                   152.01
100.985 through 100.987                   154.091
100.9865                                  154.091
100.987                                   154.091
118                                       31.15
131.010(6)                                113.04
136.120                                   110.03
151                                       151.05
151.250                                   151.05;
                                          151.06
154.20-250 to 154.20-284                  110.03
183                                       34.016;
                                          154.073
183.132                                   34.016
183.133                                   34.016
189.010(19)                               70.01
189.270                                   74.02
189.287                                   91.116
189.394                                   Ch. 75
189.450(5)                                72.03
189.990(1)                                72.99
198B.060(5)                               150.01
198B.060(8)                               150.01;
                                          150.02
198B.990(1)                               150.99
218A.140 et seq.                          118.02
218B.010                                  154.009
219A                                      154.009
222.500 - 222.510                         100.05,
                                          100.99
226.010                                   112.01
                                          93.23;
227                                       133.01;
                                          133.03;
                                          133.04
227.320                                   72.12
227.700 through 227.752                   133.01
227.710                                   133.04
227.720                                   133.04
227.750                                   133.08
227.990(1)                                150.99
230                                       154.009
                                          120.03;
241                                       120.05;
                                          120.27
                                          120.02;
241 through 244                           120.05;
                                          120.06
241.010                                   120.08
241.100                                   120.06
241.150                                   120.06
241.160                                   120.06
241.170                                   120.06
                                          113.02;
242                                       120.03;
                                          120.05
                                          110.03;
243                                       120.03;
                                          120.05;
                                          120.27
243.030                                   120.08
243.0305                                  120.99
243.033                                   120.08
243.034                                   120.08
243.035                                   120.08
243.036                                   120.08
243.037                                   120.08
243.038                                   120.08
243.039                                   120.08
243.040                                   120.08
243.042                                   120.08
243.050                                   120.08
243.070                                   120.07;
                                          120.08
243.082                                   120.08
243.083                                   120.08
243.084                                   120.08
243.086                                   120.08 ;
                                          120.99
243.088                                   120.08
243.120                                   120.08
243.130                                   120.08
243.150                                   120.08
243.155                                   154.009
243.157                                   120.08
243.160                                   120.08
243.170                                   120.08
243.180                                   120.08
243.230                                   120.08
243.240                                   120.08
243.260                                   120.08
243.280                                   120.08
243.360                                   120.08
243.450                                   120.13
243.480                                   120.99
243.490                                   120.13 ;
                                          120.99
243.500                                   120.13 ;
                                          120.99
243.520                                   120.99
243.850                                   120.21
243.895                                   120.23;
                                          120.99
                                          120.03;
244                                       120.05;
                                          120.27
244.290                                   120.08
244.295                                   120.08
244.480                                   120.22
244.606                                   120.08
257.100(4)                                90.01;
                                          90.22
278.010(3)                                154.091
318.990                                   150.99
335B.010 through 335B070                  115.02
344                                       96.20
350                                       151.05
424                                       120.09
424.130(1)(d)                             35.35
424.170                                   120.09
446.010(1)                                10.02
446.010(2)                                10.02
446.010(6)                                10.02
446.010(9)                                10.02
446.010(10)                               10.02
446.010(13)                               10.02
446.010(14)                               10.02
446.010(15)                               10.02
446.010(17)                               10.02
446.010(18)                               10.02
446.010(23)                               10.02
446.010(25)                               10.02
446.010(28)                               10.02
446.010(31)                               10.02
446.010(33)                               10.02
446.010(37)                               10.02
446.010(43)                               10.02
446.010(46)                               10.02
446.010(47)                               10.02
446.010(49)                               10.02
446.020(1)                                10.03
446.020(2)                                10.03
446.030                                   10.04
446.060                                   10.05
446.080(1)                                10.03
446.080(3)                                10.03
446.080(4)                                10.03
446.100                                   10.07
446.110                                   10.08
506.120                                   118.02
510.040                                   118.02
510.050                                   118.02
510.060                                   118.02
510.070                                   118.02
510.080                                   118.02
510.090                                   118.02
510.110                                   118.02
510.120                                   118.02
510.130                                   118.02
510.140                                   118.02
510.150                                   118.02
517.050                                   118.02
522.040                                   119.07
                                          90.23;
525                                       90.24;
                                          90.26;
                                          90.27
525.130                                   90.23
529.020                                   118.02
529.040                                   118.02
529.100                                   118.02
531.020                                   118.02
531.030                                   118.02
531.040                                   118.02
531.300 through 531.370                   118.02
532.090(1)                                10.02
534.040                                   120.27
534.040(2)(a)                             10.02
534.040(2)(c)                             10.02
610                                       130.01
610.180                                   130.01
610.200                                   130.01
                                          
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Code Section
Prior Code        Code Section
10.01             10.01
10.02             10.02
10.03             10.03
10.04             10.04
10.06             10.05
10.07             10.06
10.08             10.07
10.09             10.08
10.10             10.09
10.11             10.10
10.12             10.11
10.13             10.12
10.14             10.13
10.15             10.14
10.17             10.16
10.99             10.99
30.01             30.01
30.02             30.02
31.01             31.01
31.02             31.02
31.20             31.15
31.21             31.16
31.22             31.17
31.35             31.30
32.01             32.01
32.02             32.02
32.03             32.03
32.20             32.15
32.21             32.16
32.22             32.17
34.01             34.001
34.05             34.015
34.06             34.016
34.90             34.030
34.91             34.031
34.92             34.032
34.93             34.033
34.94             34.034
34.95             34.035
34.96             34.036
34.97             34.037
34.98             34.038
34.99             34.039
34.100            34.040
34.101            34.041
34.102            34.042
34.103            34.043
34.104            34.044
36.01             36.01
36.01             37.01
37.00             35.01
37.01             35.15
37.02             35.16
37.17             35.03
37.20             35.02
50.01             50.02
50.02             50.03
51.01             51.01
51.02             51.02
51.03             51.03
51.04             51.04
51.05             51.05
51.06             51.06
51.15             51.20
51.16             51.21
51.17             51.22
51.18             51.23
51.19             51.24
51.20             51.25
51.21             51.26
51.22             51.27
51.23             51.28
51.24             51.29
52.01             52.01
52.02             52.02
52.03             52.03
52.04             52.04
52.05             52.05
52.23             52.06
52.30             52.20
52.31             52.99
70.01             70.01
70.02             70.02
70.03             70.03
70.04             70.04
70.05             70.05
70.15             70.20
70.16             70.21
70.17             70.22
70.18             70.23
70.19             70.24
71.01             71.01
71.04             71.02
71.05             71.03
72.01             72.01
72.02             72.02
72.03             72.03
72.04             72.04
72.05             72.05
72.06             72.06
72.07             72.07
72.08             72.08
72.09             72.09
72.10             72.10
72.11             72.11
72.12             72.12
72.25             72.25
72.26             72.26
72.27             72.27
72.50             72.40
72.50             74.03
72.53             72.41
72.54             72.42
72.56             72.43
72.70             Ch. 75, Schd. VII
72.71             Ch. 75, Schd. VII
72.99             72.99
73.02             73.01
73.03             73.02
73.04             73.03
74.01             74.01
74.02             74.02
74.03             74.03
74.04             74.03
74.05             Ch. 75, Schd. VI
Ch. 75, Schd. I   Ch. 75, Schd. I
Ch. 75, Schd. II  Ch. 75, Schd. II
Ch. 75, Schd. III Ch. 75, Schd. III
Ch. 75, Schd. IV  Ch. 75, Schd. IV
Ch. 75, Schd. V   Ch. 75, Schd. V
90.01             90.01
90.15             90.15
90.16             90.16
90.17             90.17
90.18             90.18
90.19             90.19
90.20             90.20
90.20             90.99
90.21             90.21
90.22             90.22
90.23             90.23
90.24             90.24
90.25             90.25
90.26             90.26
90.27             90.27
90.28             90.28
90.29             90.29
91.001            91.001
91.002            91.002
91.015            91.015
91.016            91.016
91.017            91.017
91.018            91.018
91.019            91.019
91.046            91.030
91.047            91.031
91.085            91.070
91.086            91.071
91.087            91.072
91.088            91.073
91.089            91.074
91.090            91.075
91.091            91.076
91.105            91.090
91.106            91.091
91.107            91.092
91.108            91.093
91.109            91.094
91.110            91.095
91.111            91.096
91.112            91.097
91.113            91.098
91.114            91.099
91.115            91.100
91.116            91.101
91.117            91.102
91.201            91.115
91.202            91.116
91.203            91.999
91.204            91.117
91.999            91.999
92.001            92.001
92.010            92.015
92.011            92.016
92.012            92.017
92.013            92.018
92.025            92.030
92.026            92.031
92.035            92.045
92.037            92.046
92.039            92.047
92.050            92.060
92.051            92.061
92.052            92.062
92.075            92.075
92.076            92.076
92.077            92.077
92.090            92.090
92.091            92.091
92.092            92.092
92.093            92.093
92.094            92.094
92.095            92.095
92.096            92.096
92.097            92.097
92.098            92.098
92.099            92.099
92.100            92.100
92.110            92.135
92.111            92.136
92.112            92.137
92.113            92.138
92.114            92.139
92.150            92.115
92.151            92.116
92.152            92.117
92.153            92.118
92.154            92.119
92.155            92.120
92.156            92.121
92.157            92.999
92.158            92.122
92.999            92.999
93.01             93.01
93.02             93.02
93.04             93.03
93.05             93.04
93.99             93.99
94.01             94.01
94.02             94.02
94.03             94.03
94.04             94.04
94.99             94.99
95.01             95.01
95.02             95.02
95.03             95.03
95.04             95.04
95.05             95.05
95.06             95.06
95.07             95.07
95.08             95.08
95.09             95.09
95.10             95.10
95.11             95.11
95.12             95.12
95.13             95.13
96.01             96.01
96.02             96.02
96.03             96.03
96.04             96.04
96.05             96.05
97.01             97.01
97.02             97.01
97.03             97.01
97.99             97.99
98.01             98.01
98.02             98.02
98.03             98.03
98.04             98.04
98.05             98.05
98.06             98.06
98.07             98.07
98.08             98.08
99.01             99.01
99.02             99.02
99.03             99.03
99.04             99.04
100.01            93.20
100.02            93.21
100.03            93.22
100.04            93.23
100.99            93.99
110.01            110.01
110.02            110.02
110.03            110.03
110.04            110.04
110.05            110.05
110.06            110.06
110.07            110.07
110.08            110.08
110.09            110.09
110.10            110.10
110.11            110.11
110.12            110.12
110.12            110.99
110.13            110.13
110.15            110.14
111.01            111.01
111.02            111.02
111.03            111.03
111.04            111.04
111.05            111.05
111.06            111.06
111.07            111.07
112.01            112.01
112.02            112.02
112.03            112.03
112.04            112.04
112.05            112.99
113.01            113.01
113.02            113.02
113.03            113.03
113.04            113.04
113.05            113.05
113.06            113.06
114.01            114.01
114.02            114.02
114.03            114.03
114.04            114.04
114.05            114.05
114.06            114.06
115.01            115.01
115.03            115.03
115.04            115.04
115.05            115.05
115.06            115.06
115.07            115.07
117.01            34.080
117.02            34.081
117.04            34.083
117.05            34.084
117.06            34.085
117.07            34.086
117.08            34.087
117.09            34.088
117.10            34.088
117.11            34.089
117.12            34.090
117.13            34.091
118.01            116.01
119.01            117.01
119.02            117.02
119.03            117.03
119.04            117.04
119.05            117.05
119.06            117.06
119.07            117.07
119.08            117.08
119.09            117.09
119.10            117.10
119.11            117.11
119.12            117.12
119.13            117.13
119.14            117.14
119.99            117.99
121.01            119.01
121.02            119.02
121.03            119.03
121.04            119.04
121.05            119.05
121.06            119.06
121.07            119.07
121.08            119.08
121.09            119.99
121.10            119.09
121.11            119.10
121.12            119.11
125.01            37.15
125.02            37.16
125.03            37.17
125.04            37.18
125.05            37.19
125.06            37.20
125.07            37.21
125.08            37.22
125.09            37.23
125.10            37.24
125.11            37.25
125.12            37.26
125.13            37.99
125.14            37.27
125.15            37.28
125.16            37.29
125.17            37.30
126.01            121.01
126.02            121.02
126.03            121.03
126.04            121.04
126.05            121.05
126.06            121.06
126.07            121.07
126.08            121.08
126.09            121.09
126.10            121.10
126.11            121.11
130.01            130.01
130.02            130.02
130.03            130.03
131.01            131.01
131.02            131.02
131.03            131.03
131.04            131.04
131.05            131.99
132.01            132.01
132.02            132.02
132.03            132.99
133.01            133.01
133.02            133.02
133.03            133.02
133.04            133.03
133.05            133.04
133.06            133.05
133.08            133.09
133.09            133.99
150.01            150.01
150.02            150.02
150.03            150.03
150.15            150.15
150.16            150.16
150.17            150.17
150.99            150.99
151.01            151.01
151.02            151.02
151.03            151.03
151.04            151.04
151.05            151.05
151.06            151.06
151.07            151.07
151.08            151.08
151.09            151.09
151.10            151.10
151.11            151.11
151.12            151.12
151.13            151.13
151.13            151.99
151.25            151.25
151.26            151.26
151.27            151.27
151.40            151.40
151.41            151.41
151.42            151.42
151.43            151.43
151.44            151.44
151.45            151.45
151.46            151.46
151.47            151.28
152.01            152.01
152.02            152.02
153.02            152.02
157.01            155.01
157.02            155.02
157.03            155.03
157.04            155.04
157.05            155.05
157.06            155.06
157.07            155.07
157.08            155.08
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.     Date Passed Description
                         Ch. 75, Schd. I;
-            - -         Ch. 75, Schd. II;
                         Ch. 75, Schd. III
-            9-4-1922    91.030
-            2-1-1926    116.01
-            8-7-1939    TSO Table I
-            8-7-1939    TSO Table I
-            8-7-1939    TSO Table I
-            11-6-1939   TSO Table I
-            11-6-1939   TSO Table I
-            11-6-1939   TSO Table I
-            9-12-1944   TSO Table I
-            11-6-1944   TSO Table I
-            6-3-1946    72.11
-            12-2-1946   72.40;
                         Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
1-1948       2-2-1948    TSO Table I
2-1948       2-2-1948    TSO Table I
3-1948       2-2-1948    TSO Table I
4-1948       2-2-1948    TSO Table I
-            3-15-1948   TSO Table I
Annex Ord. 1 3-15-1948   TSO Table I
Annex Ord. 2 3-15-1948   TSO Table I
Annex Ord. 3 3-15-1948   TSO Table I
-            5-12-1950   TSO Table II
-            8-7-1950    TSO Table II
-            11-6-1950   Ch. 75, Schd. I
7-2-51A      7-2-1951    TSO Table I
9-5-51A      9-5-1951    TSO Table I
9-12-51A     9-12-1951   TSO Table I
-            10-1-1951   TSO Table II
-            1-1-1952    32.16
9-5-51A      1-16-1952   TSO Table I
9-12-51A     1-16-1952   TSO Table I
-            3-3-1952    TSO Table II
3-17-52A     3-17-1952   TSO Table I
-            4-7-1952    74.01;
                         74.02
4-7-52A      4-7-1952    TSO Table I
3-17-52A     6-16-1952   TSO Table I
4-7-52A      6-16-1952   TSO Table I
-            7-21-1952   74.03
9-15-52      9-15-1952   TSO Table I
9-15-52      12-15-1952  TSO Table I
3-16-53      3-16-1953   TSO Table I
4-14-53      4-14-1953   TSO Table I
3-16-53      7-20-1953   TSO Table I
4-14-53      7-20-1953   TSO Table I
-            9-20-1954   72.42
-            5-16-1955   TSO Table II
-            5-16-1955   TSO Table II
-            1-16-1956   Ch. 75, Schd. III
-            2-20-1956   72.40;
                         Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
-            6-4-1956    72.40;
                         Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
-            8-20-1956   74.03
9-26-56      9-26-1956   TSO Table I
-            10-1-1956   Ch. 75, Schd. I
-            11-19-1956  130.02
                         51.01—
-            4-1-1957    51.03;
                         51.27
-            5-20-1957   TSO Table II
-            10-20-1958  TSO Table I
-            12-1-1958   TSO Table I
-            4-20-1959   51.04;
                         51.05
-            5-18-1959   111.01—
                         111.07
-            7-20-1959   TSO Table I
-            8-17-1959   73.01
-            8-24-1959   TSO Table I
-            9-21-1959   TSO Table I
-            10-5-1959   TSO Table I
-            3-7-1960    TSO Table I
-            3-7-1960    72.03
-            3-21-1960   95.01—
                         95.13
-            5-2-1960    TSO Table I
-            8-21-1961   TSO Table I
-            11-6-1961   TSO Table I
-            3-21-1962   TSO Table I
-            4-1-1963    TSO Table I
-            10-21-1963  TSO Table I
-            1-6-1964    TSO Table I
-            2-17-1964   150.99
-            10-5-1964   TSO Table I
-            1-4-1965    TSO Table I
-            5-1-1967    98.05
-            6-19-1967   72.42
-            6-3-1968    TSO Table I
-            9-3-1968    TSO Table I
-            12-2-1968   Ch. 75, Schd. I
-            1-6-1969    98.04
-            4-21-1969   50.02
-            6-16-1969   Ch. 75, Schd. III
-            6-16-1969   TSO Table II
-            1-19-1970   51.20—
                         51.23
-            3-2-1970    98.03
-            7-6-1970    152.02
-            11-16-1970  35.15
-            12-7-1970   150.03;
                         150.15
-            2-1-1971    98.03
-            3-15-1971   Ch. 75, Schd. III
-            5-17-1971   TSO Table I
-            6-21-1971   98.02
-            8-2-1971    TSO Table I
-            11-3-1971   TSO Table I
-            3-6-1972    72.41
                         51.03;
                         93.01;
-            4-3-1972    150.01;
                         150.15;
                         150.17;
                         150.99
-            5-5-1972    Ch. 75, Schd. II
-            5-15-1972   Ch. 75, Schd. IV
-            7-17-1972   96.01—
                         96.05
-            3-5-1973    TSO Table II
-            9-17-1973   Ch. 75, Schd. I
-            10-1-1973   72.41;
                         Ch. 75, Schd. III
-            12-3-1973   72.12
-            2-18-1974   93.01
-            3-18-1974   Ch. 75, Schd. VII
-            4-15-1974   Ch. 75, Schd. III
-            10-21-1974  Ch. 75, Schd. VI
-            3-17-1975   51.27
-            7-21-1975   TSO Table I
-            9-8-1975    TSO Table I
                         115.01;
-            2-23-1976   115.03—
                         115.07
5-1976       2-23-1976   TSO Table I
11-1976      4-19-1976   TSO Table I
27-1976      10-18-1976  TSO Table I
-            1-3-1977    51.28;
                         51.29
4-1977       1-17-1977   TSO Table I
6-1977       2-21-1977   TSO Table I
09-1977      3-21-1977   Ch. 75, Schd. VI
11-1977      4-4-1977    TSO Table I
                         98.01;
-            6-6-1977    98.02;
                         98.04;
                         98.05
22-1977      6-6-1977    Ch. 75, Schd. VI
5-1978       2-22-1978   TSO Table I
-            6-5-1978    93.01;
                         150.03
25-1978      8-14-1978   TSO Table I
-            11-6-1978   130.03
-            4-2-1979    Ch. 75, Schd. I
11-1979      4-2-1979    TSO Table I
14-1979      6-4-1979    TSO Table I
-            8-20-1979   72.03
22           9-4-1979    TSO Table II
                         114.01—
-            10-8-1979   114.04;
                         114.06
                         72.11;
-            6-16-1980   72.41;
                         72.99;
                         Ch. 75, Schd. III
49-1980      11-3-1980   TSO Table I
-            12-22-1980  98.06
1-1981       1-19-1981   TSO Table I
13-1981      4-6-1981    TSO Table I
15           5-4-1981    TSO Table II
-            6-1-1981    Ch. 75, Schd. II
-            6-15-1981   Ch. 75, Schd. II
30           8-3-1981    TSO Table II
36-1981      8-17-1981   Ch. 75, Schd. VI
41           9-8-1981    TSO Table II
42-1981      9-21-1981   TSO Table I
43-1981      9-21-1981   TSO Table I
-            10-19-1981  72.11
63-1981      12-21-1981  TSO Table I
5-1982       2-1-1982    TSO Table I
12-1982      3-15-1982   TSO Table I
23-1982      5-17-1982   TSO Table I
26-1982      6-7-1982    TSO Table I
-            7-19-1982   32.15
34           9-7-1982    TSO Table II
38-1982      10-4-1982   TSO Table I
42-1982      10-18-1982  TSO Table I
43           10-18-1982  TSO Table II
-            10-25-1982  32.16
50           12-6-1982   TSO Table II
-            2-7-1983    150.03
-            6-20-1983   152.02
24           6-20-1983   TSO Table II
28           8-15-1983   TSO Table II
32-1983      10-3-1983   TSO Table I
33-1983      11-21-1983  TSO Table I
-            12-5-1983   111.01—
                         111.07
5-1984       4-2-1984    TSO Table I
7-1984       6-4-1984    TSO Table I
8-1984       6-4-1984    TSO Table I
8A-1984      6-18-1984   TSO Table I
12-1984      7-23-1984   TSO Table I
14-1984      8-6-1984    TSO Table I
17-1984      9-4-1984    TSO Table I
21-1984      10-15-1984  TSO Table I
                         98.03;
-            12-17-1984  150.17;
                         150.99
-            4-15-1985   113.01—
                         113.06
10           4-18-1985   TSO Table II
-            5-20-1985   51.03;
                         71.03
14           5-20-1985   52.04;
                         52.05
-            7-1-1985    Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
23           7-1-1985    TSO Table II
33-1985      10-7-1985   TSO Table I
-            1-20-1986   93.01;
                         150.03
3-1986       1-20-1986   TSO Table I
9-1986       2-17-1986   TSO Table I
10           2-17-1986   TSO Table II
-            4-7-1986    Ch. 75, Schd. III
-            5-5-1986    93.03
-            5-19-1986   Ch. 75, Schd. III
-            6-5-1986    93.04
-            9-2-1986    98.06
-            9-15-1986   Ch. 75, Schd. IV
33           12-15-1986  TSO Table II
8-1987       5-4-1987    TSO Table I
11-1987      5-18-1987   TSO Table I
15-1987      6-15-1987   TSO Table I
16-1987      6-15-1987   TSO Table I
17-1987      6-15-1987   TSO Table I
20-1987      9-8-1987    TSO Table I
21-1987      9-8-1987    TSO Table I
22-1987      9-8-1987    TSO Table I
24           9-17-1987   TSO Table II
-            11-2-1987   51.20—
                         51.25
5            3-7-1988    TSO Table II
6-1988       3-7-1988    TSO Table I
7-1988       3-7-1988    TSO Table I
8-1988       3-7-1988    TSO Table I
                         51.20—
9-1988       3-21-1988   51.25;
                         51.27
16-1988      5-16-1988   TSO Table I
20-1988      6-6-1988    TSO Table I
21-1988      6-6-1988    TSO Table I
24-1988      6-6-1988    98.07
25-1988      6-20-1988   TSO Table I
26-1988      6-20-1988   TSO Table I
29-1988      7-18-1988   TSO Table I
30-1988      8-15-1988   152.01
33-1988      9-19-1988   TSO Table I
34-1988      10-17-1988  TSO Table I
35-1988      11-7-1988   150.17;
                         150.99
36           11-7-1988   Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
38-1988      12-5-1988   TSO Table I
2-1989       1-3-1989    TSO Table I
5-1989       2-6-1989    TSO Table I
6            2-6-1989    TSO Table II
7            2-6-1989    TSO Table II
9-1989       3-6-1989    Ch. 75, Schd. III
10           3-6-1989    Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
18           7-3-1989    TSO Table II
33-1989      11-20-1989  TSO Table I
34-1989      11-20-1989  TSO Table I
36           12-4-1989   TSO Table II
3-1990       2-5-1990    32.16
4-1990       2-19-1990   TSO Table I
7-1990       2-19-1990   TSO Table I
8            3-5-1990    Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
10-1990      3-19-1990   35.16
15-1990      5-21-1990   Ch. 75, Schd. VI
16           5-21-1990   TSO Table II
19           6-4-1990    TSO Table II
22-1990      8-6-1990    TSO Table I
23-1990      9-4-1990    Ch. 75, Schd. VI
26           9-17-1990   TSO Table II
30-1990      10-1-1990   TSO Table I
31-1990      10-15-1990  TSO Table I
33-1990      11-19-1990  Ch. 75, Schd. VI
3-1991       1-7-1991    TSO Table I
6            1-21-1991   150.01
11-1991      2-18-1991   TSO Table I
12           2-18-1991   TSO Table II
15           3-4-1991    TSO Table II
                         91.001;
20           5-20-1991   91.070—
                         91.076
25           5-20-1991   TSO Table II
24           6-3-1991    TSO Table II
                         150.01;
27           7-1-1991    150.02;
                         150.17;
                         150.99
29           8-5-1991    TSO Table II
30           8-17-1991   TSO Table II
31-1991      8-19-1991   32.16
34           10-21-1991  72.43
                         92.001;
                         92.015—
                         92.018;
                         92.030;
                         92.031;
                         92.045—
                         92.047;
37           11-4-1991   92.060—
                         92.062;
                         92.075—
                         92.077;
                         92.090—
                         92.097;
                         92.135—
                         92.139
39           12-4-1991   TSO Table II
5-1992       4-13-1992   TSO Table I
6-1992       4-13-1992   TSO Table I
7            4-27-1992   52.02
10           5-18-1992   Ch. 75, Schd. I
14-1992      7-13-1992   TSO Table I
15           8-17-1992   TSO Table II
18           11-16-1992  34.001
24           12-21-1992  91.090—
                         91.102
5            1-21-1993   Ch. 75, Schd. III
                         34.080,
4            2-8-1993    34.081,
                         34.083—
                         34.091
-            8-27-1993   Ch. 75, Schd. III
17           9-13-1993   TSO Table II
-            9-20-1993   Ch. 75, Schd. III
26           11-1-1993   72.43
                         51.20—
-            11-22-1993  51.24;
                         51.27
29-1993      12-6-1993   TSO Table I
30-1993      12-6-1993   TSO Table I
2            1-3-1994    Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
                         72.40—
3            1-3-1994    72.43;
                         Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
5-1994       2-21-1994   TSO Table I
6-1994       2-21-1994   TSO Table I
16           5-2-1994    TSO Table II
                         117.01—
18           5-9-1994    117.14;
                         117.99
21-1994      7-18-1994   99.03;
                         99.04
22           9-6-1994    TSO Table II
23-1994      9-6-1994    91.002
32           12-19-1994  Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
7-1995       5-1-1995    99.01;
                         99.02
15-1995      6-19-1995   TSO Table I
16           6-26-1995   TSO Table II
19           9-18-1995   TSO Table II
25           9-18-1995   Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
23           10-2-1995   TSO Table II
27           11-6-1995   TSO Table II
28           12-4-1995   90.99
1            1-2-1996    91.094
                         91.097;
1-96         1-2-1996    91.098;
                         91.100—
                         91.102
4            3-4-1996    Ch. 75, Schd. III
5            3-18-1996   Ch. 75, Schd. II
15           8-5-1996    Ch. 75, Schd. III
18           8-19-1996   TSO Table II
23           11-4-1996   TSO Table II
24-1996      11-4-1996   TSO Table I
29-1997      - -1997     52.05
1            1-6-1997    Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
7            3-17-1997   TSO Table II
9            4-7-1997    TSO Table II
12           4-21-1997   TSO Table I
10-1987      5-18-1997   TSO Table I
-            7-21-1997   93.02
27           11-17-1997  TSO Table II
30           12-1-1997   TSO Table II
28-1997      12-15-1997  TSO Table III
05-1998      3-16-1998   TSO Table II
15-1998      9-8-1998    34.001
26-1998      10-19-1998  TSO Table II
30-1998      12-7-1998   TSO Table I
31-1998      12-7-1998   TSO Table I
33-1998      12-21-1998  TSO Table III
01-1999      1-4-1999    TSO Table I
02-1999      1-4-1999    TSO Table I
04-1999      1-4-1999    TSO Table II
11-1999      3-1-1999    TSO Table II
12-1999      3-15-1999   TSO Table II
14-1999      4-5-1999    TSO Table II
13-1999      5-17-1999   TSO Table II
17-1999      6-21-1999   150.16
25-1999      9-7-1999    Ch. 75, Schd. III
26-1999      9-7-1999    Ch. 75, Schd. III
27-1999      9-7-1999    Ch. 75, Schd. III
29-1999      9-7-1999    TSO Table III
30           9-7-1999    Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
35           9-20-1999   52.03
38-1999      11-1-1999   TSO Table I
04-2000      - -2000     34.001
03-2000      2-11-2000   TSO Table II
5-2000       4-3-2000    35.01
11-2000      7-18-2000   TSO Table II
12-2000      8-7-2000    TSO Table II
                         119.01—
13-2000      8-21-2000   119.11;
                         119.99
                         90.15—
17-2000      9-25-2000   90.29;
                         90.99
23-2000      10-16-2000  TSO Table II
29-2000      12-18-2000  90.99
06-2001      3-19-2001   TSO Table II
                         131.01—
10-2001      4-16-2001   131.04;
                         131.99
12-2001      6-18-2001   TSO Table II
16-2001      8-6-2001    TSO Table I
26-2009      12-21-2001  TSO Table I
1            1-7-2002    150.01
04-2002      2-19-2002   98.01;
                         98.03
08-2002      6-17-2002   93.01;
                         93.02
11-2002      7-1-2002    52.02
                         132.01;
13-2002      8-5-2002    132.02;
                         132.99
14-2002      8-5-2002    114.06
15-2002      8-19-2002   TSO Table II
19-2002      9-16-2002   Ch. 75, Schd. II
22-2002      11-4-2002   TSO Table II
24-2002      11-18-2002  TSO Table II
02-2003      1-6-2003    150.16
03-2003      1-6-2003    TSO Table II
05-2003      2-18-2003   Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
9-2003       4-21-2003   34.001
09-2003      4-21-2003   34.030—
                         34.044
13-2003      6-16-2003   91.999;
                         92.999
13-2003      6-16-2003   93.99
14-2003      6-16-2003   150.16
                         51.01;
                         51.20—
18-2003      6-23-2003   51.25;
                         51.27;
                         51.28
                         72.99;
19-2003      6-23-2003   90.99;
                         94.99;
                         132.99
21-2003      8-4-2003    TSO Table II
22-2003      8-4-2003    Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
23-2003      8-18-2003   72.43
26-2003      9-2-2003    TSO Table I
27-2003      9-2-2003    34.035
33-2003      11-7-2003   52.03
34-2003      11-17-2003  97.01;
                         97.99
35-2003      11-17-2003  91.999
40-2003      12-15-2003  Ch. 75, Schd. III
11-2004      - -2004     34.001
02-2004      2-24-2004   TSO Table III
07-2004      5-17-2004   34.043
13-2004      7-19-2004   Ch. 75, Schd. II;
                         Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
14-2004      7-19-2004   TSO Table II
20-2004      10-4-2004   TSO Table III
21-2004      10-4-2004   51.06
24-2004      12-6-2004   Ch. 75, Schd. VI
01-2005      2-7-2005    Ch. 75, Schd. III
03-2005      2-21-2005   34.043;
                         132.99
07-2005      3-31-2005   35.02
10-2005      4-18-2005   Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
15-2005      6-20-2005   TSO Table I
16-2005      6-20-2005   TSO Table I
23-2005      9-19-2005   TSO Table II
26-2005      10-3-2005   TSO Table II
28-2005      10-17-2005  34.001
29-2005      10-17-2005  TSO Table I
30-2005      11-7-2005   TSO Table II
02-2006      1-3-2006    TSO Table I
05-2006      2-21-2006   Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
07-2006      3-6-2006    31.30
08-2006      3-20-2006   TSO Table I
                         110.01—
09-2006      5-8-2006    110.14;
                         110.99
10-2006      5-15-2006   TSO Table III
11-2006      6-5-2006    TSO Table I
14-2006      7-17-2006   34.001
17-2006      8-21-2006   TSO Table I
18-2006      9-5-2006    TSO Table I
                         37.15—
24-2006      10-16-2006  37.30;
                         37.99
25-2006      10-16-2006  TSO Table I
30-2006      12-4-2006   TSO Table I
02-2007      2-20-2007   52.20;
                         52.99
04-2007      2-20-2007   34.043
05-2007      2-20-2007   37.17
08-2007      2-20-2007   TSO Table II
09-2007      2-20-2007   TSO Table II
01-2007      3-5-2007    155.01—
                         155.08
11-2007      3-5-2007    TSO Table II
13-2007      4-2-2007    Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
15-2007      4-16-2007   TSO Table III
20-2007      4-16-2007   TSO Table I
22-2007      4-23-2007   121.01—
                         121.11
16-2007      5-7-2007    TSO Table III
21-2007      5-7-2007    TSO Table III
23-2007      5-21-2007   121.02
26-2007      6-2-2007    150.01;
                         150.02
                         151.01—
                         151.13;
                         151.25—
27-2007      7-16-2007   151.28;
                         151.40—
                         151.46;
                         151.99
32-2007      9-14-2007   151.41
                         151.01;
32-2007      9-17-2007   151.07;
                         151.28
32-2008      9-17-2007   151.46
-            11-5-2007   Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
33-2007      11-5-2007   TSO Table III
35-2007      11-5-2007   52.03
36-2007      11-5-2007   Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
38-2007      11-19-2007  51.23—
                         51.29
02-2008      4-7-2008    TSO Table II
03-2008      4-7-2008    150.01
04-2008      4-7-2008    TSO Table II
                         154.001—
                         154.020;
                         154.035—
                         154.042;
                         154.055—
                         154.067;
                         154.069—
                         154.075;
                         154.085—
                         154.091;
                         154.105—
                         154.116;
                         154.130—
                         154.136;
06-2008      6-16-2008   154.150—
                         154.164;
                         154.175—
                         154.192;
                         154.205—
                         154.217;
                         154.230—
                         154.232;
                         154.245—
                         154.252;
                         154.265—
                         154.271;
                         154.285—
                         154.291;
                         154.999;
                         Ch. 154, App. A
07-2008      6-16-2008   34.043
08-2008      6-16-2008   150.16
                         133.01;
                         133.03—
10-2008      6-16-2008   133.05;
                         133.09;
                         133.99
14-2008      11-17-2008  154.007;
                         154.009
20-2008      12-22-2008  34.030
                         92.115—
21-2008      12-22-2008  92.122;
                         92.999
22-2008      12-22-2008  34.043
01-2009      1-20-2009   31.30
02-2009      2-2-2009    TSO Table II
03-2009      2-17-2009   TSO Table II
05-2009      5-18-2009   154.007
07-2009      6-15-2009   TSO Table II
                         154.009;
                         154.056—
                         154.067;
                         154.069—
                         154.073;
08-2009      5-18-2009   154.136;
                         154.159;
                         154.181;
                         154.231;
                         154.247;
                         154.250;
                         154.252
                         112.01—
10-2009      7-20-2009   112.04;
                         112.99
11-2009      8-17-2009   150.16
14-2009      8-24-2009   150.03
                         154.063;
                         154.064;
                         154.072;
12-2009      9-8-2009    154.205;
                         154.207—
                         154.210;
                         154.215;
                         154.217
13-2009      9-8-2009    Ch. 75, Schd. V
16-2009      9-8-2009    121.03;
                         121.05
                         154.042;
23-2009      11-16-2009  154.065;
                         154.088
24-2009      12-7-2009   TSO Table II
                         93.20—
25-2009      12-7-2009   93.23;
                         93.99
01-2010      2-16-2010   TSO Table I
                         133.01;
04-2010      6-7-2010    133.03—
                         133.05
12-2010      10-11-2010  Ch. 75, Schd. III
13-2010      10-11-2010  Ch. 75, Schd. III
14-2010      10-11-2010  Ch. 75, Schd. III
16-2010      10-11-2010  Ch. 75, Schd. III
17-2010      11-1-2010   Ch. 75, Schd. II
18-2010      12-20-2010  TSO Table I
19-2010      12-20-2010  TSO Table I
02-2011      2-22-2011   TSO Table III
                         112.15—
03-2011      2-22-2011   112.20;
                         112.99
                         154.009;
                         154.055—
                         154.067;
                         154.069—
05-2011      2-7-2011    154.073;
                         154.135;
                         154.163;
                         154.252;
                         154.289
08-2011      3-31-2011   TSO Table II
11-2011      6-6-2011    TSO Table I
13-2011      6-20-2011   112.17;
                         112.20
                         133.02—
14-2011      6-20-2011   133.04;
                         133.99
                         154.061—
                         154.067;
-            9-6-2011    154.072;
                         154.073;
                         154.217;
                         154.247
19-2011      9-19-2011   TSO Table II
                         154.009;
                         154.055—
                         154.063;
20-2011      10-17-2011  154.066—157.067;
                         154.069—
                         154.073;
                         154.113;
                         154.115
21-2011      11-7-2011   TSO Table II
                         118.01—
                         118.04;
                         118.15—
23-2011      11-21-2011  118.22;
                         118.35—
                         118.44;
                         118.99
24-2011      11-21-2011  151.05
25-2011      11-21-2011  93.03
                         154.009;
                         154.055—
                         154.060;
                         154.062—
26-2011      11-21-2011  154.067;
                         154.069;
                         154.071;
                         154.160;
                         154.164
27-2011      12-21-2011  35.03
01-2012      1-17-2012   150.03
04-2012      2-21-2012   114.06
05-2012      3-5-2012    Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
                         91.045—
06-2012      4-2-2012    91.057;
                         91.999
                         156.01—
07-2012      4-2-2012    156.12;
                         156.99
08-2012      6-4-2012    133.06;
                         133.07
                         51.01;
                         51.04;
11-2012      6-18-2012   51.05;
                         51.20—
                         51.27
12-2012      6-18-2012   52.03
                         72.40—
13-2012      7-16-2012   72.44;
                         72.99
13-2012      7-16-2012   Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
14-2012      7-16-2012   98.02
16-2012      8-6-2012    34.060—
                         34.068
10-2012      8-20-2012   110.03
17-2012      8-20-2012   TSO Table II
21-2012      9-4-2012    TSO Table II
                         154.009;
                         154.042;
                         154.055—
                         154.060;
                         154.062;
                         154.063;
                         154.065;
27-2012      12-3-2012   154.089;
                         154.134;
                         154.189;
                         154.192;
                         154.212;
                         154.217;
                         154.250;
                         154.251
28-2012      12-17-2012  Ch. 75, Schd. III
29-2012      12-17-2012  31.16;
                         32.01
30-2012      12-17-2012  31.30
1-2013       1-22-2013   TSO Table II
02-2013      3-4-2013    52.02
4-2013       4-15-2013   TSO Table I
5-2013       4-15-2013   TSO Table I
06-2013      4-15-2013   Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
7-2013       5-6-2013    TSO Table II
8-2013       6-3-2013    TSO Table I
09-2013      6-3-2013    Ch. 75, Schd. V
12-2013      8-19-2013   34.001;
                         34.035
20-2013      10-14-2013  Ch. 75, Schd. V
23-2013      11-18-2013  TSO Table I
26-2013      12-2-2013   TSO Table I
27-2013      12-2-2013   52.03
07-2014      2-18-2014   52.03;
                         52.05
                         154.009;
                         154.055—
                         154.061;
                         154.063—
                         154.066;
                         154.069—
                         154.073;
                         154.089;
                         154.090;
                         154.106;
10-2014      4-7-2014    154.107;
                         154.132;
                         154.133;
                         154.160;
                         154.189;
                         154.207;
                         154.215;
                         154.217;
                         154.251;
                         154.252;
                         154.265;
                         154.271
11-2014      5-19-2014   TSO Table I
15-2014      8-18-2014   TSO Table II
20-2014      10-13-2014  TSO Table II
21-2014      10-20-2014  TSO Table I
22-2014      10-20-2014  Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
24-2014      12-1-2014   TSO Table I
26-2014      12-15-2014  Ch. 75, Schd. II
27-2015      12-15-2014  TSO Table II
                         154.009;
                         154.061—
                         154.067;
28-2014      12-15-2014  154.085;
                         154.089;
                         154.134;
                         154.135;
                         154.252
04-2015      5-4-2015    TSO Table I
                         154.009;
                         154.055—
                         154.063;
05-2015      5-4-2015    154.065;
                         154.066;
                         154.069;
                         154.192
06-2015      5-4-2015    TSO Table II
08-2015      7-20-2015   TSO Table II
09-2015      8-17-2015   TSO Table II
11-2015      9-8-2015    TSO Table I
12-2015      9-21-2015   Ch. 75, Schd. III
                         121.25—
19-2015      11-16-2015  121.30;
                         121.99
20-2015      11-16-2015  93.05;
                         93.99
22-2015      12-14-2015  TSO Table I
01-2016      1-4-2016    Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
07-2016      5-16-2016   52.02
08-2016      5-16-2016   121.27
10-2016      6-20-2016   31.30
11-2016      6-20-2016   35.03
18-2016      9-19-2016   Ch. 75, Schd. III
19-2016      9-19-2016   TSO Table II
20-2016      11-7-2016   Ch. 75, Schd. VI
22-2016      11-21-2016  TSO Table II
                         34.030;
                         34.034;
                         34.039;
                         34.040;
                         34.044—
                         34.046;
                         154.055—
                         154.064;
                         154.066—
24-2016      12-19-2016  154.067;
                         154.069—
                         154.073;
                         154.106;
                         154.107;
                         154.189;
                         154.208;
                         154.217;
                         154.265;
                         154.266
03-2017      5-15-2017   TSO Table II
                         153.001—
                         153.006;
                         153.020—
                         153.027;
                         153.040—
                         153.045;
                         153.060—
                         153.066;
                         153.080—
                         153.083;
                         153.095—
                         153.101;
                         153.115—
04-2017      5-15-2017   153.119;
                         153.130—
                         153.133;
                         153.145—
                         153.153;
                         153.165—
                         153.168;
                         153.180—
                         153.186;
                         153.200—
                         153.206;
                         153.220—
                         153.223;
                         153.999
                         154.009;
                         154.042;
                         154.055—
                         154.065;
                         154.069;
05-2017      6-5-2017    154.071;
                         154.072;
                         154.074;
                         154.107;
                         154.108;
                         154.160;
                         154.217
07-2017      6-19-2017   133.06
08-2017      6-19-2017   Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
11-2017      9-5-2017    154.063;
                         154.064
                         154.062;
15-2017      9-18-2017   154.072;
                         154.217
16-2017      9-18-2017   70.06;
                         70.99
32-2018      - -2018     TSO Table I
01-2018      1-18-2018   TSO Table II
02-2018      1-18-2018   TSO Table II
08-2018      2-20-2018   34.001
09-2018      2-20-2018   31.30
11-2018      4-16-2018   TSO Table I
19-2018      5-21-2018   Ch. 75, Schd. II
                         154.042;
14-2018      6-4-2018    154.065;
                         154.248
15-2018      6-4-2018    TSO Table I
18-2018      6-4-2018    37.23
24-2018      8-20-2018   TSO Table II
26-2018      9-17-2018   150.01
                         50.02;
                         51.02—
                         51.04;
                         51.06;
27-2018      9-17-2018   51.20—
                         51.22;
                         51.29;
                         52.01;
                         52.03—
                         52.05
31-2018      11-5-2018   TSO Table II
32-2018      12-3-2018   116.15—
                         116.17
33-2018      12-3-2018   Ch. 75, Schd. II
-            12-16-2018  92.098—
                         92.100
34-2018      12-17-2018  TSO Table I
06-2019      4-15-2019   98.03;
                         98.99
10-2019      5-20-2019   Ch. 75, Schd. II;
                         Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
11-2019      5-20-2019   92.031
18-2019      9-16-2019   TSO Table II
22-2019      9-30-2019   35.30—
                         35.39
                         110.01—
                         110.03;
25-2019      11-4-2019   110.13;
                         121.01;
                         121.02
27-2019      12-2-2019   TSO Table I
                         154.009;
                         154.055—
04-2020      4-20-2020   154.060;
                         154.065;
                         154.072
06-2020      5-11-2020   TSO Table II
08-2020      6-15-2020   Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
                         154.009;
                         154.063;
09-2020      8-3-2020    154.064;
                         154.285;
                         154.287;
                         154.288
10-2020      8-17-2020   52.02
11-2020      9-8-2020    Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
15-2020      9-28-2020   TSO Table I
22-2020      11-16-2020  TSO Table I
25-2020      12-14-2020  Ch. 75, Schd. VIII
02-2021      1-19-2021   TSO Table II
03-2021      3-1-2021    TSO Table I
04-2021      4-19-2021   72.13
05-2021      4-19-2021   154.132,
                         154.250
12-2021      6-21-2021   TSO Table I
17-2021      8-16-2021   Adopting Ordinance
18-2021      8-16-2021   TSO Table II
23-2021      10-18-2021  90.30;
                         90.99
25-2021      11-1-2021   TSO Table I
                         71.15—
26-2021      11-15-2021  71.31;
                         71.99
02-2022      2-7-2022    TSO Table II
                         154.060—
                         154.063;
                         154.065;
03-2022      2-7-2022    154.088;
                         154.132;
                         154.211;
                         154.217
11-2022      5-16-2022   154.065
12-2022      5-23-2022   TSO Table I
14-2022      5-23-2022   TSO Table II
16-2022      6-13-2022   TSO Table I
18-2022      7-11-2022   TSO Table I
22-2022      8-15-2022   53.01—
                         53.08
24-2022      9-19-2022   35.40
31-2022      11-7-2022   TSO Table I
                         120.01—
34-2022      11-7-2022   120.27;
                         120.99
37-2022      12-5-2022   34.082
03-2023      3-6-2023    TSO Table I
05-2023      3-27-2023   120.40
09-2023      5-31-2023   35.38
11-2023      6-12-2023   TSO Table I
12-2023      6-12-2023   TSO Table I
13-2023      6-26-2023   110.03
                         154.058—
                         154.060;
                         154.062—
                         154.065;
17-2023      8-21-2023   154.069;
                         154.071;
                         154.072;
                         154.189;
                         154.192;
                         154.193
18-2023      8-21-2023   121.25;
                         121.28
22-2023      9-18-2023   32.16;
                         34.001
23-2023      10-16-2023  TSO Table I
24-2023      11-20-2023  Ch. 75, Sch. III
                         154.250;
25-2023      11-20-2023  154.252 -
                         154.254
                         100.01—
1-2024       1-16-2024   100.05;
                         100.99
02-2024      4-8-2024    TSO Table I
03-2024      4-8-2024    Ch. 75, Sch. VIII
04-2024      4-8-2024    Ch. 75, Sch. VIII
09-2024      5-20-2024   TSO Table I
13-2024      7-8-2024    52.02
                         154.009;
                         154.063;
24-2024      11-18-2024  154.064;
                         154.066;
                         154.067
25-2024      11-18-2024  154.009;
                         154.217
                         120.01—
26-2024      12-2-2024   120.27;
                         120.99
01-2025      1-13-2025   TSO Table I
02-2025      1-13-2025   TSO Table I
03-2025      1-13-2025   TSO Table I
05-2025      2-18-2025   TSO Table I
07-2025      4-7-2025    TSO Table I
08-2025      4-7-2025    TSO Table I
09-2025      4-7-2025    TSO Table I
10-2025      4-7-2025    52.03;
                         52.05
11-2025      4-21-2025   52.02
                         33.01;
                         33.15—
                         33.26;
16-2025      8-4-2025    33.40—
                         33.47;
                         33.60—
                         33.68;
                         33.99
                         154.009;
                         154.042;
17-2025      8-4-2025    154.055—
                         154.063;
                         154.068—
                         154.080
                         154.059;
                         154.060;
18-2025      8-18-2025   154.072;
                         154.207;
                         154.212;
                         154.217
22-2025      8-18-2025   TSO Table I
                        
 
 
