Fort Wright, Kentucky
Code of Ordinances
2025 S-35 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 05-2025, passed 6-4-25; and
State legislation current through KRS 2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
[City_of_Fort_Wright,_Kentucky_Home_Page]
CITY OFFICIALS OF
FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY
COUNCIL
COUNCILMEMBER         Dave Abeln
COUNCILMEMBER         Jason Collins
COUNCILMEMBER         Scott Wall
COUNCILMEMBER         Jay Weber
COUNCILMEMBER         Bernie Wessels
COUNCILMEMBER         Margie Witt
CITY OFFICIALS
MAYOR                 David Hatter
CITY ADMINISTRATOR    Jill Cain Bailey
CITY CLERK            Kerrie Holland
FIRE CHIEF            Stephen Schewe
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR Jeff Bethell
POLICE CHIEF          Jonathan Colwell
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 378-1987
   AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY, APPROVING, ADOPTING, AND
ENACTING AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING COMPANY'S KENTUCKY CODE AS THE CODIFIED
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City are
inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and substance
for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety, and welfare
of the City and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and
   WHEREAS, The American Legal Publishing Company has published a Code of
Ordinances which arranges and classifies the City of Fort Wright's ordinances
for adoption by the City; and
   WHEREAS, KRS 83A.060(8) establishes requirements for the maintenance and
indexing of the ordinances of the City; and
   WHEREAS, KRS 83A.060(5) authorizes the City to adopt standard codes and
codifications of entire bodies of local legislation by reference.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY:
                                 SECTION I
   American Legal Publishing Company's Code of Ordinances, as reviewed and
approved by the legislative body and dated June 3, 1987, is adopted.
                                 SECTION II
   A summary of the subjects contained in the Kentucky Basic Code, as adopted,
is as follows:
                                 TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter 10. General Provisions. This chapter contains general provisions and
rules of construction that are operative throughout the code.
   Chapter 11. Ordinances Repealed and Saved. This chapter lists ordinances of
the city specifically saved and those specifically repealed by adoption of the
code.
                                 TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter 30. Mayor-Council Plan. This chapter contains provisions dealing
with the Mayor, City Council, and the Mayor-Council Plan of government.
   Chapter 31. City Officials. This chapter contains provisions dealing with
city officers and employees.
   Chapter 32. City Council. This chapter contains provisions dealing with
Councilmembers, rules of procedure, and passage and maintenance of ordinances.
   Chapter 33. Finance and Revenue. This chapter contains provisions dealing
with municipal financial administration and municipal improvements financed by
assessments.
                                 TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter 70. General Provisions. This chapter contains provisions applicable
to the entire title and provisions dealing with traffic-control devices.
   Chapter 71. Traffic Rules. This chapter contains provisions governing the
operation of vehicles, as well as provisions concerning accidents and parades.
   Chapter 72. Parking Regulations. This chapter contains provisions governing
the parking of vehicles, impoundment of vehicles, and snow emergencies.
   Chapter 73. Bicycles and Motorcycles. This chapter contains provisions
governing the operation of bicycles, motorcycles, and similar vehicles.
                                 TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter 90. Animals. This chapter contains provisions dealing with animals
running at large; the control and treatment of animals in general; and the
control, treatment, and licensing of dogs in particular.
   Chapter 91. Streets and Sidewalks. This chapter contains provisions
governing streets and sidewalks in the areas of excavations and construction;
road and bridge projects; and obstructions.
   Chapter 92. Nuisances. This chapter contains provisions governing conditions
which constitute nuisances and the procedure for abatement of nuisances.
   Chapter 93. Fireworks and Explosives. This chapter contains regulations
dealing with fireworks, explosives, and fire prevention.
   Chapter 94. Littering. This chapter contains regulations dealing with
littering, hauling loose materials, and posting notices.
                                 TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter 110. General Licensing Provisions. This chapter contains general
provisions dealing with the licensing of trades, businesses, and professions in
the city.
   Chapter 111. Prohibited Business and Commercial Activities. This chapter
lists references to sections of the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters 500
through 534) which relate to business and commercial activities and the
appropriate penalty classes.
   Chapter 112. Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants, and Solicitors. This chapter
contains provisions dealing with the licensing and regulation of peddlers,
itinerant merchants, and solicitors.
                                 TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter 130. Offenses Against Persons. This chapter lists references to
sections of the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters 500 through 534) which relate
to offenses against persons and the appropriate penalty classes.
   Chapter 131. Family Offenses. This chapter lists references to sections of
the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters 500 through 534) which relate to offenses
against the family and theappropriate penalty classes.
   Chapter 132. Offenses Against Property. This chapter lists references to
sections of the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters 500 through 534) which relate
to offenses against property and the appropriate penalty classes.
   Chapter 133. Offenses Against Public Morals. This chapter lists references
to sections of the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters 500 through 534) which
relate to offenses against public morals and the appropriate penalty classes.
   Chapter 135. Offenses Against Public Administration and Justice.
This chapter lists references to sections of the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS
Chapters 500 through 534) which relate to public administration and justice and
the appropriate penalty classes.
   Chapter 136. Offenses Against Public Order. This chapter lists references to
sections of the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters 500 through 534) which relate
to public order and the appropriate penalty classes.
   Chapter 137. Sexual Offenses. This chapter lists references to sections of
the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters 500 through 534) which relate to sexual
offenses and the appropriate penalty classes.
   Chapter 138. Inchoate Offenses. This chapter lists references to sections of
the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters 500 through 534) which relate to inchoate
offenses and the appropriate penalty classes.
   Chapter 139. General Penalty for Title XIII. This chapter sets out statutory
provisions governing fines and imprisonment for misdemeanors and felonies
listed in Title XIII.
                                 SECTION III
   A copy of the Code of Ordinances, as adopted, shall accompany this ordinance
and shall be made a part of the permanent records of the City pursuant to KRS
83A.060(5).
                                 SECTION IV
   Any and all ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance shall be and hereby
are repealed to the extent of said conflict.
                                 SECTION V
   This ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its
passage, publication and recording, according to law.
   PASSED by the City Council this lst day of July, 1987.
                        CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY a municipal corporation
of the fourth class
                        BY:  Joseph E. Nienaber
                            MAYOR
FIRST READING: June 3, 1987
SECOND READING: July 1, 1987
ATTEST:  Linda Meeks
      CITY CLERK
PUBLISHED: July 22, 1987
APPROVED: July 1, 1987
ORDINANCE NO. 511-95
AN ORDINANCE RE-ENACTING AND RE-ADOPTING BY REFERENCE THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT AS REVISED BY THE 1994 S-8 SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE
PREPARED BY BURLINGTON PUBLISHED SYSTEMS.
      WHEREAS, Burlington Publishing Systems of Florence, Kentucky has prepared
the 1994 S-8 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort Wright,
which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature duly
enacted by the city since the S-7 revision of the Code was approved by
ordinance; and
      WHEREAS, the 1994 S-8 Supplement to the Fort Wright Code of Ordinances
contains revisions to various code provisions made necessary by changes in the
Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
      WHEREAS, the adoption of these revisions will bring the Fort Wright Code
of Ordinances up-to-date and into conformance with the Kentucky Revised
Statutes; and
      WHEREAS, the Fort Wright City Council acknowledges the necessity of
revision and updating the code so that all current laws of the city of a
general and permanent nature are set forth therein and so that the Code is in
conformance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
      NOW, THEREFORE, Be it ordained by the City of Fort Wright, Kentucky as
follows:
      1.   That the Fort Wright Code of Ordinances, as revised and updated by
the supplement prepared by Burlington Publishing Systems which supplement is
attached hereto, be and the same is hereby re-enacted and re-adopted by
reference as if fully set forth in this ordinance.
      2.   This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and publication according to law.
      Duly enacted after second reading by the Fort Wright City Council on this
the 14th day of September, 1995.
 
                        Cindy J. Pinto /s/
                        Mayor
ATTEST:   Jody Anderson /s/
      City Clerk
Published:   7/21/95
First Reading:    9/6/95
Second Reading: 9/14/95
Ordinance No. 544-97
   AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT ENACTING AS AN ORDINANCE, A CODE OF
ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING
CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED
IN THE CODE.
   WHEREAS, the present general ordinances of the City of Fort Wright are
incomplete and inadequate and the manner of arrangement, classification and
indexing thereof is insufficient to meet the immediate needs of the City; and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the Commonwealth of Kentucky empower
and authorize the Legislative Body of this City to revise, amend, restate,
codify and to compile any existing ordinance or ordinances and all new
ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate the
ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, the Legislative Body of the City of Fort Wright has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of
a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinances in book form:
   NOW, THEREFORE, Be it ordained by the legislative body of the City of Fort
Wright, Kentucky that:
   SECTION 1
The general ordinances of the City of Fort Wright as herein revised, amended,
restated, codified, and compiled in book form are adopted as and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort Wright."
   SECTION 2
The code as adopted in Section I shall consist of the attached titles,
(attachment A).
   SECTION 3
All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects, treated in the Code shall be
deemed repealed from and after the effective date of the Code, except as they
are included and preordained in whole or in part in the Code; provided that
such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any
right established prior to the effective date of the Code, nor shall such
repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money,
annexing or detaching territory, establishing franchises or granting special
rights to certain persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the
issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing public improvements,
authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the
purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or accepting easements
or plats, accepting dedications of land to public use, vacating or setting the
boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal affect any
other ordinances of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not
contained in or covered by the Code.
   SECTION 4
The Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and approval
by the City Legislative Body and the Clerk of the City of Fort Wright is hereby
authorized and ordered to file a copy of the Code in the Office of the City
Clerk.
   SECTION 5
The Code shall be in full force and effect from and after its date of passage,
approval and publication as required by law. The Code shall be presumptive
evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all provisions,
sections, penalties and regulations therein contained, and of the date of
passage, and that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded and approved,
and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been
given.
Passed by the City Council this 5th day of March, 1997

            City of Fort Wright, Kentucky
            A Municipal Corporation of the Fourth Class.
            Cindy J. Pinto /s/
            Mayor

First Reading: 02/18/97
Second Reading: 3/5/97
Published: 3/13/97

Attest: Judy Anderson /s/
    City Clerk
Ordinance No. 554-97
      AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT ENACTING AS AN ORDINANCE, A CODE
OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND
COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN THE CODE.
   WHEREAS, the present general ordinances of the City of Fort Wright are
incomplete and inadequate and the manner of arrangement, classification and
indexing thereof is insufficient to meet the immediate needs of the City; and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the Commonwealth of Kentucky empower
and authorize the Legislative Body of this City to revise, amend, restate,
codify and to compile any existing ordinance or ordinances and all new
ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate the
ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
   Whereas, the Legislative Body of the City of Fort Wright has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of
a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinances in book for;
   NOW, THEREFORE, Be it ordained by the legislative body of the City of Fort
Wright, Kentucky that:
   SECTION 1
The general ordinances of the City of Fort Wright as herein revised, amended,
restated, codified, and compiled in book form are adopted as and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort Wright."
   SECTION 2
The code as adopted in Section I shall consist of the attached titles,
(attachment A - Zoning; attachment B - General).
   SECTION 3
All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects, treated in the Code shall be
deemed repealed from and after the effective date of the Code, except as they
are included and preordained in whole or in part in the Code; provided that
such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any
right established prior to the effective date of the Code, nor shall such
repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money,
annexing or detaching territory, establishing franchises or granting special
rights to certain persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the
issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing public improvements,
authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the
purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or accepting easements
or plats, accepting dedications of land to public use, vacating or setting the
boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal affect any
other ordinances of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not
contained in or covered by the Code.
   SECTION 4
The Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and approval
by the City Legislative Body and the Clerk of the City of Fort Wright is hereby
authorized and ordered to file a copy of the Code in the Office of the City
Clerk.
   SECTION 5
The Code shall be in full force and effect from and after its date of passage,
approval and publication as required by law. The Code shall be presumptive
evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all provisions,
sections, penalties and regulations therein contained, and of the date of
passage, and that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded and approved,
and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been
given.
Passed by the City Council this 5th day of March, 1997

               City of Fort Wright, Kentucky
               A Municipal Corporation of the Fourth Class.

               Cindy J. Pinto /s/
               Mayor, Cindy J. Pinto
First Reading: 08/23/97
Second Reading: 9/03/97
Published: 9/12/97

Attest: Jody Anderson /s/
   City Clerk
ORDINANCE NO. 574-98
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES AND
ZONING CODE OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 1998 supplement to the Code of Ordinances and the Zoning Code of
the City of Fort Wright. The supplement contains all ordinances of a general
nature and zoning issues enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of
Ordinances and the Zoning Code of the municipality;
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances and the Zoning Code
which are based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes;
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections in
accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT,
KENTON COUNTY.
   SECTION I
That the 1998 supplement to the Code of Ordinances and Zoning Code of the City
of Fort Wright, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation
of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if fully set out in its entirety.
   SECTION II
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its
passage, publication and recording, according to law.
Passed by the City Council this 2nd day of September, 1998.
               City of Fort Wright, Kentucky
               A Municipal Corporation of the Fourth Class
               Paul Hiltz /s/ 
               Mayor Paul C. Hiltz
ATTEST:   Jody Anderson /s/
      City Clerk
First Reading:      8/18/98
Second Reading:   9/2/98
Published:      9/10/98
ORDINANCE NO. 11-01
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES AND
ZONING CODE OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2001 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort
Wright, Kentucky, which Supplement contains all Ordinances of a general nature
and zoning issues enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of this city; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes;
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections in
accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT,
KENTON COUNTY.
   SECTION I
That the 2001 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort Wright,
Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if
fully set out in its entirety.
   SECTION II
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent
of such conflict, if any, hereby repealed.
   SECTION III
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its
passage, publication and recording, according to law.
Passed by the City Council this 24th day of October, 2001.
               City of Fort Wright, Kentucky
               A Municipal Corporation of the Fourth Class
                           Gene Weaver /s/ 
                           Mayor Paul C. Hiltz
ATTEST:   Joyce Woods /s/
         City Clerk
First Reading:      10/10/01
Second Reading:   10/24/01
Published:   10/31/01
ORDINANCE NO. 1-06
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES AND
ZONING CODE OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2005 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort
Wright, Kentucky, which Supplement contains all Ordinances of a general nature
and zoning issues enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of this city; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes;
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections in
accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT,
KENTON COUNTY.
SECTION I
That the 2005 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort Wright,
Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if
fully set out in its entirety.
SECTION II
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent
of such conflict, if any, hereby repealed.
SECTION III
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its
passage, publication and recording, according to law.
Passed by the City Council this 11th day of January, 2006.

               City of Fort Wright, Kentucky
               A Municipal Corporation of the Fourth Class
                           Gene Weaver /s/
                           Mayor Paul C. Hiltz
ATTEST:   Joyce Woods /s/
      City Clerk
First Reading:      12-07-05
Second Reading:   1-11-06
Published:      1-23-06
ORDINANCE NO. 03-12
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2011 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort
Wright, Kentucky, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes;
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections in
accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT,
KENTON COUNTY.
   SECTION I
That the 2011 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort Wright,
Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if
fully set out in its entirety.
   SECTION II
That this ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its
date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.
                      City of Fort Wright, Kentucky
                  A Municipal Corporation of the Fourth Class
                       Joseph Nienaber, Jr. /s/ 
                      Joseph Nienaber, Jr., Mayor
ATTEST:   Joyce Woods /s/
      City Clerk
First Reading:      02-01-12
Second Reading:   03-07-12
Published:      03-12-12
ORDINANCE NO. 03-15
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2014 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort
Wright, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature enacted
since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this municipality; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances, which are based on
or make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes;
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updates sections in
accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT,
KENTON COUNTY, KENTUCKY.
   SECTION I
That the 2014 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort Wright,
Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if
set out in its entirety.
   SECTION II
Any and all Ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance shall be, and hereby
are, repealed to the extent of said conflict.
   SECTION III
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its
passage, publication, which may be in summary form, and recording, according to
law.
Passed by the City Council this 7th day of January 2015.
                      City of Fort Wright, Kentucky
                  A Municipal Corporation of the Fourth Class
                       Dave Hatter /s/ 
                      Dave Hatter, Mayor
 
ATTEST:   Joyce Woods /s/
      City Clerk
 
First Reading:      02-04-15
Second Reading:   03-03-15
Published:      03-21-15
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   CORPORATE NAME
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Rules of construction
   
10.04   Computation of time
   
10.05   Majority may act for all; authorized agent
   
10.06   Writings and signatures
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Revivor
   
10.09   Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance
   
10.10   Construction of section references
   
10.11   Ordinances repealed
   
10.12   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.13   Ordinances saved
   
10.14   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.15   Conflicting provisions
   
10.16   Reference to offices
   
10.17   Errors and omissions
   
10.18   Historical and statutory references
 
   
10.99   Penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES
   (A) All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component codes,
titles, chapters, and sections shall be known and designated as the Ft. Wright
Code, for which designation "codified ordinances" or "code" may be substituted.
Code, title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the
law as contained in the code. (KRS 446.140)
   (B) All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to such
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the "traffic code." Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation "§" followed by the number, such as "§
10.01." Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “ACTION.” Includes all proceedings in any court of this state.
   “AND.” May be read “OR,” and “OR” may be read “AND,” if the sense requires
it.
   “ANIMAL.” Includes every warm-blooded living creature except a human being.
(KRS 446.010(2))
   “AVIS.” The automated vehicle information system established and maintained
by the Transportation Cabinet to collect titling and registration information
on vehicles and boats and information on holders of motor vehicle operator’s
licenses and personal identification cards. (KRS 446.010(55))
   “CITY,” “MUNICIPAL CORPORATION,” or “MUNICIPALITY.” When used in this code
shall denote the City of Ft. Wright irrespective of its population or legal
classification.
   “COMPANY.” May extend and be applied to any corporation, company, person,
partnership, joint stock company, or association.
(KRS 446.010(9))
   “CORPORATION.” May extend and be applied to any corporation, company,
partnership, joint stock company, or association.
(KRS 446.010(10))
   “COUNCIL.” The city legislative body. (KRS 83A.010(5))
   “COUNTY.” Kenton County, Kentucky.
   “CRUELTY.” As applied to animals, includes every act or omission whereby
unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death is caused or permitted. (KRS
446.010(12))
   “DIRECTORS.” When applied to corporations, includes managers or trustees.
(KRS 446.010(13))
   “DOMESTIC.” When applied to corporations, a corporation, partnership,
business trust, or limited liability company, means all those incorporated or
formed by authority of this state. (KRS 446.010(14))
   “DOMESTIC ANIMAL.” Any animal converted to domestic habitat. (KRS 446.010
(15))
   “EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY.” The Mayor. (KRS 83A.010(6))
   “EXECUTIVE ORDER.” An order issued by the Mayor which is binding upon the
officers and employees of the city and any governmental agency over which the
city has jurisdiction. (KRS 83A.010(7))
   “FEDERAL.” Refers to the United States. (KRS 446.010(17))
   “FOREIGN.” When applied to corporations, a corporation, partnership, limited
partnership, business trust, statutory trust, or limited liability company,
includes all those incorporated or formed by authority of any other state. (KRS
446.010(18))
   “KEEPER” or “PROPRIETOR.” Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves
or as a servant, agent, or employee.
   “KRS.” Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   “LAND” or “REAL ESTATE.” Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments and
all rights thereto and interest therein, other than a chattel interest. (KRS
446.010(23))
   “LEGISLATIVE BODY.” The City Council. (KRS 91A.010(8))
   “LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER.” A city councilmember. (KRS 83A.010(8))
   “LIVESTOCK.” Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, alpacas, llamas,
buffaloes, or any other animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine, equine,
or camelid species. (KRS 446.010(25))
   “MAY.” The act referred to is permissive. (KRS 446.010(26))
   “MISDEMEANOR.” An offense for which the criminal fine can not exceed the
amount set forth in KRS 534.040(2)(a), or a term of imprisonment not to exceed
the periods set forth in KRS 532.090(1) or both. (KRS 83A.065)
   “MONTH.” Calendar month. (KRS 446.010(27))
   “MUNICIPALITY.” The City of Ft. Wright, Kentucky.
   “OATH.” Includes “AFFIRMATION” in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath. (KRS 446.010(28))
   “OFFICER.” Any person elected to a position by the voters or any person
appointed to a position which:
      (1)   Is created by the Constitution, the General Assembly, or a city;
      (2)   Possesses a delegation of a portion of the sovereign power of
government;
      (3)   Has powers and duties to be discharged which are conferred directly
or by implication by the city;
      (4)   Has duties performed independently and without control of a
superior power other than the law;
      (5)   Has some permanency;
      (6)   Requires an official oath;
      (7)   Is assigned by a commission or other written authority; and
      (8)   Provides for an official bond if required by proper authority.
(KRS 83A.010(10))
   “ORDINANCE.” An official act of the City Council which is a regulation of a
general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local law or is an
appropriation of money.
   “PARTNERSHIP.” Includes both general and limited partnerships. (KRS 446.010
(30))
   “PEACE OFFICER.” Includes sheriffs, constables granted police powers,
coroners, jailers, metropolitan and urban-county government correctional
officers, marshals, policemen, and other persons with similar authority to make
arrests. (KRS 446.010(31))
   “PERSON.” May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and corporate,
societies, communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships, joint
stock companies, and limited liability companies. (KRS 446.010(33))
   “PERSONAL PROPERTY.” Includes all property except real.
   “PREMISES.” As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   “PROPERTY.” Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   “PUBLIC AUTHORITY.” Includes boards of education; the municipal, county,
state, or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   “PUBLIC PLACE.” Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   “REAL PROPERTY.” Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   “REGULAR ELECTION.” The election in even numbered years at which members of
Congress are elected and the election in odd numbered years at which state
officers are elected. (KRS 446.010(37))
   “SHALL.” The act referred to is mandatory. (KRS 446.010(39))
   “SIDEWALK.” That portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   “STATE.” The Commonwealth of Kentucky.
   “STREET.” Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the city.
   “SUBCHAPTER.” A division of a chapter, designated in this code by an
underlined heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the
body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject
matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
   “SWORN.” Includes “AFFIRMED” in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath. (KRS 446.010(43))
   “TENANT” or “OCCUPANT.” As applied to premises, includes any person holding
a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such
premises, alone or with others.
   “VACANCY IN OFFICE.” Such as exists when there is an unexpired part of a
term of office without a lawful incumbent therein, or when the person elected
or appointed to an office fails to qualify according to law, or when there has
been no election to fill the office at the time appointed by law; it applies
whether the vacancy is occasioned by death, resignation, removal from the
state, county, city, or district, or otherwise. (KRS 446.010(46))
   “VIOLATE.” Includes failure to comply with. (KRS 446.010(47))
   “VIOLATION.” An offense for which the criminal fine can not exceed the
amount set forth in KRS 534.040(2)(c). (KRS 83A.065)
   “YEAR.” Calendar year. (KRS 446.010(50))
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Singular includes plural. A word importing the singular number only
may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one
person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be
applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things. (KRS
446.020(1))
   (B)   Masculine includes feminine. A word importing the masculine gender
only may extend and be applied to females as well as males. (KRS 446.020(2))
   (C)   Liberal construction. All sections of this code shall be liberally
construed with a view to promote their objects and carry out the intent of
Council. (KRS 446.080(1))
   (D)   Retroactivity. No ordinance shall be construed to be retroactive,
unless expressly so declared. (KRS 446.080(3))
   (E)   Technical terms. All words and phrases shall be construed according to
the common and approved usage of language, but technical words and phrases and
such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law,
shall be construed according to such meaning. (KRS 446.080(4))
§ 10.04 COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order of
court, or by any applicable ordinance or regulation, the day of the act, event,
or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be
included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it
is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on which the public office
in which a document is required to be filed is actually and legally closed, in
which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not one of
the days just mentioned. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less
than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be
excluded in the computation.
   (B)   When an ordinance, regulation, or order of court requires an act to be
done either a certain time before an event or a certain time before the day on
which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be excluded in computing the
time. If the day thereby computed on which or by which the act is required to
be done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or a day on which the
public office in which the act is required to be completed is actually and
legally closed, the act may be done on the next day which is none of the days
just mentioned.
   (C)   If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act is
directed to be done, on a particular day of a month and that day is Sunday, the
proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the next day that is
not a legal holiday.
(KRS 446.030)
   (D)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a reasonable
time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall
mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty
or compliance with such notice.
§ 10.05 MAJORITY MAY ACT FOR ALL; AUTHORIZED AGENT.
   (A)   Words giving authority to three or more public officers or other
persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
officers or other persons. (KRS 446.050)
   (B)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to
include such acts when done by an authorized agent.
§ 10.06 WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.
   (A)   When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party thereto,
it shall not be deemed to be signed unless the signature is subscribed at the
end or close of the writing.
   (B)   Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the English
language.
(KRS 446.060)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   It shall be considered that it is the intent of Council in enacting any
ordinance, that if any part of the ordinance be held unconstitutional the
remaining parts shall remain in force, unless the ordinance provides otherwise,
or unless the remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably connected with
and dependent upon the unconstitutional part that it is apparent that Council
would not have enacted the remaining parts without the unconstitutional part,
or unless the remaining parts, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of
being executed in accordance with the intent of Council.
(KRS 446.090)
§ 10.08 REVIVOR.
   (A)   A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is revived when
the ordinance that repealed it is repealed by another ordinance enacted at the
same meeting of Council.
   (B)   A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived by the
enactment of a repealer of the ordinance that repealed it at the same or any
subsequent meeting of Council as long as it takes effect prior to the effective
date of the original repealer.
   (C)   An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to an amendment which is repealed at the same meeting of
Councilwhich enacted the amendment.
   (D)   An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains unchanged
with respect to that amendment if the ordinance making the amendment is
repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of Council as long as the
repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of the original
amendment.
   (E)   No other action of Council repealing a repealer or an amendment shall
have the effect of reviving the original language of the repealer or amendment
as the case may be.
(KRS 446.100)
§ 10.09 RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.
   No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to any
offense committed against a former ordinance, nor as to any act done, or
penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance
takes effect, except that the proceedings thereafter had shall conform, so far
as practicable, to the laws in force at the time of such proceedings. If any
penalty, forfeiture, or punishment is mitigated by any provision of the new
ordinance, such provision may, by the consent of the party affected, be applied
to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance takes effect.
(KRS 446.110)
§ 10.10 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, such reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances,
shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
Council, or a certain city officer or employee, to make additional ordinances
or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving such purpose effected
prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect
and are saved.
§ 10.14 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   Any chapter, section, or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance with
the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. Any
chapter, section, or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded
from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent ordinances as
printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances
until Council shall adopt a new code of ordinances.
   (B)   The method of amendment set forth in §
32.37 should be used by the city to amend, add, or repeal a chapter, section,
or division of this code of ordinances.
§ 10.15 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a
whole.
§ 10.16 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.17 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of such error.
§ 10.18 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed1-1-80; Am. Ord.
25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   If a KRS cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text
of the section reads word-for-word the same as the statute. Example: (KRS
83A.090) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85). If a KRS cite
is set forth as a "statutory reference" following the text of the section, this
indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for further information,
Example:
      § 31.10 MAYOR.
         The executive authority of the city shall be vested in and exercised
by the Mayor.
      (Ord. 10, passed1-1-80)
      Statutory reference:
         For powers and duties of the Mayor, see KRS 83A.130
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this code of
ordinances, and no penalty is otherwise provided, the offense shall be deemed a
violation and the offender shall be fined not more than $250 for each offense.
CHAPTER 11: CORPORATE NAME
Section
   
11.01   Corporate name changed
§ 11.01 CORPORATE NAME CHANGED.
   The corporate name of this city shall be: "The City of Fort Wright,
Kentucky."
('77 Code, § 2-1) (Ord. 57-1969, passed 12-31-69)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
32.   CITY COUNCIL
      
33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
34.   PUBLIC RECORDS
      
35.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
      
36.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
37.   TAXATION
      
38.   CODE OF ETHICAL CONDUCT
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN
Section
   
30.01   Form of government
   
30.02   Governing officers
§ 30.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government provided for this city shall be known as the "Mayor-
Council Plan."
(KRS 83A.130 (1))
§ 30.02 GOVERNING OFFICERS.
   (A)   The city shall be governed by an elected executive who shall be called
Mayor and by an elected legislative body which shall be called the City
Council, and by such other officers and employees as are provided for by
statute or city ordinance. (KRS 83A.130 (2))
   (B)   The City Council shall be composed of six members.
(KRS 83A.030 (1)) ('77 Code, § 2-2) (Ord. 21-1968, passed 8-5-68; Am. Ord. 148-
1977, passed 12-8-77; Am. Ord. 188-1979, passed 6-8-79)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Oath; bond
   
31.02   Compensation
   
31.03   Removal from office
Elected Officials
   
31.20   Election procedure
   
31.21   Mayor
   
31.22   Councilmembers
Nonelected City Officials
   
31.35   Establishment of nonelected city offices
   
31.36   City Clerk
   
31.37   City Administrative Officer
   
31.38   City Treasurer
   
31.39   Fire/EMS Chief.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 OATH; BOND.
   (A)   Oath. Each officer of the city shall, before entering upon the
discharge of duties of his office, take the following oath: "I do solemnly
swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the Constitution of
this Commonwealth, and the Constitution of the United States, and be faithful
and true to the Commonwealth of Kentucky, so long as I continue a citizen
thereof, and that I will faithfully execute, to the best of my ability, the
office of         , according to law; and I do further solemnly swear (or
affirm) that, since the adoption of the present Constitution, I being a citizen
of this United States, have not fought a duel with deadly weapons within this
State, nor out of it, nor have I sent or accepted a challenge to fight a duel
with deadly weapons, nor have I acted as a second in carrying a challenge, nor
aided or assisted any person thus offending, so help me God", as established by
section 228 of the Kentucky Constitution.
   (B)   Certification. Certification of the person administering the oath of
office to an elected official shall certify in writing that the oath was
administered and the date of its administration. Said certification shall be
filed in accordance with KRS 62.020.
   (C)   Bond.
      (1)   All officers, officials, and employees of cities, urban-county
governments, charter county governments, a regional wastewater commission and
special districts who handle public funds in the execution of their duties
shall give a good and sufficient bond to the local governing body for the
faithful and honest performance of his or her duties and as security for all
money coming into that person's hands or under that person's control. The bond
amount shall be based upon the maximum amount of public funds the officer,
official, or employee handles at any given time during a fiscal year cycle. The
local governing body shall pay the cost of the bond.
      (2)   Elected officials who post bond as required by statute, and
employees of their offices covered by a blanket or umbrella bond, shall be
deemed to have complied with division (C)(1) of this section.
(KRS 65.067)
§ 31.02 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Manner and procedure for establishing compensation.
      (1)   City Council shall establish the compensation of every elected city
officer not later than the first Monday in May in the year in which the officer
is elected. An elected officer's compensation shall not be changed after his
election or during his term of office.
         (a)   In order to equate the compensation of Mayors and Councilmembers
with the purchasing power of the dollar, the Department for Local Government
computes by the second Friday of every year the annual increase or decrease in
the consumer price index of the preceding year by using 1949 as the base year
in accordance with Section 246 of the Constitution of Kentucky, which provides
that the Mayor in cities of the first class shall be paid at a rate no greater
than $12,000 per annum and Mayors in cities other than the first class and
Councilmembers shall be paid at a rate no greater than $7,200 per annum.
         (b)   The City Council shall set the compensation of these officers in
accordance with KRS 83A.070 at a rate no greater than that stipulated by the
Department for Local Government.
      (2)   The City Council shall fix the compensation of each appointed city
officer by ordinance and may change it by ordinance.
      (3)   The City Council shall establish the compensation of city employees
in accordance with the personnel and pay classification plan ordinance of the
city.
      (4)   All fees and commissions authorized by law shall be paid into the
city treasury for the benefit of the city and shall not be retained by any
officer or employee.
   (B)   Compensation for succeeding Mayor and members of City Council,
effective as of the installation of the newly elected Mayor and members of City
Council in January 2027. Effective as of the installation of the newly elected
Mayor and members of City Council in
January 2027, pursuant to KRS 83A.070 and KRS 83A.075, the compensation of the
succeeding Mayor and members of City Council shall be as follows:
      (1)   The Mayor shall receive annual compensation in the amount of $8,000
per calendar year;
      (2)   The members of City Council shall receive annual compensation in
the amount of $3,300 per calendar year; and
      (3)   The compensation of the Mayor and members of City Council shall
remain subject to modifications based upon the annual cost of living adjustment
consistent with the Department of Local Government's annual DLG letter.
(Ord. 05-2025, passed 6-4-25)
Statutory reference:
   Compensation, see KRS 83A.070 and 83A.075
§ 31.03 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   (A)   Elected officers. Any elected officer, in case of misconduct,
inability, or willful neglect in the performance of the duties of his office,
may be removed from office by a unanimous vote of the members of the City
Council exclusive of any member to be removed, who shall not vote in the
deliberation of his removal. No elected officer shall be removed without having
been given the right to a full public hearing. The officer, if removed, has the
right to appeal to the circuit court of the county and the appeal shall be on
the record. No officer so removed is eligible to fill the office vacated before
the expiration of the term to which originally elected.
   (B)   Nonelected officers. Nonelected city officers may be removed by the
Mayor at will, unless otherwise provided by state law or ordinance.
Statutory reference:
   Removal of elected officers, see KRS 83A.040(9)
   Removal of nonelected officers, see KRS 83A.080(2)
ELECTED OFFICIALS
§ 31.20 ELECTION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The nomination and election of candidates for city office in a
nonpartisan election within the city shall be conducted pursuant to the
following provisions:
      (1)   There shall be no nonpartisan primary election for the nomination
of candidates to city office regardless of the number of candidates running for
each office.
      (2)   All candidates must file their nomination papers with the County
Clerk not earlier than the first Wednesday after the first Monday in November
of the year preceding the year in which the office will appear on the ballot
and not later than the first Friday following the first Mondayin January before
the day fixed by KRS Chapter 118 for holding a regular primary for nominations
for the office. Signatures for nomination papers shall not be affixed on the
document to be filed prior to the first Wednesday after the first Monday in
November of the year preceding the year in which the office will appear on the
ballot. (KRS 83A.045(2)(b)1.)
      (3)   All nomination papers shall be filed no later than 4:00 p.m. local
time when filed on the last day on which such papers are permitted to be filed.
      (4)   The election of candidates to city office shall be governed by the
provisions of this section, KRS 83A.175(2) through (7), KRS Chapters 116
through 121, KRS 83A.050, and KRS 83A.045 (2) (B).
      (5)   Candidates for city office shall not be required to make pre-
election reports to the Registry of Election Finance pursuant to KRS 121.180
but shall be required to make post-election reports within 30 days after the
regular election in November.
      (6)   The number of candidates equal to the number of city offices to be
filled who receive the highest number of votes cast in the regular election for
each city office shall be elected.
      (7)   All candidates shall be subject to all other applicable election
laws pursuant to KRS 83A.050 and 83A.045 (2) (B) and Chapters 116 to 121.
      (8)   If a vacancy occurs in a candidacy for city office after the
expiration of time for filing nomination papers due to death, incapacity, or
withdrawal of a candidate, the vacancy in candidacy shall be filled in the
following manner:
         (a)   If the vacancy in candidacy occurs less than 91 days but more
than 30 days prior to the regular election, candidates shall file petitions of
nomination to fill the vacancy with the County Clerk not less than 30 days
prior to the regular election.
         (b)   If the vacancy in candidacy occurs less than 30 days prior to
the regular election and there are no remaining candidates running to fill the
office for which a vacancy has occurred, the office shall remain vacant until
after the regular election, and if no person is elected to the office by write-
in ballots at the regular election, the vacancy and office shall be filled
temporarily by the office or body designated by law to fill the appointment.
   (B)   The city has elected to have nonpartisan elections. This section shall
be further governed by and construed in light of KRS 83A.040.
(Ord. 393-1988, passed 12-10-88)
Statutory reference:
   Election of city officers, see KRS 83A.050
   Creation, abolishment of city offices, see KRS 83A.080(3), (4)
§ 31.21 MAYOR.
   (A)   Election; term of office. The Mayor of this city shall be elected by
the voters of the city at a regular election. A candidate for Mayor shall be a
resident of the city for not less than one year prior to his or her election.
His or her term of office shall begin on the first day of January following his
or her election and shall be for four years and until his or her successor
qualifies. If a person is elected or appointed as Mayor in response to a
vacancy and serves less than four calendar years, then that period of service
shall not be considered for purposes of re-election a term of office.
   (B)   Qualifications. The Mayor shall be at least 21 years of age, shall be
a qualified voter in the city, and shall reside in the city throughout his or
her term of office.
   (C)   Vacancy. If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, Council shall
fill the vacancy within 30 days. If for any reason, any vacancy in the office
of Mayor is not filled within 30 days after it occurs, the Governor shall
promptly fill the vacancy by appointment of a qualified person who shall serve
for the same period as if otherwise appointed.
(KRS 83A.040(1), (2), (6))
      (1)   When voting to fill a vacancy in the office of Mayor, a member of
the City Council shall not vote for himself. (KRS 83A.040(2)(c))
      (2)   When voting to fill a vacancy created by the resignation of the
Mayor, the resigning Mayor shall not vote on his or her successor. (KRS 83A.040
(3))
      (3)   No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation in the office of
Mayor shall occur unless a written resignation which specifies the resignation
date is tendered to the City Council. The resignation may be submitted through
electronic mail if it originates from the official’s electronic mail address
and includes also the official’s handwritten signature. The resignation shall
be effective at the next regular or special meeting of the City Council
occurring on or after the date specified in the written letter of resignation.
If a resignation date is not specified, the written resignation shall be deemed
to become effective at the first regular or special meeting of the legislative
body occurring on or after its receipt. (KRS 83A.040(7))
      (4)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor which is required by law
to be filled temporarily by appointment, the City Council shall immediately
notify in writing both the County Clerk and the Secretary of State of the
vacancy. (KRS 83A.040(8))
      (5)   The City Council shall elect from among its members an individual
to preside over meetings of the City Council during any vacancy in the office
of the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of KRS 83A.130. (KRS 83A.040(2)
(d))
   (D)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The executive authority of the city is hereby vested in and shall
be exercised by the Mayor. The Mayor shall enforce the Mayor-Council Plan, city
ordinances and orders, and all applicable statutes. He shall supervise all
departments of city government and the conduct of all city officers and
employees under his jurisdiction and require each department to make reports to
him as required by ordinance or as he deems desirable.
      (2)   The Mayor shall maintain liaison with related units of local
government respecting interlocal contracting and joint activities.
      (3)   The Mayor shall report to the Council and to the public on the
condition and needs of city government as he finds appropriate or as required
by ordinance, but not less than annually. He shall make any recommendations for
actions by the Council he finds in the public interest.
(KRS 83A.130(3))
      (4)   Subject to disapproval of the Council, the Mayor shall promulgate
procedures to insure orderly administration of the functions of city government
and compliance with statutes or ordinances. Upon promulgation or upon revision
or rescission of the procedures, copies shall be filed with the person
responsible for maintaining city records. (KRS 83A.130(4))
      (5)   Any delegation of the Mayor's power, duties, or responsibilities to
subordinate officers and employees and any expression of his official authority
to fulfill executive functions shall be made by executive order. Executive
orders shall be sequentially numbered by years and kept in a permanent file.
(KRS 83A.130(7))
      (6)   All bonds, notes, contracts, and written obligations of the city
shall be made and executed by the Mayor or his agent designated by executive
order. (KRS 83A.130(8)
      (7)   The Mayor shall be the appointing authority with power to appoint
and remove all city employees, including police officers, except as tenure and
terms of employment are protected by statute, ordinance, or contract and except
for employees of the Council. (KRS 83A.130(9))
      (8)   The Mayor shall provide for the orderly continuation of the
functions of city government at any time he is unable to attend to the duties
of his office by delegating responsibility for any function to be performed, in
accordance with division (D)(5) above. However, the Mayor may not delegate the
responsibility of presiding at meetings of the Council, and the authority to
approve ordinances or promulgate administrative procedures may only be
delegated to an elected officer. With approval of the Council, the Mayor may
rescind any action taken in his absence under this section within 30 days of
such action. If for any reason the disability of the Mayor to attend to his
duties persists for 60 consecutive days, the office of Mayor may be declared
vacant by a majority vote of the Council and the provisions of §
31.21(C) shall apply. (KRS 83A.130(10)
§ 31.22 COUNCILMEMBERS.
   For provisions concerning City Council, see
Chapter 32.
NONELECTED CITY OFFICIALS
§ 31.35 ESTABLISHMENT OF NONELECTED CITY OFFICES.
   (A)     All nonelected city offices shall be created by ordinance which
shall specify:
      (1)   Title of office;
      (2)   Powers and duties of office;
      (3)   Oath of office; and
      (4)   Bond, if required
   (B)   A city may create nonelected offices other than those referred to in
this division. For purposes of the requirements of this section, the following
shall be considered nonelected offices:
      (1)   City Clerk;
      (2)   City Manager;
      (3)   City Administrator;
      (4)   Chief of Police; and
      (5)   Fire Chief, other than a volunteer Fire Chief.
   (C)   All nonelected city officers shall be appointed by the Mayor with
approval of City Council. The Police Chief and all city police officers shall
be appointed by the Mayor at will and such appointments need not be approved by
City Council. Upon removal of a nonelected officer at will, the executive
authority shall give the officer a written statement setting forth the reason
or reasons for the removal. However, this requirement shall not be construed as
limiting in any way the at will dismissal power of the executive authority.
   (D)   All nonelected officers may be removed by the Mayor at will unless
otherwise provided by statute or ordinance.
   (E)   The following are nonelected city offices:
      (1)   City Clerk.
      (2)   City Administrative Officer.
      (3)   City Treasurer.
      (4)   Fire/EMS Chief.
(KRS 83A.080)
§ 31.36 CITY CLERK.
   (A)      The city hereby establishes the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)      The duties and responsibilities of the Clerk shall include, but are
not limited to the following:
      (1)   Maintenance and safekeeping of the permanent records of the city;
      (2)   Performance of the duties required of the "official custodian" or
"custodian" in accordance with KRS 61.870 through 61.882;
      (3)   Possession of the seal of the city if used; and
      (4)   Performance of any other duties and responsibilities required of
the City Clerk by statute or ordinance.
('77 Code, §2-7.1) (Ord. 271-l982, passed 9-1-82)
      (5)   No later than January 31 of each year, mail or electronically
submit to the Department for Local Government, a list containing current city
information including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The correct name, telephone number, and electronic mail address
of the Mayor, legislative body members, and the correct name, telephone number,
and electronic mail address for the city’s appointed officials or employees who
are serving in the following roles or substantially similar roles as of January
1 of each year:
            1.   City Clerk;
            2.   City Treasurer or chief financial officer;
            3.   City Manager or administrator;
            4.   City Attorney;
            5.   Human Resources Director;
            6.   Police Chief;
            7.   Fire Chief;
            8.   Public Works Director;
            9.   Risk manager;
            10.   Information technology manager;
            11.   Public relations or communications officer; and
            12.   Planning and zoning administrator.
         (b)   The correct name of the city, mailing address for city hall, and
telephone number of the city hall; and
         (c)   The name and telephone number of either an elected or appointed
official to serve as a contact person that may be reached during normal
business hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.;
      (6)   Performance of any other duties and responsibilities required of
the City Clerk and City Treasurer by statute or ordinance.
      (7)   Once the information required to be reported under division (B)(5)
(a) is compiled by the Governor’s Office for Local Development, the department
shall forward one electronic copy of the compiled information to the
Legislative Research Commission.
(KRS 83A.085)
   (C)   Compensation shall be in the amount as established by the City Council
from time to time as set forth in §
31.02.
   (D)   No person shall be appointed or act as the City Clerk unless such
person has taken the oath required by section 228 of the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky and has provided bond, if required, with corporate
surety authorized to transact business in Kentucky and conditioned upon the
performance of the duties specified herein.
§ 31.37 CITY ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.
   (A)      Establishment. There is hereby established, pursuant to KRS 83A.080
and 83A.090, the office of City Administrative Officer.
   (B)      Appointment and qualifications. The Mayor, with approval of City
Council, shall appoint the City Administrative Officer. The Mayor may remove
the City Administrative Officer at will except as otherwise provided by statute
or ordinance. The City Administrative Officer shall have graduated from an
accredited college or university with a degree in public administration or a
closely related field supplemented by three years of progressively responsible
experience in management, or any combination of education, training, and
abilities to perform effectively the duties of the position. The City
Administrative Officer shall have: extensive knowledge of the principles and
practices of contemporary public administration with emphasis on the planning,
implementation, and evaluation of policies and programs; working knowledge of
executive and legislative policies and procedures; ability to establish and
maintain effective working relationships with employees, public and private
officials, and the general public; ability to communicate effectively orally
and in writing; ability to lead and manage; resourcefulness and imagination;
initiative; analytical ability; sound judgment; integrity; patience; tact; and
firmness.
   (C)      Duties and powers. The duties and powers of the City Administrative
Officer shall be as herein provided:
      (1)   Advise the Mayor in policy formulation on overall problems of the
city;
      (2)   Have major responsibility for preparation and administration of
operating and capital improvement budgets under direction of the Mayor;
      (3)   Advise the Mayor in the appointment of subordinate administrative
personnel if not delegated appointment authority by appropriate order;
      (4)   Have continuing direct relationships with operating department
heads on implementation and administration of programs;
      (5)   Supervise all department heads on the implementation and
administration of programs;
      (6)   Attend regular and special meetings of City Council;
      (7)   Prepare and present reports to the Mayor and City Council on the
condition of the city and city business;
      (8)   Plan for, supervise, and evaluate all phases of municipal
operations including finance and budgeting, personnel, building and zoning,
parks and recreation, police protection, tax assessment and fees collection,
and maintenance;
      (9)   Handle citizens' complaints;
      (10)   Serve as a liaison with other governmental and service bodies;
      (11)   Meet with citizens in regard to municipal services;
      (12)   Serve as purchasing agent;
      (13)   Represent the city at civic, church, school, service, and similar
organizations;
      (14)   Act as liaison for the city with news agencies; and
      (15)   Perform the duties of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator
as prescribed under state law. ('77 Code, § 3-3) (Ord. 123-1975, passed 8-8-75)
   (D)      Oath and bond. No person shall be appointed or act as the City
Administrative Officer unless such person has taken the oath required by
Section 228 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, and has
provided a bond in the sum established by City Council, with corporate surety
authorized to transact business in the Commonwealth of Kentucky and conditioned
upon the performance of the duties specified herein.
   (E)      Compensation. The compensation of the City Administrative Officer
shall be in an amount to be established by City Council by ordinance in
accordance with the pay classification plan.
('77 Code, § 2-7) (Ord. 238-1981, passed 5-27-81)
§ 31.38 CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established the office of City
Treasurer.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the City Treasurer are as
follows:
      (1)   Prepares and administers department budget and prepares financial
reports as required.
      (2)    Prepares monthly and annual financial statements and accounts
payable; maintains ledger account.
      (3)   Reconciles bank statements.
      (4)   Directs and supervises the collection of all city taxes and fees.
      (5)   Receives and gives receipts of all money due the city such as
property tax, franchise tax, gross receipts, occupational licenses, vehicle
licenses, and dog tag fees.
      (6)   Makes deposits and withdrawals of revenues for city receipts and
accounts.
      (7)   Invests funds and transfers funds.
      (8)   Processes purchase requisitions and supplies for the department.
      (9)   Performs related duties as required.
   (C)   Oath and bond. No person shall be appointed or act as the City
Treasurer unless such person has taken the oath required by Section 228 of the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, and has provided a bond in the
sum established by City Council, with corporate surety authorized to transact
business in the Commonwealth of Kentucky and conditioned upon the performance
of the duties specified herein.
   (D)   Compensation. The compensation of the City Treasurer shall be in an
amount to be established by City Council by ordinance in accordance with the
pay classification plan.
§ 31.39 FIRE/EMS CHIEF.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby created the non-elective city office of
Fire/EMS Chief.
   (B)   Appointment. The Fire/EMS Chief will be appointed by the Mayor with
approval of the City Council.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Fire/EMS Chief shall have the following powers
and duties:
      (1)   Plans, organizes, directs, coordinates and evaluates the activities
and programs of the Fire and Emergency Medical Service Department;
      (2)   Protects lives and property through prevention and suppression of
fires, provision of rescue and emergency medical services;
      (3)   Responds to fires, rescue, and EMS scenes as necessary;
      (4)   Is responsible for development and implementation of an effective
recruitment and retention program for volunteers;
      (5)   Develops and maintains a high level of morale and technical
proficiency among the career, part-time and volunteer staff;
      (6)   Performs administrative duties and provides leadership in the
development of municipal disaster and emergency plans;
      (7)   Formulates departmental policies, procedures, rules and regulations
following consultation with the City Administrative Officer, elected city
officers, and subordinate officers, firefighters and EMS personnel;
      (8)   Develops long-term plans to meet Fire/EMS needs of citizens;
      (9)   Develops the organizational structure of the Department in
accordance with professional standards and City Council policy;
         (10)   Prepares and authorizes work schedules;
         (11)   Furnishes technical advice on fire safety and protection;
         (12)   Maintains a complete fire protection effort, including, but not
limited to, Fire Prevention Code Enforcement, Public Fire Safety Education
Program in the community;
         (13)   Maintains readiness of fire suppression forces and EMS
capabilities;
         (14)   Investigates fires and explosions;
         (15)   Plans and prepares for community response to hazardous
conditions;
         (16)   Maintains a complete training program for Fire/EMS staff;
         (17)   Supervises and evaluates the acquisitions, maintenance and use
of fire equipment;
         (18)   Appoints, instructs, disciplines and evaluates departmental
personnel, both volunteer and paid;
         (19)   Develops and maintains a written discipline and evaluation
policy for volunteers with the City Administrative Officer;
         (20)   Authorizes purchase requisitions of supplies and equipment for
the Department;
         (21)   Confers with representatives of federal, state and local
agencies, including the insurance industry on various Fire and EMS safety
issues;
         (22)   Prepares oral and written memoranda and reports on activities
of the Department;
         (23)   Supervises others in the preparation of reports;
         (24)   Attends all City Council meetings or sees to it that a Fire/EMS
Department representative is present;
         (25)   Attends Department, local and state fire and EMS organization
meetings to maintain knowledge and relationships;
         (26)   Reviews Fire/EMS Department related complaints from the general
public;
         (27)   Studies and reviews all laws, official opinions, and guidelines
and makes recommendations for changes in municipal ordinances pertaining to
fire and EMS issues;
         (28)   Maintains a proper record system compliant with all government
regulations pertaining to fire loss, personnel training and departmental
activity;
         (29)   Participates in approved fire safety and EMS courses as
necessary and ensures that all subordinates, both paid and volunteer, are
properly trained; and
         (30)   Represents the Department as needed.
   (D)   Compensation. The compensation of the Fire/EMS Chief shall be in an
amount to be established by City Council, by ordinance, in accordance with the
pay classification plan.
(Ord. 5-00, passed 3-22-00; Am. Ord. 3-01, passed 4-11-01)
CHAPTER 32: CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Members; election, qualifications, compensation
   
32.02   Vacancies
   
32.03   Powers and duties
Rules of Procedure
   
32.20   Mayor as Presiding Officer
   
32.21   Meetings
   
32.22   Quorum
Ordinances
   
32.35   One subject; title
   
32.36   Introduction; enacting clause
   
32.37   Form of amendment
   
32.38   Reading requirement; exception for emergency
   
32.39   Approval, disapproval by Mayor
   
32.40   Adoption of standard codes by reference
   
32.41   Official city records
   
32.42   Indexing and maintenance requirements
   
32.43   Publication requirements
   
32.44   Additional requirements for adoption may be established by city
   
32.45   Periodic review required
   
32.46   Municipal orders
   
32.47   Proved by Clerk; received in evidence
   
32.48   Legislative immunity
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 MEMBERS; ELECTION, QUALIFICATIONS, COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Election; term of office. Each Councilmember shall be elected at-large
by the voters of the city at a regular election. A candidate for City Council
shall be a resident of the city for not less than one year prior to his or her
election. Terms of office shall begin on the first day of January following the
election and shall be for two years.
   (B)   Qualifications. A member shall be at least 18 years of age, shall be a
qualified voter in the city, and shall reside in the city throughout his or her
term of office.
(KRS 83A.040(4))
   (C)   Compensation. For provisions concerning compensation, see §
31.02.
§ 32.02 VACANCIES.
   (A)   Vacancies. If one or more vacancies on Council occur in a way that one
or more members remain seated, the remaining members shall within 30 days fill
the vacancies one at a time, giving each new appointee reasonable notice of his
or her selection as will enable him or her to meet and act with the remaining
members in making further appointments until all vacancies are filled. If
vacancies occur in a way that all seats become vacant, the Governor shall
appoint qualified persons to fill the vacancies sufficient to constitute a
quorum. Remaining vacancies are filled as provided in this section. (KRS
83A.040(5))
      (1)   No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation of a member of the
City Council shall occur unless a written resignation which specifies a
resignation date is tendered to the City Council. The resignation may be
submitted through electronic mail if it originates from the official’s
electronic mail address and includes also the official’s handwritten signature.
The resignation shall be effective at the next regular or special meeting of
the city legislative body occurring on or after the date specified in the
written letter of resignation. If a resignation date is not specified, the
written resignation shall be deemed to become effective at the first regular or
special meeting of the legislative body occurring on or after its receipt. (KRS
83A.040(7))
      (2)   If a vacancy occurs on the City Council which is required by law to
be filled temporarily by appointment, the City Council shall immediately notify
in writing both the County Clerk and the Secretary of State of the vacancy.
(KRS 83A.040(8))
   (B)   Failure to fill vacancies. If for any reason, any vacancy on Council
is not filled within 30 days after it occurs, the Governor shall promptly fill
the vacancy by appointment of a qualified person who shall serve for the same
period as if otherwise appointed.
(KRS 83A.040(6))
Statutory reference:
   Filling of vacancies for nonpartisan city office, see KRS 83A.175
§ 32.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The legislative authority of the city is hereby vested in and shall be
exercised by the elected Council of the city. The Council may not perform any
executive functions except those functions assigned to it by statute. (KRS
83A.130 (11))
   (B)   The Council shall establish all appointive offices and the duties and
responsibilities of those offices and codes, rules, and regulations for the
public health, safety, and welfare. (KRS 83A.130 (12))
   (C)   The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for sufficient revenue to
operate city government and shall appropriate the funds of the city in a budget
which provides for the orderly management of city resources. (KRS 83A.130 (12))
   (D)   The Council may investigate all activities of city government. The
Council may require any city officer or employee to prepare and submit to it
sworn statements regarding the performance of his official duties. Any
statement required by the Council to be submitted or any investigation
undertaken by the Council, if any office, department, or agency under the
jurisdiction of the Mayor is involved, shall not be submitted or undertaken
unless and until written notice of the Council's action is given to the Mayor.
The Mayor may review any statement before submission to the Council and to
appear personally or through his designee on behalf of any department, office,
or agency in the course of any investigation.
(KRS 83A.130 (13))
RULES OF PROCEDURE
§ 32.20 MAYOR AS PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council. (KRS 83A.130(5))
   (B)   Pursuant to KRS 83A.130(5), the following procedure shall be used in
selecting a member of Council to preside at regular and special meetings of
Council in the absence of the Mayor:
      (1)   Any Councilmember may make a motion proposing either himself or
another Councilmember as presiding head of the meeting;
      (2)   The motion must be seconded by another member of Council;
      (3)   Upon a second, the motion will automatically be called for a roll
call vote;
      (4)   Upon the vote, the named individual shall either be empowered to
preside over the Council meeting, or the selecting procedure will be initiated
again.
(Ord. 289-1983, passed - -83)
   (C)   The Mayor may participate in Council proceedings, but shall not have a
vote, except that he may cast the deciding vote in case of a tie. (KRS 83A.130
(5))
Cross-reference:
   Council's responsibility to select one of its own members to preside when
there is a vacancy in the office of Mayor, see §
31.21
§ 32.21 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The City Council will conduct its regular monthly legislative meeting
on the first Wednesday of each month, at 6:00 p.m. at the Fort Wright City
Building at 409 Kyles Lane, Fort Wright, Kentucky.
   (B)   The city shall have a Finance Committee, comprised of the Mayor and
two City Council members appointed by the Mayor, whose duties shall be to
regularly review the finances of the city and to assist the Mayor in his duties
under § 33.03(E) to prepare the city's annual budget proposal. The meetings of
the Finance Committee will be conducted on the first Wednesday of each month at
4:30 p.m. at the Fort Wright City Building at 409 Kyles Lane, Fort Wright,
Kentucky. The city shall have a Community Improvements Committee, comprised of
three City Council members appointed by the Mayor, whose duties shall be to
identify and recommend to City Council projects that can be carried out by
community volunteers and projects involving city-owned structures, assets,
rights-of-way or property. The meetings of the Community Improvements Committee
will be conducted on the third Wednesday of each month at 5:00 p.m. at the Fort
Wright City Building at 409 Kyles Lane, Fort Wright, Kentucky.
   (C)   The City Council will conduct a caucus meeting on the third Wednesday
of each month at 6:00 p.m. at the Fort Wright City Building at 409 Kyles Lane,
Fort Wright, Kentucky.
('77 Code, § 2-3) (Ord. 93-1974, passed 1-11-74; Am. Ord. 317-1984, passed 2-1-
84; Am. Ord. 436-1991, passed 1-2-91; Am. Ord. 441-1991, passed 2-6-91; Am.
Ord. 489-1994, passed 5-4-94; Am. Ord. 579-99, passed 1-19-99; Am. Ord. 587-99,
passed 8-25-99; Am. Ord. 5-03, passed 1-22-03; Am. Ord. 1-05, passed 3-9-05;
Am. Ord. 4-08, passed 3-5-08; Am. Ord. 08-2021, passed 9-1-21)
   (D)   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or upon
written request of a majority of the Council. In the call, the Mayor or Council
shall designate the purpose, time, and place of the special meeting with
sufficient notice for the attendance of Council members and for compliance with
KRS Chapter 61. At a special meeting no business may be considered other than
that set forth in the designation of purpose.
   (E)   The minutes of every meeting shall be signed by the person responsible
for maintaining city records as provided under §
31.36 and by the officer presiding at the meeting.
(KRS 83A.130 (11))
§ 32.22 QUORUM.
   Unless otherwise provided by statute, a majority of the Council constitutes
a quorum and a vote of a majority of a quorum is sufficient to take action.
(KRS 83A.060 (6))
ORDINANCES
§ 32.35 ONE SUBJECT; TITLE.
   Each ordinance shall embrace only one subject and shall have a title that
clearly states the subject.
(KRS 83A.060 (1))
§ 32.36 INTRODUCTION; ENACTING CLAUSE.
   Each ordinance shall be introduced in writing and shall have an enacting
clause styled "Be it ordained by the City of Ft. Wright."
(KRS 83A.060 (2))
§ 32.37 FORM OF AMENDMENT.
   No ordinance shall be amended by reference to its title only, and ordinances
to amend shall set out in full the amended ordinance or section indicating any
text being added by a single solid line drawn underneath it. Text that is
intended to be removed shall be marked at the beginning with an opening bracket
and at the end with a closing bracket. The text between shall be stricken
through with a single solid line.
(KRS 83A.060 (3))
§ 32.38 READING REQUIREMENT; EXCEPTION FOR EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no ordinance shall
be enacted until it has been read on two separate days. The reading of an
ordinance may be satisfied by stating the title and reading a summary rather
than the full text.
   (B)   In an emergency, upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the
membership, the Council may suspend the requirements of second reading and
publication in order for an ordinance to become effective by naming and
describing the emergency in the ordinance. Publication requirements of §
32.43 shall be complied with within ten days of the enactment of the emergency
ordinance.
(KRS 83A.060 (4),(7))
§ 32.39 APPROVAL, DISAPPROVAL BY MAYOR.
   (A)   All ordinances adopted by the Council shall be submitted to the Mayor
who, within ten days after submission, shall either approve the ordinance by
affixing his signature or disapprove it by returning it to the Council together
with a statement of his objections.
   (B)   No ordinance shall take effect without the Mayor's approval unless he
fails to return it to the legislative body within ten days after receiving it
or unless the Council votes to override the Mayor's veto, upon reconsideration
of the ordinance not later than the second regular meeting following its
return, by the affirmative vote of one more than a majority of the membership.
(KRS 83A.130 (6))
§ 32.40 ADOPTION OF STANDARD CODES BY REFERENCE.
   The Council may adopt the provisions of any local, statewide, or nationally
recognized standard code and codifications of entire bodies of local
legislation by an ordinance that identifies the subject matter by title,
source, and date and incorporates the adopted provisions by reference without
setting them out in full, if a copy accompanies the adopting ordinance and is
made a part of the permanent records of the city.
(KRS 83A.060 (5))
§ 32.41 OFFICIAL CITY RECORDS.
   (A)   Every action of the Council shall be made a part of the permanent
records of the city and on passage of an ordinance the vote of each member of
the Council shall be entered on the official record of the meeting.
   (B)   The Council has provided, under the provisions of §§
31.36(C) and
32.42, for the maintenance and safekeeping of the permanent records of the
city. The City Clerk and the presiding officer shall sign the official record
of each meeting.
(KRS 83A.060 (8))
§ 32.42 INDEXING AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   At the end of each month, all ordinances adopted in the city shall be
indexed and maintained by the City Clerk in the following manner:
   (A)   The city budget, appropriations of money, and tax levies shall be
maintained and indexed so that each fiscal year is kept separate from other
years.
   (B)   All other city ordinances shall be kept in the minute book or an
ordinance book in the order adopted and maintained in this code of ordinances.
(KRS 83A.060 (8))
§ 32.43 PUBLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
32.38(B), no ordinance shall be enforceable until published pursuant to KRS
Chapter 424.
   (B)   Ordinances may be published in full or in summary as designated by the
City Council. If the City Council elects to publish an ordinance in summary,
the summary shall be prepared or certified by an attorney licensed to practice
law in the Commonwealth of Kentucky and shall include the following:
      (1)   The title of ordinance;
      (2)   A brief narrative setting forth the main points of the ordinance in
a way reasonably calculated to inform the public in a clear and understandable
manner of the meaning of the ordinance; and
      (3)   The full text of each section that imposes taxes or fees.
   (C)   Ordinances that include descriptions of real property may include a
sketch, drawing, or map, including common landmarks, such as streets or roads
in lieu of metes and bounds descriptions.
(KRS 83A.060 (9))
§ 32.44 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ADOPTION MAY BE ESTABLISHED BY CITY.
   The city may, by ordinance, specify additional requirements for adoption of
ordinances in greater detail than contained herein, but the city may not lessen
or reduce the substantial requirements of this chapter or any statute relating
to adoption of ordinances.
(KRS 83A.060 (10))
§ 32.45 PERIODIC REVIEW REQUIRED.
   Not less than once every five years all ordinances in this code of
ordinances shall be examined for consistency with state law and with one
another and shall be revised to eliminate redundant, obsolete, inconsistent,
and invalid provisions.
(KRS 83A.060 (11))
§ 32.46 MUNICIPAL ORDERS.
   (A)   Council may adopt municipal orders. All municipal orders shall be in
writing and shall be adopted only at an official meeting. Orders may be amended
only by a subsequent municipal order or ordinance. All orders adopted shall be
maintained in an official order book.
   (B)   In lieu of an ordinance, municipal orders may be used for matters
relating to the internal operation and functions of the city and to appoint or
remove or approve appointment or removal of members of boards, commissions, and
other agencies over which the Council has control.
(KRS 83A.060 (12), (13))
§ 32.47 PROVED BY CLERK; RECEIVED IN EVIDENCE.
   All ordinances and orders of the city may be proved by the signature of the
City Clerk; and when the ordinances are placed in this code of ordinances by
authority of the city, the printed copy shall be received in evidence by any
state court without further proof of such ordinances.
(KRS 83A.060 (14))
§ 32.48 LEGISLATIVE IMMUNITY.
   For anything said in debate, Councilmembers shall be entitled to the same
immunities and protections allowed to members of the General Assembly.
(KRS 83A.060 (15))
Statutory reference:
   Privileges of members of General Assembly, see KRS 6.050 and Ky. Const. § 43
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Financial Administration
   
33.01   Definitions
   
33.02   Accounting records and financial reports
   
33.03   Annual budget ordinance
   
33.04   Annual audit of city funds
   
33.05   Official depositories; disbursement of city funds
   
33.06   Fiscal year
   
33.07   Acquisition of real and personal property; funding; public properties
corporation established
Improvements
   
33.10   Definitions
   
33.11   Financing of improvements
   
33.12   Apportionment of cost
   
33.13   Comprehensive report required
   
33.14   Public hearing required
   
33.15   Adoption of ordinance; notice to affected owners
   
33.16   Affected owner may contest
   
33.17   When city may proceed; assessment constitutes lien
   
33.18   Effect of additional property or change in financing
Fees for Equipment Use
   
33.30   Fee charged
   
33.31   Collection and use of fees
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION
§ 33.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following definitions shall apply:
   "BUDGET." A proposed plan for raising and spending money for specified
programs, functions, activities, or objectives during a fiscal year.
   "DEBT SERVICE." The sum of money required to pay installments of principal
and interest on bonds, notes, and other evidences of debt accruing within a
fiscal year and to maintain sinking funds.
   "ENCUMBRANCES." Obligations in the form of purchase orders or contracts that
are chargeable to an appropriation. An obligation ceases to be an encumbrance
when paid or when the actual liability is recorded.
   "FISCAL YEAR." The accounting period for the administration of fiscal
operations.
   "GENERALLY ACCEPTED GOVERNMENTAL AUDITING STANDARDS." Those standards for
audit of governmental organizations, programs, activities and functions issued
by the Comptroller General of the United States.
(KRS 91A.010 (6))
   "GENERALLY ACCEPTED PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENTAL ACCOUNTING." Those standards
and procedures promulgated and recognized by the Governmental Accounting
Standards Board.
(KRS 91A.010 (7))
§ 33.02 ACCOUNTING RECORDS AND FINANCIAL REPORTS.
   (A)   The city shall keep its accounting records and render financial
reports in such a way as to:
      (1)   Determine compliance with statutory provisions; and
      (2)   Determine fairly and with full disclosure the financial operations
of constituent funds and account groups of the city in conformity with
generally accepted governmental accounting principles.
   (B)   The municipal accounting system shall be organized and operated on a
fund basis.
(KRS 9lA.020)
§ 33.03 ANNUAL BUDGET ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The city shall operate under an annual budget ordinance adopted and
administered in accordance with the provisions of this section. No moneys shall
be expended from any governmental or proprietary fund except in accordance with
a budget ordinance adopted pursuant to this section.
   (B)   Moneys held by the city as a trustee or agent for individuals, private
organizations, or other governmental units need not be included in the budget
ordinance.
   (C)   If in any fiscal year subsequent to a fiscal year in which the city
has adopted a budget ordinance in accordance with this section, no budget
ordinance is adopted, the budget ordinance of the previous fiscal year has full
force and effect as if readopted.
   (D)   The budget ordinance of the city shall cover one fiscal year.
   (E)   Preparation of the budget proposal shall be the responsibility of the
Mayor.
   (F)   The budget proposal shall be prepared in such form and detail as
prescribed by ordinance.
   (G)   The budget proposal together with a budget message shall be submitted
to Council not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of the fiscal year it
covers. The budget message shall contain an explanation of the governmental
goals fixed by the budget for the coming fiscal year; explain important
features of the activities anticipated in the budget; set forth the reasons for
stated changes from the previous year in program goals, programs, and
appropriation levels; and explain any major changes in fiscal policy.
   (H)   (1)   Council may adopt the budget ordinance making appropriations for
the fiscal year in such sums as it finds sufficient and proper, whether greater
or less than the sums recommended in the budget proposal. The budget ordinance
may take any form that Council finds most efficient in enabling it to make the
necessary fiscal policy decisions.
      (2)   No budget ordinance shall be adopted which provides for
appropriations to exceed revenues in any one fiscal year in violation of
Section 157 of the Kentucky Constitution.
   (I)   The full amount estimated to be required for debt service during the
budget year shall be appropriated for all governmental fund types.
   (J)   Council may amend the budget ordinance at any time after the
ordinance's adoption, so long as the amended ordinance continues to satisfy the
requirements of this section.
   (K)   Administration and implementation of an adopted budget ordinance shall
be the responsibility of the Mayor. Such responsibility includes the
preparation and submission to Council of operating statements, including
budgetary comparisons of each governmental fund for which an annual budget has
been adopted. Such reports shall be submitted not less than once every three
months in each fiscal year.
   (1)   To the extent practical, the system utilized in the administration and
implementation of the adopted budget ordinance shall be consistent in form with
the accounting system called for in §
33.02.
   (M)   No city agency, or member, director, officer, or employee of any city
agency, may bind the city in any way to any extent beyond the amount of money
at that time appropriated for the purpose of the agency. All contracts,
agreements, and obligations, express or implied, beyond such existing
appropriations are void; nor shall any city officer issue any bond,
certificate, or warrant for the payment of money by the city in any way to any
extent, beyond the balance of any appropriation made for the purpose.
(KRS 9lA.030)
§ 33.04 ANNUAL AUDIT OF CITY FUNDS.
   (A)   The city shall, after the close of each fiscal year, cause each fund
of the city to be audited by the Auditor of Public Accounts or a certified
public accountant. The audit shall be completed by March 1 immediately
following the fiscal year being audited. The city shall forward an electronic
copy of the audit report to the Kentucky Department for Local Government for
information purposes by no later than April 1 immediately following the fiscal
year being audited. The Department for Local Government shall, upon request,
make available an electronic copy of the audit report to the Legislative
Research Commission to be used for the purposes of KRS 6.955 to 6.975 or to the
Auditor of Public Accounts.
   (B)   The city shall enter into a written contract with the selected
auditor. The contract shall set forth all terms and conditions of the agreement
which shall include, but not be limited to, requirements that:
      (1)   The auditor be employed to examine the basic financial statements
which shall include the government-wide and fund financial statements;
      (2)   The auditor shall include in the annual city audit report an
examination of local government economic assistance funds granted to the city
under KRS 42.450 to 42.495. The auditor shall include a certification with the
annual audit report that the funds were expended for the purpose intended.
      (3)   All audit information be prepared in accordance with generally
accepted governmental auditing standards which includes such tests of the
accounting records and such auditing procedures as considered necessary under
the circumstances. Where the audit is to cover the use of state or federal
funds, appropriate state or federal guidelines shall be utilized;
      (4)   The auditor shall prepare a typewritten or printed report
embodying:
         (a)   The basic financial statements and accompanying supplemental and
required supplemental information;
         (b)   The auditor's opinion on the basic financial statements or
reasons why an opinion cannot be expressed; and
         (c)   Findings required to be reported as a result of the audit.
      (5)   The completed audit and all accompanying documentation shall be
presented to Council at a regular or special meeting.
      (6)   Any contract with a certified public accountant for an audit shall
require the accountant to forward a copy of the audit report and management
letters to the Auditor of Public Accounts upon request of the city or the
Auditor of Public Accounts, and the Auditor of Public Accounts shall have the
right to review the certified public accountant's workpapers upon request.
   (C)   A copy of an audit report which meets the requirements of this section
shall be considered satisfactory and final in meeting any official request to
the city for financial data, except for statutory or judicial requirements, or
requirements of the Legislative Research Commission necessary to carry out the
purposes of KRS 6.955 to 6.975.
   (D)   Each city shall, within 30 days after the presentation of an audit to
the city legislative body, publish an advertisement, in accordance with KRS
Chapter 424, containing:
      (1)   The auditor's opinion letter;
      (2)   The "Budgetary Comparison Schedules-Major Funds," which shall
include the general fund and all major funds;
      (3)   A statement that a copy of the complete audit report, including
financial statements and supplemental information, is on file at city hall and
is available for public inspection during normal business hours;
      (4)   A statement that any citizen may obtain from city hall a copy of
the complete audit report, including financial statements and supplemental
information, for his or her personal use;
      (5)   A statement which notifies citizens requesting a personal copy of
the city audit report that they will be charged for duplication costs at a rate
that shall not exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per page; and
      (6)   A statement that copies of the financial statement prepared in
accordance with KRS 424.220, when a financial statement is required thereby,
are available to the public at no cost at the business address of the officer
responsible for preparation of the statement.
   (E)   The city may utilize the alternative publication methods authorized by
KRS 424.190(2) to comply with the provisions of this section.
   (F)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined
not less than $50 nor more than $500. In addition, any officer who fails to
comply with any of the provisions of this section shall, for each failure, be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more than $500, in the
discretion of the court, which may be recovered only once, in a civil action
brought by any resident of the city. The costs of all proceedings, including a
reasonable fee for the attorney of the resident bringing the action, shall be
assessed against the unsuccessful party.
(KRS 91A.040)
Statutory reference:
   Department for Local Government to provide assistance, see KRS 91A.050.
§ 33.05 OFFICIAL DEPOSITORIES; DISBURSEMENT OF CITY FUNDS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall designate as the city's official depositories one or
more banks, federally insured savings and loan companies, or trust companies
within the Commonwealth. The amount of funds on deposit in an official
depository shall be fully insured by deposit insurance or collateralized in
accordance with 12 U.S.C. sec. 1823, to the extent uninsured, by any
obligations, including surety bonds permitted by KRS 41.240(4).
   (B)   All receipts from any source of city money or money for which the city
is responsible, which has not been otherwise invested or deposited in a manner
authorized by law, shall be deposited in official depositories. All city funds
shall be disbursed by written authorization approved by the Mayor which states
the name of the person to whom funds are payable, the purpose of the payment,
and the fund out of which the funds are payable. Each authorization shall be
numbered and recorded.
(KRS 91A.060)
§ 33.06 FISCAL YEAR.
   The annual budget shall be for a fiscal year beginning July 1 to June 30 of
the following year.
('77 Code, § 2-5) (Ord. 119-1975, passed 8-8-75)
§ 33.07 ACQUISITION OF REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY; FUNDING; PUBLIC PROPERTIES
CORPORATION ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   A non-profit corporation, to be known as the public properties
corporation, is hereby created pursuant to KRS 58.1801 et seq. and KRS 273.161
et seq.
   (B)   The corporation shall have a perpetual existence and be formed for the
purpose of acting as a governmental agency of holding company and shall be
authorized to acquire real and personal property and borrow necessary funding,
all in accordance with the direction of City Council and statutory powers
available under KRS 273.171 and 58.180.
   (C)   The corporation shall have and exercise all of the powers available to
non-profit corporations in the state pursuant to KRS Chapters 58 and 273.
   (D)   The use of the corporation assets and earnings shall be limited to use
for the benefit of the city, and there shall be no debt limit.
   (E)   The initial incorporators and members of the Board of Directors shall
be the Mayor and the current members of City Council. The members of the Board
of Directors shall be the duly elected or appointed Mayor and City Council.
   (F)   The Articles of Incorporation shall include any provision necessary to
protect the tax status of the corporation and any other provisions deemed and
advisably necessary by the incorporators and their legal counsel to advance the
purposes of the corporation as outlined in this section.
   (G)   The incorporator shall hold the incorporators and directors harmless
from liability.
(Ord. 388-1988, passed 6-1-88)
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 33.10 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following definitions shall apply:
   "ASSESSED VALUE BASIS." The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to the ratio the assessed value of individual parcels of property
bears to the total assessed value of all such properties.
   "BENEFITS RECEIVED BASIS." The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to equitable determination by Council of the special benefit received
by property from the improvement, including assessed value basis, front foot
basis, and square foot basis, or any combination thereof, and may include
consideration of assessed value of land only, graduation for different classes
of property based on nature and extent of special benefits received, and other
factors affecting benefits received.
   "COST." All costs related to an improvement, including planning, design,
property or easement acquisition and construction costs, fiscal and legal fees,
financing costs, and publication expenses.
   "FAIR BASIS." Assessed value basis, front foot basis, square foot basis, or
benefits received basis.
   "FRONT FOOT BASIS." The apportionment of cost of an improvement according to
the ratio the front footage on the improvement of individual parcels of
property bears to such front footage of all such properties.
   "IMPROVEMENT." Construction of any facility for public use or services or
any addition thereto, which is of special benefit to specific properties in the
area served by such facility.
   "PROPERTY." Any real property benefited by an improvement.
   "SPECIAL ASSESSMENT" or "ASSESSMENT." A special charge fixed on property to
finance an improvement in whole or in part.
   "SQUARE FOOT BASIS." The apportionment of cost of an improvement according
to the ratio the square footage of individual parcels of property bears to the
square footage of all such property.
(KRS 91A.210)
§ 33.11 FINANCING OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The city may not finance any improvement in whole or in part through
special assessments except as provided in this subchapter and in any applicable
statutes. (KRS 91A.200)
   (B)   Cost of an improvement shall be apportioned equitably on a fair basis.
   (C)   The city may provide for lump sum or installment payment of
assessments or for bond or other long-term financing, and for any improvement
may afford property owners the option as to method of payment or financing.
(KRS 91A.220)
Statutory reference:
   Improvements; alternate methods, see KRS Ch. 107
§ 33.12 APPORTIONMENT OF COST.
   The cost of any improvement shall be apportioned on a benefits received
basis with respect to any property owned by the state, a local unit of
government, or any educational, religious, or charitable organization. Council
may assess such property in the same manner as for privately owned property or
it may pay the costs so apportioned out of general revenues.
(KRS 91A.230)
§ 33.13 COMPREHENSIVE REPORT REQUIRED.
   Before undertaking any improvements pursuant to this subchapter, the city
shall prepare a comprehensive report setting out:
   (A)   The nature of the improvement;
   (B)   The scope and the extent of the improvement, including the boundaries
or other description of the area to be assessed;
   (C)   The preliminary estimated cost of the improvement;
   (D)   The fair basis of assessment proposed;
   (E)   If financing of assessments is provided, the proposed method,
including the proposed years to maturity of any bonds to be issued in
connection with the improvement; and
   (F)   Such other information as may further explain material aspects of the
improvement, assessments, or financing.
(KRS 91A.240)
§ 33.14 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.
   After preparation of the report required by §
33.13, the city shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed
improvement at which all interested persons shall be heard. Notice of the
hearing shall be published pursuant to KRS Chapter 424, and mailed to each
affected property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall
include:
   (A)   The nature of the improvement;
   (B)   Description of area of the improvement;
   (C)   Statement that the city proposes to finance the improvement in whole
or in part by special assessment of property and the method to be used;
   (D)   Time and place the report may be examined; and
   (E)   Time and place of the hearing.
(KRS 91A.250)
§ 33.15 ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE; NOTICE TO AFFECTED OWNERS.
   Within 90 days of conclusion of the hearing, the city shall determine
whether to proceed with the improvement by special assessments, and if it
determines to proceed shall adopt an ordinance so stating and containing all
necessary terms, including the items referred to in §
33.13 and a description of all properties. Promptly upon passage the city shall
publish such ordinance pursuant to KRS Chapter 424 and shall mail by certified
mail to each affected property owner a notice of determination to proceed with
the project, the fair basis of assessment to be utilized, the estimated cost to
the property owner, and the ratio the cost to each property owner bears to the
total cost of the entire project.
(KRS 91A.260)
§ 33.16 AFFECTED OWNER MAY CONTEST.
   (A)   Within 30 days of the mailing of the notice provided for in §
33.15, any affected property owner may file an action in the circuit court of
the county, contesting the undertaking of the project by special assessment,
the inclusion of his property in the improvement, or the amount of his
assessment. If the action contests the undertaking of the improvement by the
special assessment method of the inclusion of the property of that property
owner, no further action on the improvement insofar as it relates to any
property owner who is a plaintiff shall be taken until the final judgment has
been entered.
   (B)   The city may proceed with the improvement with respect to any
properties whose owners have not filed or joined in an action as provided in
this section or who have contested only the amounts of their assessments, and
the provisions of the resolution are final and binding with respect to such
property owners except as to contested amounts of assessments. After the lapse
of time as herein provided, all actions by owners of properties are forever
barred.
(KRS 91A.270)
§ 33.17 WHEN CITY MAY PROCEED; ASSESSMENT CONSTITUTES LIEN.
   (A)   After the passage of time for the action provided for in §
33.16, or after favorable final judgment in any such action, whichever comes
later, the city may proceed with the improvement or part thereof stayed by the
action, including notice requiring payment of special assessment or installment
thereon and bonds or other method proposed to finance the improvement. The
first installment may be apportioned so that other payments will coincide with
payment of ad valorem taxes.
   (B)   The amount of any outstanding assessment or installments thereof on
any property, and accrued interest and other charges, constitutes a lien on the
property to secure payment to the bondholders or any other source of financing
of the improvement. The lien takes precedence over all other liens, whether
created prior to or subsequent to the publication of the ordinance, except a
lien for state and county taxes, general municipal taxes, and prior improvement
taxes, and is not defeated or postponed by any private or judicial sale, by any
mortgage, or by any error or mistake in the description of the property or in
the names of the owners. No error in the proceedings of the Council shall
exempt any benefited property from the lien for the improvement assessment, or
from payment thereof, or from the penalties or interest thereon, as herein
provided.
(KRS 91A.280)
§ 33.18 EFFECT OF ADDITIONAL PROPERTY OR CHANGE IN FINANCING.
   The city may undertake any further proceedings to carry out the improvement
or any extension or refinancing thereof, except that §§
33.13 through
33.17 applies if additional property is included in the improvement or if
change is made in the method or period of financing; but additional property
may be included in the improvement with the consent of the owner thereof
without compliance with other sections if it does not increase the cost
apportioned to any other property, or any other change may be made without such
compliance if all property owners of the improvement consent.
(KRS 91A.290)
FEES FOR EQUIPMENT USE
§ 33.30 FEE CHARGED.
   It is hereby authorized that the city may charge a fee for the extraordinary
or repetitive use of city equipment and city personnel, which will be
determined by a fee schedule. The schedule of fees shall be determined by
amendment to this subchapter.
(Ord. 548-97, passed 3-18-97)
§ 33.31 COLLECTION AND USE OF FEES.
   The executive authority of the city shall provide for the collection of the
fees and the fees established shall be used for the payment of the costs and
expenses of the collection thereof, with the balance thereof to be placed in
the general fund.
(Ord. 548-97, passed 3-18-97)
CHAPTER 34: PUBLIC RECORDS
Section
General
   
34.01   Definitions
Procedures for Requesting Public Records
   
34.05   Initial request with immediate inspection
   
34.06   Referral to proper custodian
   
34.07   Public records not immediately available
   
34.08   Refusal of unreasonable requests
   
34.09   Time limitation; denial of inspection
   
34.10   Concealing or destroying records prohibited
   
34.11   Access to records relating to particular individual
   
34.12   Format of copies
   
34.13   Fees for copies
   
34.14   Misstatement of purpose prohibited
   
34.15   Online access to public records in electronic form
   
34.16   Public records protected from disclosure
   
34.17   Notification of the Attorney General
GENERAL
§ 34.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   "CITY." The city government of this city.
   "COMMERCIAL PURPOSE." The direct or indirect use of any public record or
records, in any form, for sale, resale, solicitation, rent, or lease of a
service, or any use by which the user expects a profit either through
commission, salary, or fee. "COMMERCIAL PURPOSE" shall not include publication
or related use of a public record by a newspaper or periodical; use of a public
record by a radio or television station in its news or other informational
programs; or use of a public record in the preparation for prosection or
defense of litigation, or claims settlement by the parties to such action, or
the attorneys representing the parties.
   "CUSTODIAN." The official custodian or any authorized person having personal
custody andcontrol of public records. The "CUSTODIAN" having personal custody
of most of the public records of this city is the City Clerk/Treasurer.
   "MECHANICAL PROCESSING." Any operation or other procedure which is
transacted on a machine, and which may include, but is not limited to a copier,
computer, recorder or tape processor, or other automated device.
   "MEDIA." The physical material in or on which records may be stored or
represented, and which may include, but is not limited to paper, microform,
disks, diskettes, optical disks, magnetic tapes, and cards.
   "PERSON." A human being who makes a request for inspection of public
records.
   "PUBLIC AGENCY." Every city government board, commission, and authority;
every city council and council board, commission and committee; every school
district board, special district board, and municipal corporation; every city
government agency, including the policy-making board of an institution of
education created by or pursuant to state or local statute, executive order,
ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act; any body created by or
pursuant to state or local statute, executive order, ordinance, resolution, or
other legislative act in the legislative or executive branch of government; any
entity when the majority of its governing body is appointed by a "public
agency", as defined by this section; a member or employee of a "public agency",
a state or local officer, or any combination thereof; any board, commission,
committee, subcommittee, ad hoc committee, advisory committee, council or
agency, except for a purpose of evaluation the qualifications of public agency
employees, established, created, or controlled by a "public agency" as defined
in this section; an interagency body of two (2) or more public agencies where
each "public agency" is defined in this section.
(KRS 61.805(2))
   "PUBLIC RECORDS." All books, papers, maps, photographs, cards, tapes, discs,
diskettes, recordings, or other documentation regardless of physical form or
characteristics, which are prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or
retained by a public agency. "PUBLIC RECORDS" shall not include any records
owned or maintained by or for a body referred to in KRS 61.870(1)(h) that are
not related to functions, activities, programs, or operations funded by state
or local authority nor any records that have been excluded by §
34.12.
   "REASONABLE FEE" or "FEE." The fair payment required by the city for making
copies of non exempt public records requested for noncommercial purposes which
shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction, including the costs of the
media and any mechanical processing cost incurred by the public agency, but not
including the cost of staff. If a public agency is asked to produce a record in
a nonstandardized format, or to tailor the format to meet the request of an
individual or a group, the public agency may at its discretion provide the
requested format and recover staff costs as well as any actual costs incurred.
   "REQUEST." An oral or written application by any person to inspect public
records of the city.
(KRS 61.870)
   "SOFTWARE." The program code which makes a computer system function, but
does not include that portion of the program code which contains public records
exempted from inspection as provided by KRS 61.878 or specific addresses of
files, passwords, access codes, user identifications, or any other mechanism
for controlling the security or restricting access to public records in the
public agency's computer system. "SOFTWARE" consists of the operating system,
application programs, procedures, routines, and subroutines such as translators
and utility programs, but does not include that materials which is prohibited
from disclosure or copying by a license agreement between a public agency and
an outside entity which supplied the material to the agency.
(KRS 61.870)
PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTING PUBLIC RECORDS
§ 34.05 INITIAL REQUEST WITH IMMEDIATE INSPECTION.
   (A)   Any resident of the Commonwealth shall have the right to inspect
public records. The official custodian may require a written application,
signed by the applicant and with his or her name printed legibly on the
application, describing the records to be inspected. The official custodian may
require the applicant to provide a statement in the written application of the
manner in which the applicant is a resident of the Commonwealth under KRS
61.870(10)(a)to(f).
      (1)   The written application shall be:
         (a)   Hand delivered;
         (b)   Mailed;
         (c)   Sent via facsimile; or
         (d)   Sent via e-mail to the public agency's official custodian of
public records or his or her designee at the e-mail address designated in the
public agency's rules and regulations adopted pursuant to KRS 61.876.
      (2)   A public agency shall not require the use of any particular form
for the submission of an open records request, but shall accept for any request
the standardized form developed under KRS 61.876(4). (KRS 61.872(2))
   (B)   All public records shall be open for inspection by any resident of the
Commonwealth, except as otherwise provided by KRS 61.870 to 61.884, and
suitable facilities shall be made available by each public agency for the
exercise of this right. No resident of the Commonwealth shall remove original
copies of public records from the offices of any public agency without the
written permission of the official custodian of the record. (KRS 61.872(1))
   (C)   A resident of the Commonwealth may inspect the public records:
      (1)   During the regular office hours of the public agency; or
      (2)   By receiving copies of the public records from the public agency
through the mail. The public agency shall mail copies of the public records to
a person whose residence or principal place of business is outside the county
in which the public records are located after he or she precisely describes the
public records which are readily available within the public agency. If the
resident of the Commonwealth requesting the public records requests that copies
of the records be mailed, the official custodian shall mail the copies upon
receipt of all fees and the cost of mailing. (KRS 61.872(3))
   (D)   The applicant shall have the right to make abstracts of the public
records and to obtain copies of all written public records. When copies are
requested, the custodian may require a written request and advance payment of
the prescribed fee as defined in §
34.01. (KRS 61.874(1))
   (E)   Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial purposes shall be
available for copying in either standard electronic or standard hard copy
format, as designated by the party requesting the records, where the agency
currently maintains the records in electronic format. Nonexempt public records
used for noncommercial purposes shall be copied in standard hard copy format
where agencies currently maintain records in hard copy format. Agencies are not
required to convert hard copy format records to electronic formats.
   (F)   The minimum standard format in paper form shall be defined as not less
than 8½ inches by 11 inches in at least one (1) color on white paper, or for
electronic format, in a flat file electronic American Standard Code for
Information Interchange (ASCII) format. If the public maintains public records
in a format other than ASCII, and this format conforms to the requestor's
requirements, the public records may be provided in this alternate electronic
format for standard fees as specified by the public agency. Any request for a
public record in a form other than the forms described in this section shall be
considered a nonstandardized request.
(KRS 61.874(2)(b))
   (G)   Unless an enactment of the General Assembly prohibits the disclosure
of public records to persons who intend to use them for commercial purposes,
the public agency may establish a reasonable fee. The public agency from which
copies of nonexempt public records are requested for a commercial purpose may
require a certified statement from the requestor stating the commercial purpose
for which they shall be used, and may require the requestor to enter into a
contract with the state commercial purpose of a specified fee. The fee may be
based on the cost to the public agency of media, mechanical processing and
staff required to produce a copy of the public record or records or the cost to
the public agency of the creation purchase, or the acquisition of the public
records.
(KRS 61.874(4))
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for a person to obtain a copy of any part of a
public record for a:
      (1)   Commercial purpose, without stating the commercial purpose, if a
certified statement from the requestor was required by the public agency
pursuant to subsection (G) of this section; or
      (2)   Commercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the use
of the public record for a different commercial purpose; or
      (3)   Noncommercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the
use of the public record for a commercial purpose. A newspaper, periodical,
radio or television station shall not be held to have used or knowingly allowed
the use of the public record for a commercial purpose merely because of its
publication or broadcast, unless it has also given its express permission for
that commercial use. (KRS 61.874(5))
   (I)   Online access to public records in electronic form, as provided under
this section, may be provided and made available at the discretion of the
public agency. If a party wishes to access public records by electronic means
and the public agency agrees to provide online access, a public agency may
require that the party enter into a contract, license, or other agreement with
the agency, and may charge fees for these agreements. Fees shall not exceed:
      (1)   The cost of physical connection to the system and reasonable cost
of computer time access charges;
      (2)   If the records are requested for a commercial purpose, a reasonable
fee based on the factors set forth in subsection (G).
(KRS 61.874(6))
§ 34.06 REFERRAL TO PROPER CUSTODIAN.
   If the City Clerk/Treasurer does not have custody or control of the public
record or records requested, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall so notify the
applicant and shall furnish the name and location of the custodian of the
public record, if such facts are known to him.
(KRS 61.872(4))
§ 34.07 PUBLIC RECORDS NOT IMMEDIATELY AVAILABLE.
   If the public record is in active use, in storage, or not otherwise
available, the official custodian shall immediately notify the applicant and
shall designate a place, time, and date for inspection of the public records,
not to exceed five days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays) from
receipt of the application, unless a detailed explanation of the cause is given
for further delay and the place, time, and earliest date on which the public
record will be available for inspection or duplication.
(KRS 61.872(5))
§ 34.08 REFUSAL OF UNREASONABLE REQUESTS.
   If the application places an unreasonable burden in producing public
records, or if the custodian has reason to believe that repeated requests are
intended to disrupt other essential functions of the public agency, the
official custodian may refuse to permit inspection of the public records or
mail copies thereof. However, refusal under this section must be sustained by
clear and convincing evidence.
(KRS 61.872(6))
§ 34.09 TIME LIMITATION; DENIAL OF INSPECTION.
   (A)   The official custodian, upon any request for records made under this
chapter, shall determine within five days, excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and
legal holidays, after the receipt of any request whether to comply with the
request and shall notify in writing the person making the request within the
five-day period of its decision. Any agency response denying, in whole or in
part, inspection of any record shall include a statement of the specific
exception authorizing the withholding of the record and a brief explanation of
how the exception applies to the record withheld. The response shall be issued
by the official custodian or under his authority and shall constitute final
agency action.
(KRS 61.880)
   (B)   If the requesting party wants the Attorney General to review the
denial of a request for inspection of a public record, he shall proceed under
the provisions of KRS 61.880 and 61.882. Upon the Attorney General's request,
the agency will provide additional documentation.
   (C)   If upon request by the person seeking inspection, the Attorney General
reviews the denial and issues a written opinion upholding, in whole or in part,
the request for inspection, the requesting party may institute appeal
proceedings within thirty (30) days for injunctive or declaratory relief in the
circuit court. In addition, if the Attorney General disallows the request, or
if the city continues to withhold the record notwithstanding the Attorney
General's opinion, and the person seeking disclosure institutes proceedings in
circuit court, the city shall notify the Attorney General of such action. (KRS
61.880, 61.882)
§ 34.10 CONCEALING OR DESTROYING RECORDS PROHIBITED.
   No official of the city shall willfully conceal or destroy any record with
the intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or these rules and
regulations.
§ 34.11 ACCESS TO RECORDS RELATING TO PARTICULAR INDIVIDUAL.
   Any person shall have access to any public record relating to him or in
which he is mentioned by name, upon presentation of appropriate identification,
subject to the provisions of this chapter. (KRS 61.884)
§ 34.12 FORMAT OF COPIES.
   (A)   Upon inspection, the applicant shall have the right to make abstracts
of the public records and memoranda thereof, and to obtain copies of all public
records not exempted by the terms of §
34.16. When copies are requested, the custodian may require a written request
and advance payment of the prescribed fee, including postage where appropriate.
If the applicant desires copies of public records other than written records,
the custodian of the records shall duplicate the records or permit the
applicant to duplicate the records; however, the custodian shall ensure that
such duplication will not damage or alter the original records.
   (B)   (1)   Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial purposes shall
be available for copying in either standard electronic or standard hard copy
format, as designated by the party requesting the records, where the agency
currently maintains the records in electronic format. Nonexempt public records
used for noncommercial purposes shall be copied in standard hard copy format
where agencies currently maintain records in hard copy format. Agencies are not
required to convert hard copy format records to electronic formats.
      (2)   The minimum standard format in paper form shall be defined as not
less than 8½ inches x 11 inches in at least one color on white paper, or for
electronic format, in a flat file electronic American Standard Code for
Information Interchange (ASCII) format. If the public agency maintains
electronic public records in a format other than ASCII, and the format conforms
to the requestor's requirements, the public record may be provided in this
alternate electronic format for standard fees as specified by the public
agency. Any request for a public record in a form other than the forms
described in this section shall be considered a nonstandardized request.
(KRS 61.874(1) - (3))
§ 34.13 FEES FOR COPIES.
   (A)   The public agency may prescribe a reasonable fee for making copies of
nonexempt public records requested for use for noncommercial purposes which
shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction, including the costs of the
media and any mechanical processing cost incurred by the public agency, but not
including the cost of staff required. If a public agency is asked to produce a
record in a nonstandardized format, or to tailor the format to meet the request
of an individual or a group, the public agency may at its discretion provide
the requested format and recover staff costs as well as any actual costs
incurred.
   (B)   (1)   Unless an enactment of the General Assembly prohibits the
disclosure of public records to persons who intend to use them for commercial
purposes, if copies of nonexempt public records are requested for commercial
purposes, the public agency may establish a reasonable fee.
      (2)   The public agency from which copies of nonexempt public records are
requested for a commercial purpose may require a certified statement from the
requestor stating the commercial purpose for which they shall be used, and may
require the requestor to enter into a contract with the agency. The contract
shall permit use of the public records for the stated commercial purpose for a
specified fee.
      (3)   The fee provided for in division (B)(1) of this section may be
based on one or both of the following:
         (a)   Cost to the public agency of media, mechanical processing, and
staff required to produce a copy of the public record or records;
         (b)   Cost to the public agency of the creation, purchase, or other
acquisition of the public records.
(KRS 61.874(3), (4))
Cross-reference:
   Fees for online access to public records, see §
34.15
§ 34.14 MISSTATEMENT OF PURPOSE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to obtain a copy of any part of a public
record for a:
   (A)   Commercial purpose, without stating the commercial purpose, if a
certified statement from the requestor was required by the public agency
pursuant to §
34.13;
   (B)   Commercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the use of
the public record for a different commercial purpose; or
   (C)   Noncommercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the use
of the public record for a commercial purpose. A newspaper, periodical, radio
or television station shall not be held to have used or knowingly allowed the
use of the public record for a commercial purpose merely because of its
publication or broadcast, unless it has also given its express permission for
that commercial use.
(KRS 61.874(5))
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 34.15 ONLINE ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS IN ELECTRONIC FORM.
   (A)   Online access to public records in electronic form may be provided and
made available at the discretion of the public agency. If a party wishes to
access public records by electronic means and the public agency agrees to
provide online access, a public agency may require that the party enter into a
contract, license, or other agreement with the agency, and may charge fees for
these agreements.
   (B)   Fees shall not exceed:
      (1)   The cost of physical connection to the system and reasonable cost
of computer time access charges; and
      (2)   If the records are requested for a commercial purpose, a reasonable
fee based on the factors set forth in §
34.13.
(KRS 61.874(6))
§ 34.16 PUBLIC RECORDS PROTECTED FROM DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   The following public records are excluded from the application of this
chapter and these rules and regulations and shall be subject to inspection only
upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction, except as provided in KRS
61.878(1) that no court shall authorize the inspection by any party of any
materials pertaining to civil litigation beyond that which is provided by the
Rules of Civil Procedure governing pretrial discovery:
      (1)   Public records containing information of a personal nature where
the public disclosure thereof would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion
of personal privacy.
      (2)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency and compiled and
maintained for scientific research. This exemption shall not, however, apply to
records the disclosure or publication of which is directed by other statute.
      (3)   (a)   Records confidentially disclosed to the agency, or required
by an agency to be disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or
proprietary, which if openly disclosed would permit an unfair commercial
advantage to competitors of the entity that disclosed the records.
         (b)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency or required by an
agency to be disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or
proprietary, which are compiled and maintained:
            1.   In conjunction with an application for or the administration
of a loan or a grant;
            2.   In conjunction with an application for or the administration
of assessments, incentives, inducements, and tax credits as described in KRS
Ch. 154;
            3.   In conjunction with the regulation of commercial enterprise,
including mineral exploration records, unpatented, secret commercially valuable
plans, appliances, formulae, or processes, which are used for the making,
preparing, compounding, treating, or processing of articles or materials which
are trade commodities obtained from a person; or
            4.   For the grant or review of a license to do business.
         (c)   The exemptions provided for in divisions (A)(3)(a) and (b)
above, shall not apply to records the disclosure or publication of which is
directed by statute.
      (4)   Public records pertaining to a prospective location of a business
or industry where no previous public disclosure has been made of the business'
or industry's interest in locating in, relocating within, or expanding within
the Commonwealth. This exemption shall not include those records pertaining to
applications to agencies for permits or licenses necessary to do business or to
expand business operations within the state, except as provided in division (A)
(2) above.
      (5)   Public records which are developed by an agency in conjunction with
the regulation or supervision of financial institutions, including but not
limited to, banks, savings and loan associations, and credit unions, which
disclose the agency's internal examining or audit criteria and related
analytical methods.
      (6)   The contents of real estate appraisals or engineering or
feasibility estimates and evaluations made by or for a public agency relative
to the acquisition of property, until such time as all of the property has been
acquired. The law of eminent domain shall not be affected by this provision.
      (7)   Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data used to
administer a licensing examination, examination for employment, or academic
examination before the exam is given or if it is to be given again.
      (8)   Records of law enforcement agencies or agencies involved in
administrative adjudication that were compiled in the process of detecting and
investigating statutory or regulatory violations, if the disclosure of the
information could pose an articulable risk of harm to the agency or its
investigation by revealing the identity of informants not otherwise known or by
premature release of information to be used in a prospective law enforcement
action or administrative adjudication. Unless exempted by other provisions of
this chapter, public records exempted under this provision shall be open after
enforcement action is completed or a decision is made to take no action. The
exemptions provided by this subdivision shall not be used by the custodian of
the records to delay or impede the exercise of rights granted by this chapter.
      (9)   Preliminary drafts, notes, or correspondence with private
individuals, other than correspondence which is intended to give notice of
final action of a public agency.
      (10)   Preliminary recommendations and preliminary memoranda in which
opinions are expressed or policies formulated or recommended.
      (11)   All public records or information the disclosure of which is
prohibited by federal law or regulation.
      (12)   Public records or information the disclosure of which is
prohibited or restricted or otherwise made confidential by enactment of the
General Assembly, including any information acquired by the Department of
Revenue in tax administration that is prohibited from divulgence or disclosure
under division (C) of this section.
      (13)   (a)   Public records the disclosure of which would have a
reasonable likelihood of threatening the public safety by exposing a
vulnerability in preventing, protecting against, mitigating, or responding to a
terrorist act and limited to:
            1.   Criticality lists resulting from consequence assessments;
            2.   Vulnerability assessments;
            3.   Antiterrorism protective measures and plans;
            4.   Security and response needs assessments;
            5.   Infrastructure records that expose a vulnerability referred to
in this division through the disclosure of the location, configuration, or
security of critical systems, including public utility critical systems. These
critical systems shall include but not be limited to information technology,
communication, electrical, fire suppression, ventilation, water, wastewater,
sewage and gas systems.
            6.   The following records when their disclosure will expose a
vulnerability referred to in this division: detailed drawings, schematics,
maps, or specifications of structural elements, floor plans, and operating,
utility or security systems of any building or facility owned, occupied, leased
or maintained by a public agency; and
            7.   Records when their disclosure will expose a vulnerability
referred to in this division and that describe the exact physical location of
hazardous chemical, radiological, or biological materials.
         (b)   As used in this division, “TERRORIST ACT” means a criminal act
intended to:
            1.   Intimidate or coerce a public agency or all or part of the
civilian population;
            2.   Disrupt a system identified in division (a)5.; or
            3.   Cause massive destruction to a building or facility owned,
occupied, leased, or maintained by a public agency.
         (c)   On the same day that a public agency denies a request to inspect
a public record for a reason identified in this division, that public agency
shall forward a copy of the written denial of the request, referred to in KRS
61.880(1), to the executive director of the Kentucky Office of Homeland
Security and the Attorney General;
         (d)   Nothing in this division shall affect the obligations of a
public agency with respect to disclosure and availability of public records
under state environmental, health, and safety programs;
         (e)   The exemption established in this division shall not apply when
a member of the Kentucky General Assembly seeks to inspect a public record
identified in this division under the Open Records Law.
      (14)   Public or private records, including books, papers, maps,
photographs, cards, tapes, discs, diskettes, recordings, software, or other
documentation regardless of physical form or characteristics, having historic,
literary, artistic, or commemorative value accepted by the archivist of a
public university, museum, or government depository from a donor or depositor
other than a public agency. This exemption shall apply to the extent that
nondisclosure is requested in writing by the donor or depositor of such
records, but shall not apply to records the disclosure or publication of which
is mandated by another statute or by federal law:
         (a)   Records of a procurement process under KRS Ch. 45A or 56. This
exemption shall not apply after:
            1.   A contract is awarded; or
            2.   The procurement process is canceled without award of a
contract and there is a determination that the contract will not be
resolicited;
         (b)   Client and case files maintained by the Department of Public
Advocacy or any person or entity contracting with the Department of Public
Advocacy for the provision of legal representation under KRS Chapter 31;
         (c)   Communications of a purely personal nature unrelated to any
governmental function;
         (d)   Except as provided in KRS 61.168, photographs or videos that
depict the death, killing, rape, or sexual assault of a person. However, such
photographs or videos shall be made available by the public agency to the
requesting party for viewing on the premises of the public agency, or a
mutually agreed upon location, at the request of:
         (e)   Records confidentially maintained by a law enforcement agency in
accordance with a wellness program, including an early intervention system, as
described in state law.
         (f)   Communications of a purely personal nature unrelated to any
governmental function.
            1.   a.   Any victim depicted in the photographs or videos, his or
her immediate family, or legal representative;
               b.   Any involved insurance company or its representative; or
               c.   The legal representative of any involved party;
            2.   Any state agency or political subdivision investigating
official misconduct; or
            3.   A legal representative for a person under investigation for,
charged with, pled guilty to, or found guilty of a crime related to the
underlying incident. The person under investigation for, charged with, pled
guilty to, or found guilty of a crime related to the underlying incident or
their immediate family shall not be permitted to have access to the photographs
or videos; and
         (e)   Records confidentially maintained by a law enforcement agency in
accordance with a wellness program, including an early intervention system, as
described in state law.
         (f)   Communications of a purely personal nature unrelated to any
governmental function.
   (B)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to prohibit
disclosure of statistical information not descriptive of any readily
identifiable person. In addition, if any public record contains material which
is not excepted under this section, the city shall separate the excepted and
make the nonexcepted material available for examination, subject to the
possible applicability of §
34.08.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall in no way prohibit or limit the
exchange of public records or the sharing of information between public
agencies when the exchange is serving a legitimate governmental need or is
necessary in the performance of a legitimate government function.
   (D)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to deny, abridge,
or impede the right of a municipal employee, an applicant for employment, or an
eligible on a register to inspect and copy any record, including preliminary
and other supporting documentation, that relates to him. Such records shall
include, but not be limited to work plans, job performance, demotions,
evaluations, promotions, compensation, classification, reallocation, transfers,
layoffs, disciplinary actions, examination scores, and preliminary and other
supporting documentation. A city employee, applicant, or eligible shall not
have the right to inspect or copy any examination or any documents relating to
ongoing criminal or administrative investigations by any agency.
   (E)   If any public record contains material which is not excepted under
this section, the public agency shall separate the excepted and make the
nonexcepted material available for examination.
   (F)   The provisions of this section shall in no way prohibit or limit the
exchange of public records or the sharing of information between public
agencies when the exchange is serving a legitimate governmental need or is
necessary in the performance of a legitimate government function.
   (G)   When material is made available pursuant to a request under division
(A)(14)(d) of this section, the public agency shall not be required to make a
copy of the recording except as provided in KRS 61.169, and the requesting
parties shall not be limited in the number of times they may view the material.
(KRS 61.878)
§ 34.17 NOTIFICATION OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
   The official custodian shall notify the Attorney General of any actions
filed against the city in circuit court regarding the enforcement of the open
records law, KRS 61.870 to 61.884.
CHAPTER 35: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Board of Adjustment
   
35.01   Establishment
Police Department
   
35.10   Creation; composition
   
35.11   Appointment of Police Chief and police officers
   
35.12   Oath and bond
   
35.13   Compensation
   
35.14   Duties and authority of Police Chief
   
35.15   Duties and responsibilities of members
Tree Board
   
35.25   Establishment
Board of Ethics
   
35.35   Establishment
Code Enforcement Board
   
35.50   Creation of Code Enforcement Board
   
35.51   Definitions
   
35.52   Enforcement powers
   
35.53   Appointment of members; terms of office; removal from office; oath;
compensation; organization of Board; meetings; quorum; conflict of interest;
minutes and records
   
35.54   Powers of the Joint Code Enforcement Board
   
35.55   Enforcement proceedings
   
35.56   Hearing; notice; and final order
   
35.57   Presentation of cases
   
35.58   Appeals; final judgment
   
35.59   Ordinance fine schedule
   
35.60   Liens; fines; charges; and fines
   
35.61   Lienholder notification system
   
35.62   Liens
   
35.63   Immediate action
   
35.64   Purpose
Economic Development Authority
   
35.65   Findings of fact
   
35.66   Establishment
City Historian
   
35.70   Establishment
   
35.71   Appointment; qualifications
   
35.72   Terms of office
   
35.73   Duties and functions
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 35.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   For provisions concerning the Board of Adjustment, see §
153.02.
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 35.10 CREATION; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created a Police Department for the city, which shall
consist of the Chief of Police and such other officers as may be provided for
by the City Council by ordinance.
('77 Code, § 10-16) (Ord. 143-1977, passed 10-14-77)
§ 35.11 APPOINTMENT OF POLICE CHIEF AND POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Police Chief and all police officers shall be appointed by the
Mayor at will, and may be removed by the Mayor at will except as tenure and
terms of employment are protected by statute, ordinance, or contract. The
Police Department shall have the following positions:
      (1)   Police Chief
      (2)   Police Captain
      (3)   Police Sergeant
      (4)   Police Officer Specialist
      (5)   Police Officer
   (B)   From time to time, the Mayor may promulgate job descriptions for the
various Police Department positions, subject to approval by Council through
municipal order.
(Ord. 06-2015, passed 5-6-15; Am. Ord. 10-2021, passed 9-1-21)
§ 35.12 OATH AND BOND.
   (A)   No person shall be appointed or act as the Police Chief or a police
officer of the city unless such person has taken the oath required by Section
228 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
   (B)   The Chief of Police and each other member of the Police Department
shall execute a bond with surety approved by Council to the state in a penal
amount of $2,500. ('77 Code, § 10-18)
§ 35.13 COMPENSATION.
   The compensation of the Chief of Police and other police officers as well as
additional benefits, including, but not limited to, medical coverage, pension
retirement plans, and other insurance coverages, shall be as established by the
City Council in the pay classification ordinance.
('77 Code, § 10-19) (Ord. 143-1977, passed 10-14-77)
§ 35.14 DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF POLICE CHIEF.
   (A)   Subject to the executive authority of the Mayor, the Chief of Police
shall be the head of the Department and shall supervise all officers and
members thereof. ('77 Code, § 10-20)
   (B)   With the approval of the Mayor the Chief of Police may establish such
divisions or special sections within the Police Department, assigning such
policemen to such divisions or special sections and designating such duties as
may be deemed necessary.
('77 Code, § 10-22)
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall keep records and make reports concerning the
activities of his Department as may be required by statute or by the City
Council. The Chief shall be responsible for the performance by the Police
Department of its functions, and all persons who are members of the Police
Department shall serve subject to the orders of the Chief of Police and
otherwise as provided by state law. ('77 Code, § 10-23)
   (D)   Subject to the executive authority of the Mayor, the Chief of the
Police Department shall make or prescribe such rules and regulations as he
deems advisable. Such rules when approved by resolution by the City Council
shall be binding on the members. The rules and regulations may cover, besides
the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment to be worn or carried, hours
of service, vacations, and all other similar matters necessary or desirable for
the better efficiency of the Department. This section in no way restricts other
matters which may be prescribed or regulated through the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Chief of Police pursuant to this chapter. ('77 Code, § 10-
24)
   (E)   The Chief of Police shall have the custody of all lost, stolen, or
abandoned property recovered in the city. ('77 Code, § 10-26)
(Ord. 143-1977, passed 10-14-77)
§ 35.15 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to
the enforcement of all of the ordinances of the city and all statutes
applicable therein, to preserve order, to prevent infractions of the law, and
to make arrests for violations thereof. ('77 Code, § 10-27)
   (B)   No member of the Police Department, except the Chief, shall serve any
process except on command of the Chief of the Police Department. ('77 Code, §
10-28)
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to
conduct himself in a proper and law-abiding manner at all times and to avoid
the use of unnecessary force. Each member of the Police Department shall obey
the orders and directions of his superior. ('77 Code, § 10-29)
   (D)   Every member of the Police Department shall appear as a witness
whenever this is necessary in the prosecution for a violation of an ordinance
or of any state or federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for
service as witness in any action or suit to which the city is a party; any fees
paid for such services shall be turned over to the Police Chief, who shall
deposit same to the City Treasurer. ('77 Code, § 10-30)
(Ord. 143-1977, passed 10-14-77)
TREE BOARD
§ 35.25 ESTABLISHMENT.
   For provisions concerning the City Tree Board, see
Chapter 95.
BOARD OF ETHICS
§ 35.35 ESTABLISHMENT.
   For provisions concerning the Board of Ethics, see §§
38.40 -
38.49.
CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD
§ 35.50 CREATION OF CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to create the Fort Wright Code Enforcement
Board, that shall have the power to issue remedial orders and impose civil
fines when a violation of an ordinance has been classified as a civil offense.
   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 65.8811(1)(b), the city participates in a Joint Code
Enforcement Board through an Interlocal Agreement executed with other
participating city and county members. This Joint Code Enforcement Board shall
operate in lieu of a City Code Enforcement Board, and have jurisdiction and
authority throughout the City of Fort Wright in the same manner as a City Code
Enforcement Board created under KRS 65.8811(1)(a).
   (B)   The city’s representation on the Joint Code Enforcement Board is
established through the Interlocal Agreement with the participating cities and/
or Kenton County, and any and all amendments to the Interlocal Agreement. The
city shall appoint one member, and two alternate members to the Kenton County
Joint Code Enforcement Board. All appointments shall be made by the Mayor, with
approval of the City Council. Members of the Kenton County Joint Code
Enforcement Board shall serve consistent with the provisions of the interlocal
agreement.
   (C)    All appointments to the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board
shall be for a term of three years. Upon expiration of a term, a member or
alternate member may be re-appointed by the Mayor, with approval by the City
Council.
   (D)   Each member and alternate member appointed by the city to the Kenton
County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall have resided within the boundaries of
the city for a period of at least one year prior to the date of the member’s
appointment, and shall reside there throughout the term in office.
   (E)   In the event that the appointed member of the city +vacates his/her
membership on the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board, the city shall,
following the procedures in KRS 65.8811, fill the vacancy within 60 days. If
the Mayor has not filled the vacancy within 60 days, then the remaining member
of the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall fill the vacancy with
another person who meets the qualifications in KRS 65.8811. All vacancies shall
be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.
   (F)   Any member or alternate member appointed by the Mayor to the Kenton
County Joint Code Enforcement Board, pursuant to KRS 65.8811, may be removed by
the Mayor for misconduct, inefficiency, or willful neglect of duty. In the
event of removal, the Mayor shall submit a written statement to the member
subject to removal, and to the City Council, setting forth the reasons for
removal. The member so removed shall have the right to appeal the removal to
the Kenton County Circuit Court.
   (G)   Any member or alternate member shall, prior to entering their duties,
take the oath of office prescribed by Section 228 of the Kentucky Constitution.
   (H)   The members of the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board may be
compensated or reimbursed per the terms of the Interlocal Agreement, and its
amendments.
   (I)   No member or alternate member appointed by the city to the Kenton
County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall hold any elected or appointed office,
whether paid or unpaid, or any position of employment with the city.
   (J)   A copy of the governing Interlocal Agreement shall be maintained in
the Office of the City Clerk for inspection by the public.
(Ord. 1-07, passed 2-7-07; Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)
§ 35.51 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   "ABATEMENT COSTS." A city's necessary and reasonable costs for and
associated with clearing, preventing unauthorized entry to, or demolishing all
or a portion of a structure or premises, or taking any other action with regard
to a structure or premises necessary to remedy a violation and to maintain and
preserve the public health, safety and welfare in accordance with any city
ordinance.
   "JOINT CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD." An administrative body created and acting
under the authority of the Local Government Code Enforcement Board Act, KRS
65.8801 to 65.8839.
   “CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER." A city police officer, safety officer, citation
officer, or other public law enforcement officer with the authority to issue a
citation.
   "FINAL ORDER." Any order:
      (1)   Issued by the Code Enforcement Board following a hearing in
accordance with §
35.56;
      (2)   Created because a violator neither paid nor contested the citation
within seven days as provided in §
35.55; or
      (3)   Created because a violator failed to appear at a hearing the
violator requested to contest the citation as provided in §
35.56.
   "IMMINENT DANGER." A condition which is likely to cause serious or life-
threatening injury or death at any time.
   "ORDINANCE." An official action of the local government body, which is a
regulation of a general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local law and
shall include any provision of a code of ordinances adopted by the city
legislative body which embodies all or part of an ordinance.
   "OWNER." A person, association, corporation, partnership or other legal
entity having a legal or equitable title in real property.
   "PREMISES." A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures upon it.
(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)
§ 35.52 ENFORCEMENT POWERS.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Board shall have the power to issue remedial
orders and impose civil fines as a method of enforcing city ordinances when a
violation of this subchapter has been classified as a civil offense.
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Board shall not have the authority to enforce any
ordinance regulating conduct which would also, under any provision of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes, constitute a criminal offense or a moving motor
vehicle offense.
(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)
§ 35.53 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERMS OF OFFICE; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; OATH;
COMPENSATION; ORGANIZATION OF BOARD; MEETINGS; QUORUM; CONFLICT OF INTEREST;
MINUTES AND RECORDS.
   Membership, oath and terms of office, quorum, vacancies, removal of members,
and other statutory requirements related to the Board’s activities shall be as
stated in the Local Government Code Enforcement Board Act and as set forth by
the Interlocal Agreement for the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board
(hereinafter “Interlocal Agreement”) filed of record with the Kenton County
Clerk in Book C5439, Page 321 as incorporated by reference as set forth herein.
(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)
§ 35.54 POWERS OF THE JOINT CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.
   The Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall have the powers and
duties as set forth by the Interlocal Agreement for the Kenton County Joint
Code Enforcement Board filed of record with the Kenton County Clerk in Book
C5439, Page 321 as incorporated by reference as set forth herein.
(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)
§ 35.55 ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS.
   The following requirements shall govern all enforcement proceedings before
the Code Enforcement Board:
   (A)   Enforcement proceedings shall only be initiated by the issuance of a
citation by a Code Enforcement Officer.
   (B)   Except when immediate action is necessary pursuant to §
35.63, if a Code Enforcement Officer believes, based on his personal
observation or investigation, that a person has violated a city ordinance, he
shall issue a notice of violation allowing the alleged violator a specified
period of time to remedy the violation without incurring a fine. If the alleged
violator fails or refuses to remedy the violation within the time specified,
the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue a citation.
   (C)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a citation by one of the
following methods:
      (1)   Personal service to the alleged violator;
      (2)   Leaving a copy of the citation with any person 18 years of age or
older who is on the premises, if the alleged violator is not on the premises at
the time the citation is issued; or
 
      (3)   Posting a copy of the citation in a conspicuous place on the
premises and mailing a copy of the citation by regular, first-class mail to the
owner of record of the property, if no one is on the premises at the time the
citation is issued.
   (D)   The citation issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The date and time of issuance;
      (2)   The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued;
      (3)   The physical address of the premises where the violation occurred;
      (4)   The date and time the offense was committed;
      (5)   The facts constituting the offense;
      (6)   The section of the code or the number of the ordinance violated;
      (7)   The name of the Code Enforcement Officer;
      (8)   The civil fine that may be imposed for the violation, including, if
applicable:
         (a)   The civil fine that will be imposed if the person does not
contest the citation; and
         (b)   The maximum civil fine that may be imposed if the person elects
to contest the citation;
      (9)   The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil
fine or to contest the citation; and
      (10)   A statement that if the person fails to pay the civil fine set
forth in the citation or contest the citation within the time allowed: the
person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing before the Code
Enforcement Board to contest the citation; the determination that the violation
was committed shall be final; the citation as issued shall be deemed a final
order determining that the violation was committed and imposing the civil fine
as set forth in the citation; and the person shall be deemed to have waived the
right to appeal the final order to District Court.
   (E)   After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall notify the Code Enforcement Board by delivering a copy of the
citation to board Chairman.
   (F)   (1)   The person to whom the citation is issued shall respond to the
citation within seven days of the date of issuance by either paying the civil
fine or requesting, in writing, a hearing to contest the citation. If the
person fails to respond to the citation within seven days, the person shall be
deemed to have waived the right to a hearing and the determination that a
violation was committed shall be considered final. In this event, the citation
as issued shall be deemed a final order determining that the violation was
committed and imposing the civil fine as set forth in the citation, and the
person shall be deemed to have waived the right to appeal the final order to
District Court.
         
      (2)   Notice of a final order shall be provided to the cited violator by
regular first-class mail; certified mail, return receipt requested; personal
delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person's usual place of residence
with any individual residing therein who is eighteen (18) years of age or older
and who is informed of the contents of the notice.
(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)
§ 35.56 HEARING; NOTICE; AND FINAL ORDER.
   (A)   When a hearing has been requested, the Code Enforcement Board or its
administrative staff shall schedule a hearing.
   (B)   Not less than seven days before the date of the hearing, the Code
Enforcement Board shall notify the requester of the date, time, and place of
the hearing. The notice may be given by regular first-class mail; certified
mail, return receipt requested; personal delivery; or by leaving the notice at
the person’s usual place of residence with any individual residing therein who
is eighteen (18) years of age or older and who is informed of the contents of
the notice.
   (C)   (1)   Any person requesting a hearing who fails to appear at the time
and place set for the hearing shall be deemed to have waived the right to a
hearing to contest the citation, and the determination that a violation was
committed shall be final. In this event, the citation as issued shall be deemed
a final order determining the violation was committed and imposing the civil
fine set forth in the citation, and the alleged violator shall be deemed to
have waived the right to appeal the final order to District Court.
      (2)   Notice of a final order shall be provided to the cited violator by
regular first-class mail; certified mail, return receipt requested; personal
delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person's usual place of residence
with any individual residing therein who is 18 years of age or older and who is
informed of the contents of the notice.
   (D)   All testimony at the hearing shall be taken under oath and recorded.
Testimony shall be taken from the Code Enforcement Officer, the alleged
violator, and any witnesses to the violation offered by the Code Enforcement
Officer or alleged violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but
fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings.
   (E)   The Code Enforcement Board shall, based on the evidence, determine
whether a violation was committed. If it is determined that no violation was
committed, an order dismissing the citation shall be entered. If it is
determined that a violation was committed, an order may be issued upholding the
citation. The board may impose a fine up to the maximum authorized by
ordinance, or require the offender to remedy a continuing violation to avoid a
fine, or both.
   (F)   (1)   Every final order following a hearing shall be reduced to
writing, which shall include the findings and conclusions reached and the date
the order was issued. A copy shall be furnished to the person named in the
citation.
      (2)   If the person named in the citation is not present when the final
order is issued, the order shall be delivered to the person by regular first-
class mail; certified mail, return receipt requested; personal delivery; or by
leaving the notice at the person's usual place of residence with any individual
residing therein who is eighteen (18) years of age or older and who is informed
of the contents of the notice.
(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)
§ 35.57 PRESENTATION OF CASES.
   Each case before the Code Enforcement Board may be presented by an attorney
selected by the city, a Code Enforcement Officer for the city, or by a member
of the city's administrative staff.
(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)
§ 35.58 APPEALS; FINAL JUDGMENT.
   (A)   An appeal from a final order of a Code Enforcement Board following a
hearing conducted pursuant to §
35.56 may be made to the Kenton County District Court within 30 days of the
date the order is issued. The appeal shall be initiated by the filing of a
complaint and a copy of the final order in the same manner as any civil action
under the Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure.
   (B)   If no appeal from a final order of the Code Enforcement Board is filed
within the time period set in division (A) of this section, the Code
Enforcement Board's order shall be deemed final for all purposes.
(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)
§ 35.59 ORDINANCE FINE SCHEDULE.
   Violations of ordinances that are enforced by the Kenton County Joint Code
Enforcement Board shall be subject to the schedule of civil fines as set forth
by separate ordinance.
(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)
§ 35.60 LIENS; FINES; CHARGES; AND FEES.
   (A)   The city delegates the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board to
prepare and record liens on its behalf.
   (B)   The city shall possess a lien on property owned by the person found by
a non-appealable final order as defined by §
35.51, or by a final judgment of the court, to have committed a violation of a
city ordinance. The lien shall be for all civil fines assessed for the
violation and for all charges and fees incurred by the city in connection with
the enforcement of this subchapter, including abatement costs, and reasonable
attorney’s fees. An affidavit of the Code Enforcement Officer shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the amount of the lien and regularity of the
proceedings pursuant to KRS 65.8801 to 65.8839.
   (C)   The lien shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk. The lien
shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording and shall bear
interest until paid. The lien shall continue for ten years following the date
of the non-appealable final order or final court judgment.
   (D)   Subject to §
35.61, the lien shall take precedence over all other liens, except state,
county, school board, and city taxes, and may be enforced by judicial
proceedings, including a foreclosure action.
   (E)   In addition to the remedy prescribed in division (A) of this section,
the person found to have committed the violation shall be personally
responsible for the amount of all civil fines assessed for the violation and
for all charges, fees and abatement costs incurred by the city in connection
with the enforcement of this subchapter, including reasonable attorney’s fees.
The city may bring a civil action against the person and shall have the same
remedies as provided for the recovery of a debt.
(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)
§ 35.61 LIENHOLDER NOTIFICATION SYSTEM.
   The Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall establish and maintain
a lienholder notification system on behalf of the city. The Kenton County Joint
Code Enforcement Board shall obtain and maintain priority over previously filed
liens, as provided in §
35.60, in accordance with the provisions of KRS 65.8836.
(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)
§ 35.62 LIENS.
   (A)   A lienholder of record who has registered pursuant to §
35.61 may, within 45 days from the date of issuance of notification under §
35.61:
      (1)   Correct the violation, if it has not already been abated; or
      (2)   Pay all civil fines assessed for the violation, and all charges and
fees incurred by the city in connection with enforcement of this subchapter,
including abatement costs.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from taking immediate
action if necessary under §
35.63.
   (C)   The lien provided by §
35.60 shall not take precedence over previously recorded liens if:
      (1)   The city failed to comply with the requirements of §
35.61 for notification of the final order; or
      (2)   A prior lienholder complied with division (A) of this section.
   (D)   A lien that does not take precedence over previously recorded liens
under division (C) of this section shall, if the final order remains partially
unsatisfied, continue to take precedence over all other subsequent liens except
liens for state, county, school board and city taxes.
   (E)   The city may record a lien before the 45-day period established in
division (A) of this section expires. If the lien is fully satisfied prior to
the expiration of the 45-day period, the city shall release the lien in the
County Clerk's office where the lien is recorded within fifteen days of
satisfaction.
   (F)   Failure of the city to comply with §§
35.60 and
35.61, or failure of a lien to take precedence over previously filed liens as
provided in division (C) of this section, shall not limit or restrict any other
remedies the city has against the property of the violator.
(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)
§ 35.63 IMMEDIATE ACTION.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the city from taking immediate
action to remedy a violation of its ordinances when there is reason to believe
that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, and
welfare, or if in the absence of immediate action, the effects of the violation
will be irreparable or irreversible.
(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)
§ 35.64 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to conform to all provisions of KRS
65.8801 through 65.8839, commonly known as the “Local Government Code
Enforcement Boards Act” and any subsequent amendments thereto.
(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 35.65 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The city is planning to create the Dixie Highway-Kyles Lane
Development Area (the “Development Area”) pursuant to the provisions of KRS
65.7041 to 65.7083 (the “Act”).
   (B)   Under the Act, the city may designate an agency responsible for the
oversight, administration and implementation of the Development Area.
   (C)   The city has determined it is best to establish a separate non-profit
corporation to act as its agency for the oversight, administration and
implementation of the Development Area, and other development areas or local
development areas the city may establish under the Act; and for other purposes
designed by the city to promote economic development within the city.
   (D)   Pursuant to the provisions of KRS Chapters 58 and 273, the city may
create a non-profit corporation to act as the agency, instrumentality and
constituted authority of the city for the financing of public projects on
behalf of the city, and for other purposes as may be designated by the city.
(Ord. 18-13, passed 12-18-13)
§ 35.66 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A) The Mayor is hereby authorized to execute and to file same with the
Kentucky Secretary of State, the articles of incorporation, attached to
Ordinance 18-13 as Exhibit “A,” to establish the City of Fort Wright Economic
Development Authority, Inc., as a non-profit corporation to be the agency,
instrumentality and constituted authority of the city pursuant to the
provisions of KRS Chapters 58 and 273.
   (B)   The establishment of the Economic Development Authority is for a
public purpose of the city.
(Ord. 18-13, passed 12-18-13)
CITY HISTORIAN
§ 35.70 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby created the position of City Historian for the City of Fort
Wright.
(Ord. 10-2015, passed 6-3-15)
§ 35.71 APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS.
   The City Historian shall be appointed by the Mayor and should have a keen
interest in the history of Ft. Wright.
(Ord. 10-2015, passed 6-3-15)
§ 35.72 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The City Historian shall hold office at the pleasure of the Mayor appointing
him, and he shall serve as a volunteer without compensation.
(Ord. 10-2015, passed 6-3-15)
§ 35.73 DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.
   Functions of the City Historian shall be to further the interest of the
people of the city in all matters relating to the history of the city, to
assemble data and information of historical interest to the city, and to
perform other duties as the Mayor or City Council shall prescribe that relate
to the recording of events of historical interest to the people of the city.
(Ord. 10-2015, passed 6-3-15)
CHAPTER 36: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
   
36.01   Personnel policies, pay classification adopted by reference; public
inspection
§ 36.01 PERSONNEL POLICIES, PAY CLASSIFICATION ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; PUBLIC
INSPECTION.
   (A)   The city personnel policies, pay classifications, and job description
plans dated September 4, 1985, and any subsequent amendments thereto, are
adopted by reference as the Official Personnel and Pay Classification Plan of
the city.
   (B)   The Official Personnel and Pay Classification Plan shall be available
for public inspection in the office of the city at 1661 Park Road.
(Ord. 348-1985, passed 10-2-85; Am. Ord. 380-1987, passed 9-5-87)
CHAPTER 37: TAXATION
Section
Ad Valorem Taxes
   
37.01   Adoption of county assessment
   
37.02   Establishment of tax; due date; delinquency and penalty
Bank Franchise and Local Deposit Tax
   
37.20   Establishment of tax; due date
Cross-reference:
   Waste collection assessment to be collected along with property taxes, see §
51.09
AD VALOREM TAXES
§ 37.01 ADOPTION OF COUNTY ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 132.285, the city elects to use the annual Kenton
County assessment for property situated within the city as a basis of ad
valorem tax levies ordered or approved by the City Council.
   (B)   The city shall also abide by the provisions of KRS 132.285 in its
relationship with the Property Valuation Administrator of Kenton County.
(`77 Code, § 14-1) (Ord. 286-1982, passed 12-1-82)
§ 37.02 ESTABLISHMENT; DUE DATE; DELINQUENCY AND PENALTY.
   (A)   An ad valorem tax in an amount as established by ordinance of City
Council from time to time on each $100 value of real estate, personal and mixed
property, subject to taxation for the fiscal year beginning July 1 and ending
June 30 of each year, for ordinary municipal purposes to carry on the
government of this city, including police protection, fire protection, repairs
to streets, and furnishing street lighting, is hereby established. By separate
ordinance, the city also levies a waste collection assessment per dwelling unit
which is billed and collected simultaneously with this ad valorem real estate
tax. All of the payment, collection and penalty provisions of this section
shall also apply to the waste collection assessment.
   (B)   All real and personal property taxes levied by the City Council each
year shall be due and payable to the City Treasurer. All real and personal
property taxes shall be due and payable on December 31 of each year. The city
will not accept any partial payments towards its real estate taxes; all such
tax bills must be paid in full.
Payments of real estate taxes shall be actually received by the city by 5:00
p.m. E.S.T. on or before December 31, unless December 31 falls on a Saturday or
Sunday, in which case the tax payment must be received by the city's last
business day of the year, deemed to be the Friday immediately before December
31. Provided however that payments received subsequent to the deadline which
contain valid postmarks stamped by the United States Post Office dated on or
before the due date will be received and honored as timely payments. Anyone
failing to pay the tax by December 29, 2023 shall be deemed delinquent and the
bill shall have added thereto a penalty of 20% of the amount thereof and shall
bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum from January 3, 2024, until paid.
The delinquent taxpayer shall also pay all costs and expenses incidental to any
action taken by the city for collection of the delinquent tax bill, including
court costs and attorney's fees. When a delinquent taxpayer is required to pay
penalty, interest and the city's attorney's fees pursuant to the foregoing, the
charges shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The calculation of interest shall be 12% per annum, calculated on a
monthly compound basis, such that after each calendar month of delinquency, an
additional 1% becomes due.
      (2)   If a real estate tax bill is unpaid when due, the city may engage
its City Attorney to send a letter to the taxpayer, identifying the unpaid tax
bill, stating the amount due and the fact of its delinquency; the fee agreed
upon by the city and the City Attorney for such letters shall be assessed to
the taxpayer.
      (3)   If a real estate tax bill is unpaid when due, the city may engage
its City Attorney to draft and record a statement of lien with the County
Clerk; the fee agreed upon by the city and the City Attorney for such letters
shall be assessed to the taxpayer.
      (4)   If the city is named as a party defendant in any debt collection
action against a taxpayer incident to the city's unpaid tax bill, including
actions for foreclosure of other liens against the subject real estate, the
city may engage its City Attorney to draft and file in said action an answer
and affidavit to set forth the city's claim, protect its lien, and demand
payment of all sums due to the city; the fee agreed upon by the city and the
City Attorney for such letters shall be assessed to the taxpayer.
      (5)   The set amount fees established by the agreement between the city
and the City Attorney are deemed reasonable.
      (6)   If the city engages its City Attorney, or other legal
representation, for collection of real estate taxes on a special basis or
program, other than as above, said fees shall be added to the tax bills for the
sums actually incurred by the city.
   (C)   The city has a lien upon the property assessed under the terms of this
chapter for the taxes levied upon the property under the terms of this chapter
and for all penalties, interest, fees, commissions, charges, and other
expenses, including court costs and attorney's fees, incurred by reason of
delinquency in payment of the tax bill or in the process of collecting it. Such
a lien has priority over all other obligations or liabilities for which the
property is liable.
(Ord. 349-1985, passed 10-7-85; Am. Ord. 391-1988, passed 9-7-88; Am. Ord. 408-
1989, passed 10-4-89; Am. Ord. 433-1990, passed 10-3-90; Am. Ord. 461-1992,
passed 10-7-92; Am. Ord. 480-1993, passed 9-15-93; Am. Ord. 496-1994, passed
10-5-94; Am. Ord. 529-96, passed 9-18-96; Am. Ord. 553-97, passed 9-3-97; Am.
Ord. 575-98, passed 9-2-98; Am. Ord. 588-99, passed 9-8-99; Am. Ord. 12-00,
passed 9-13-00; Am. Ord. 15- 06, passed 9-8-06; Am. Ord. 6-07, passed 9-5-07;
Am. Ord. 11-08, passed 9-9-08; Am. Ord. 14-09, passed 9-2-09; Am. Ord. 04-10,
passed 9-1-10; Am. Ord. 05-11, passed 9-7-11; Am. Ord. 12-12, passed 9-5-12;
Am. Ord. 2-13, passed 4-3-13; Am. Ord. 09-13, passed 9-4-13; Am. Ord. 11-14,
passed 9-3-14; Am. Ord. 4-2015, passed 5-6-15; Am. Ord. 12- 2015, passed 9-2-
15; Am. Ord. 07-2016, passed 9-21-16; Am. Ord. 13-2017, passed 10-11-17; Am.
Ord. 13-18, passed 10-17-18; Am. Ord. 09-19, passed 10-16-19; Am. Ord. 4-2020,
passed 10-21-20; Am. Ord. 12-2021, passed 10-6-21; Am. Ord. 10-2022, passed 10-
5-22; Am. Ord. 11-2023, passed 10-4-23)
   (D)   All personal property taxes on motor vehicles shall be collected by
the Kenton County Clerk as required by KRS 134.800 et seq. Property taxes on
motor vehicles shall become due or delinquent as set forth in KRS 134.810, and
subject to the penalty and interest provided in KRS 134.810. The tax rate on
the motor vehicle tax is hereby set at $0.02 per $100 of value effective
January 1, 2024 and thereafter unless and until changed by property-adopted
ordinance of the city.
   (E)   Pursuant to the pertinent section of the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, the general laws thereof, and KRS 136.270(3), there
shall be levied and assessed by the city an ad valorem tax in an amount to be
set annually on each $100 of taxable fair cash value of bank or trust company
stock of each bank or trust company located in the city as duly assessed by the
Kenton County Property Valuation Administrator for general fund and municipal
purposes.
(Ord. 495-1994, passed 10-5-94; Am. Ord. 13-2021, passed 10-6-21; Am. Ord. 12-
2022, passed 12-21-2022)
BANK FRANCHISE AND LOCAL DEPOSIT TAX
§ 37.20 ESTABLISHMENT OF TAX; DUE DATE.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed on all "financial institutions", as defined in
KRS Chapter 136, located within the corporate limits of the city, for the 1996
tax year and all subsequent years, a franchise tax at the rate of 0.025% on all
deposits, as defined in KRS Chapter 136, maintained by such financial
institutions.
   (B)   (1)   For transition purposes, the 1996 tax year will be treated
differently in terms of collection of taxes than for all subsequent years. For
the 1996 tax year, the following timetable is hereby established.
      (2)   The city will issue tax bills to financial institutions no later
than May 1, 1997. Payment of the tax shall be due with a 2% discount by May 31,
1997, or without the discount by June 30, 1997.
   (C)   For all tax years subsequent to the 1996 tax year, the following
timetable is hereby established: The city will issue tax bills to financial
institutions no later than December 1 of each year. Payment of the tax shall be
due with a 2% discount by December 31 of each year, or without the discount by
January 31 of each year.
   (D)   The city shall have a lien for taxes upon any and all property subject
to the tax imposed by these sections, which lien shall be superior to all
encumbrances prior or subsequent.
   (E)   All taxes due in accordance with these sections which are not paid
before June 30, 1997, for tax year 1996, or which are not paid before January
31, for all subsequent tax years shall be subject to a penalty of 15% and shall
bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum.
(Ord. 531-1996, passed 9-4-96)
CHAPTER 38: CODE OF ETHICS
Section
General Provisions
   
38.01   Title
   
38.02   Findings
   
38.03   Purpose and authority
   
38.04   Definitions
Standards of Conduct
   
38.10   Conflicts of interest in general
   
38.11   Conflicts of interest in contracts
   
38.12   Incompatible offices
   
38.13   Withdrawal from participation
   
38.14   Receipt of gifts
   
38.15   Use of city property, equipment and personnel
   
38.16   Representation of interests before city government
   
38.17   Misuse of confidential information
   
38.18   Political solicitation
   
38.19   Patronage
   
38.20   Outside employment
   
38.21   Fees and honoraria
   
38.22   Complicity with or knowledge of others’ violations
   
38.23   Falsely impugning reputation
   
38.24   Meeting attendance
   
38.25   Social media
   
38.26   Email
Financial Disclosure
   
38.40   Who must file
   
38.41   When to file statements; amended statements
   
38.42   Form of the statement of financial interests
   
38.43   Control and maintenance of the statements of financial interests
   
38.44   Contents of the financial interests statement
   
38.45   Noncompliance with filing requirements
Nepotism
   
38.60   Nepotism prohibited
Enforcement
   
38.80   Board of Ethics created
   
38.81   Alternate members
   
38.82   Facilities and staff
   
38.83   Annual meeting
   
38.84   Powers and duties of the Board of Ethics
   
38.85   Training and education
   
38.86   Annual reports and annual review of Ethics Code
   
38.87   Filing and investigation of complaints
   
38.88   Notice of hearings
   
38.89   Hearing procedure
   
38.90   Appeals
   
38.91   Limitation of actions
   
38.92   Advisory opinions
   
38.93   Reprisals against persons disclosing violations prohibited
 
   
38.99   Penalties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 38.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Fort Wright,
Kentucky Code of Ethics.”
(Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.02 FINDINGS.
   The legislative body of the city finds and declares that:
   (A)   Public office and employment by the city are public trusts.
   (B)   The vitality, stability and longevity of the government of this city
depends upon the public's confidence in the honesty and integrity of its
elected and appointed officers and employees. Whenever the public perceives a
conflict between the private interests and public duties of a city officer or
employee, that confidence is compromised.
   (C)   The government of this city has a duty to provide its citizens with
standards by which they may determine whether public duties are being
faithfully performed, and to make its officers and employees aware of the
standards in this Code of Ethics.
(Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.03 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide assurance that standards
of ethical conduct and financial disclosure requirements for officers and
employees of the city shall be clearly established, uniform in their
application, and enforceable. This chapter also provides the officers and
employees of the city with advice and information concerning potential
conflicts of interest which might arise in the conduct of their public duties.
   (B)   It is the further purpose of this chapter to meet the requirements of
KRS 65.003.
   (C)   This chapter is enacted under the power vested in the city by KRS
82.082 and pursuant to the requirements of KRS 65.003.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.04 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
   "BOARD OF ETHICS." The City Board of Ethics which is created and vested by
this chapter with the responsibility of enforcing the requirements of the
City's Code of Ethics.
   "BUSINESS." Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual,
holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, professional service
corporation, or any legal entity through which business is conducted for
profit.
   "CANDIDATE." Any individual who seeks appointment, nomination, or election
to a city office. An individual is a candidate when the individual files a
notification and declaration for nomination for office with the County Clerk or
the Secretary of State, is nominated for office by a political party, or files
a declaration of intent to be a write-in candidate with the County Clerk or
Secretary of State.
   "CITY." The City of Fort Wright, Kentucky.
   "CITY AGENCY." Any board, commission, authority, non-stock corporation, or
other entity created, either individually or jointly by this city.
   "CITY BUSINESS." Any discussion of specific city issues that goes beyond
general information.
   "CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION." Information obtained in the course of holding
public office or employment, or as a contractor to the city which is not
available to members of the public and which the officer or employee is not
authorized to disclose except to designated individuals or bodies, including
written and non-written information. When such information is also available
through channels open to the public, officers and employees are not prohibited
from disclosing the availability of those channels.
   "CONSULTANT." An independent contractor, professional person, or entity
engaged by the city or advising a city officer, and in a position to influence
a city decision or action or having access to confidential information.
   "DOMESTIC PARTNER." An adult, unrelated by blood, with whom an unmarried or
separated officer or employee has an exclusive committed relationship,
maintains a mutual residence, and shares basic living expenses.
   "EMPLOYEE." Any person, whether full-time, part-time, seasonal, or
temporary, whether paid or unpaid, who is employed or provides service to the
city. “EMPLOYEE” shall not include any contractor, subcontractor, or any of
their employees.
   "FAMILY MEMBER." A spouse, domestic partner, and, whether by blood,
adoption, marriage, guardianship, or domestic partnership, the parent, child,
brother, sister, grandparent, or grandchild.
   "FINANCIAL BENEFIT." Any money, service, license, permit, contract,
authorization, loan, discount, travel, entertainment, hospitality, gratuity,
any promise of any of these, or anything else of value. This term does not
include legal campaign contributions.
   "FINANCIAL INTEREST." A relationship to something where a direct or indirect
financial benefit has been, will be, or might be received, as a result of the
relationship.
   "HOUSEHOLD." Includes anyone whose primary residence is in the officer's or
employee's home, including non-relatives who are not paying rent, or staff.
   "IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER." A spouse, domestic partner, and, whether by
blood, adoption, marriage, guardianship, or domestic partnership, a child who
is not emancipated and who resides in the officer's or employee's household, a
person claimed by the officer or employee, or the officer's or employee's
spouse or domestic partner, as a dependent for tax purposes.
   "OFFICER." Any person, whether full-time or part-time, whether paid or
unpaid, who is one of the following:
      (1)   Mayor;
      (2)   Council Member;
      (3)   City Administrator;
      (4)   City Clerk;
      (5)   Finance Clerk;
      (6)   Police Chief;
      (7)   Fire Chief;
      (8)   Public Works Director;
      (9)   Any other person that occupies a non-elected office created
pursuant to KRS 83A.080; and
      (10)   A member of the governing body of any city agency who has been
appointed to that agency by the city.
   "OFFICIAL ACT." Any legislative, administrative, appointive, or
discretionary act of any public official or employee of the city or any agency,
board, committee, or commission thereof.
   "PERSONAL BENEFIT." Includes benefits other than those that are directly
financially advantageous. These include financial benefits to immediate family
members, business associates, as well as non- financial benefits to these
people and to oneself, including such things as reputation and the success of
one's career.
   "PERSONAL INTEREST." A relationship to something where a personal benefit
has been, will be, or might be obtained by certain action or inaction with
respect to it.
   "SOCIAL MEDIA." Understood to be content created by individuals using the
internet. Examples of social media include Facebook, Instagram, YouTube,
Twitter/X, LinkedIn, Snapchat, Reddit, and blogs.
   "SUBORDINATE." Another official or employee over whose activities an
official or employee has direction, supervision, or control.
   "TRANSACTION." Any matter, including but not limited to contracts, work,
business with the city, the sale or purchase of real estate by the city, and
any request for zoning amendments, variances, or special permits pending before
the city, upon which a public officer or employee performs an official act or
action.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
§ 38.10 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN GENERAL.
   Every officer and employee of the city and every city agency shall comply
with the following standards of conduct.
   (A)   No officer, employee, or any immediate family member of any officer or
employee, shall have an interest in a business or engage in any business,
transaction, or activity which is in substantial conflict with the proper
discharge of the officer's or employee's public duties.
   (B)   No officer or employee shall intentionally use or attempt to use their
official position with the city to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages
for themselves or others.
   (C)   No officer or employee shall intentionally take, agree to take, or
fail to take any discretionary action, or attempt to influence any other
officer or employee as to a discretionary action in order to obtain a personal
or financial benefit for any of the following:
      (1)   The officer or the employee;
      (2)   A family member;
      (3)   An outside employer;
      (4)   Any business in which the officer or employee or any family member
has a financial interest;
      (5)   Any business with which the officer or employee or any family
member is negotiating or seeking prospective employment, other business, or
professional relationship; and
      (6)   A non-governmental civic group, social, charitable, or religious
organization of which they or their immediate family member is an officer or
director.
   (D)   No officer or employee shall be deemed in violation of any provision
in this section, if by reason of the officer's or employee's action or
inaction, no personal or financial benefit accrues to the officer or employee,
a family member, an outside employer, or a business as a member of any business
occupation, profession, or other group, to any greater extent than any gain
could reasonably be expected to accrue to any other member of the business,
occupation, profession, or other group.
   (E)   Every officer or employee who has a prohibited financial interest
which the officer or employee believes, or has reason to believe, may be
affected by their participation, vote, decision, or other action taken within
the scope of their public duties shall disclose the precise nature and value of
the interest in writing to the governing body of the city or city agency served
by the officer or employee. The disclosure shall be entered on the official
record of the proceedings of the governing body. The officer or employee shall
refrain from taking any action with respect to the matter that is the subject
of the disclosure pursuant to §
38.13.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.11 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN CONTRACTS.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall directly
or through others undertake, execute, hold, or enjoy, in whole or in part, any
contract made, entered into, awarded, or granted by the city or a city agency,
with the following exceptions:
      (1)   The prohibition in division (A) of this section shall not apply to
contracts entered into before an elected officer filed as a candidate for city
office, before an appointed officer was appointed to a city or city agency
office, or before an employee was hired by the city or a city agency. If the
contract is renewable, then the prohibition in division (A) of this section
shall apply to the renewal of the contract unless the disclosures required by
division (A)(3) below are satisfied.
      (2)   The prohibition in division (A) of this section shall not apply if
the contract is awarded after public notice and competitive bidding, unless the
officer or employee is authorized to participate in establishing the contract
specifications, or awarding, or managing the contract. If so, then the officer
or employee shall have no interest in the contract, unless the disclosures
required by division (A)(3) below are satisfied.
      (3)   The prohibition in division (A) of this section shall not apply in
any case where the following requirements are satisfied:
         (a)   The specific nature of the contract transaction and the nature
of the officer's or employee's interest in the contract are publicly disclosed
at a meeting of the governing body of the city or city agency.
         (b)   The disclosure is made as part of the official record of the
governing body of the city or city agency before the contract is executed.
         (c)   A finding is made by the governing body of the city or city
agency that the contract with the officer or the employee is in the best
interests of the public and the city or city agency before the contract is
executed.
         (d)   The finding is made as part of the official record of the
governing body of the city or city agency before the contract is executed.
   (B)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class A misdemeanor.
Upon conviction, the court may void any contract entered into in violation of
KRS 61.252. Additionally, violation of this section shall be grounds for
removal from office or employment with the city in accordance with any
applicable provisions of state laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations of the
city.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.12 INCOMPATIBLE OFFICES.
   (A)   Pursuant to Section 165 of the Kentucky Constitution, no officer or
employee of the city may also be a state officer, deputy state officer, member
of the General Assembly, or may fill more than one municipal office at the same
time, whether in the same or a different city.
   (B)   Pursuant to KRS 61.080, no city officer may also hold a county office.
In addition, the statute states that the following city and consolidated local
government offices are incompatible with any other public office:
      (1)   Member of the legislative body of cities of the First Class;
      (2)   Mayor and member of the legislative council of a consolidated local
government; and
      (3)   Mayor and member of the legislative body in cities of the Home Rule
Class.
   (C)   In addition to the constitution and statutory provisions, there are
common law incompatibilities defined by the courts. City officers and
employment positions are deemed incompatible when one office or position of
employment was inherently inconsistent in function with the other. This
incompatibility occurs when there arises an implication that the duties and
responsibilities of both cannot be performed at the same time with a necessary
degree of impartiality and honesty.
   (D)   KRS 61.090 provides that the acceptance of an incompatible office
operates to vacate the first office.
(Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.13 WITHDRAWAL FROM PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   An officer or employee must refrain from acting on or discussing,
formally or informally, a matter before the city, if acting on the matter or
failing to act on the matter may personally or financially benefit any of the
persons or entities listed in §
38.10(C) above. Such an officer or employee should leave the room if it is a
public meeting conducted under KRS 61.810 and KRS 61.815.
   (B)   Withdrawal at a meeting requires public announcement, on the record,
of the reason for withdrawal.
(Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.14 RECEIPT OF GIFTS.
   (A)   No officer, employee, or appointee of the city or city agency shall
directly or indirectly solicit any gift or accept or receive any gift having a
value of $250 or more. Gifts include the form of money, service, loan, travel,
entertainment, hospitality, promise, or any other form, under circumstances
when it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence or
could reasonably be expected to influence the officer, employee, or appointee
in the performance of their official duties, or was intended as a reward for
any official action.
   (B)   Certain items are typically excluded from the prohibition. Examples of
these items include:
      (1)   Gifts received from family members;
      (2)   Gifts accepted on behalf of the city and transferred to the city;
      (3)   Reasonable travel and travel-related expenses, cost of admission,
food, beverages, and entertainment furnished in connection with certain
specified public events, appearances, ceremonies, economic development
activities, or fact-finding trips related to official government business;
      (4)   Usual and customary loans made in the ordinary course of business;
      (5)   Awards, including certificates, plaques, and commemorative tokens
presented in recognition of public service; and
      (6)   Informational, promotional, and educational items.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.15 USE OF CITY PROPERTY, EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL.
   No officer or employee of the city shall use or permit the use of any city
time, funds, personnel, equipment, or other personal or real property, for the
private use of any person, unless the use is available to the general public,
and then only to the extent and upon the terms that such use is available to
the general public.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.16 REPRESENTATION OF INTERESTS BEFORE CITY GOVERNMENT.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall represent
any person, group, or business, other than the city, in connection with any
cause, proceeding, application, or other matter pending before the city or any
city agency.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any officer or employee from
representing themselves in matters concerning their own interests.
   (C)   No elected officer shall be prohibited by this section from making any
inquiry for information on behalf of a constituent if no compensation, reward,
or other thing of value is promised to, given to, or accepted by the officer,
whether directly or indirectly, in return for the inquiry.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.17 MISUSE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall intentionally
use or disclose information acquired in the course of their official duties, if
the primary purpose of the use or disclosure is to further their personal or
financial interest or the personal or financial interest of another person,
group, or business. Information shall be deemed confidential if it is not
subject to disclosure pursuant to the Kentucky Open Records Act at the time of
its use or disclosure.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.18 POLITICAL SOLICITATION.
   (A)   An officer, employee, or municipal candidate may not request or
authorize anyone else to request that any subordinate or potential future
subordinate participate or not participate in any political activity, including
the making of a campaign contribution.
   (B)   An officer, employee, or municipal candidate may not engage in any
political activity for the city while on duty, in uniform, using city funds,
supplies, vehicles, or facilities during any period of time during which they
are normally expected to perform services for the city for which compensation
is paid.
(Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.19 PATRONAGE.
   No officer or employee may promise an appointment or use their influence to
obtain an appointment to any position as a reward for any political activity or
contribution.
(Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-7-24)
§ 38.20 OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   An officer or employee shall not accept any employment or enter into
any contracts that result in a conflict of interest with their duties as an
officer or employee of the city.
   (B)   An employee of the city may be self-employed or may take occasional or
part-time jobs, if, in the opinion of their supervisor and the executive
authority, there is no conflict with working hours, the employee's efficiency
in their city work, or other interest of the city.
   (C)   Employees wishing to take off-duty employment shall have the written
approval of their supervisor and the executive authority.
   (D)   Employees or officers holding management-level positions shall notify
the executive authority before creating, contracting with, or being employed by
any agency or business firm other than the city for the executive authority of
written approval.
   (E)   City employment shall remain the first priority, and if at any time
the outside employment interferes with an employee's job requirements or
performance for the city, the employee shall be required to modify the
conditions of the outside employment or terminate either the off-duty
employment or their city employment.
(Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.21 FEES AND HONORARIA.
   (A)   An officer or employee shall not accept any compensation or honorarium
in consideration for an appearance, speech, or article unless the appearance,
speech, or article is both related to the officer's or employee's employment or
activities outside of municipal service and is unrelated to the officer's or
employee's service with the city.
   (B)   This section shall not preclude an officer or an employee from
obtaining reasonable travel and travel-related expenses.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.22 COMPLICITY WITH OR KNOWLEDGE OF OTHERS' VIOLATIONS.
   No officer or employee may directly or indirectly induce, encourage, or aid
anyone to violate any provision of this code. if an officer or employee knows
or has reasonable suspicion to believe that someone has violated this code,
they are required to report it to the Board of Ethics pursuant to § 38.87.
(Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.23 FALSELY IMPUGNING REPUTATION.
   An officer or employee may not falsely impugn the reputation of a city
resident, employee, or another officer of the city. If an officer or employee
believes their accusation to be true, and then learns that it was false, even
in part, they should apologize in the same forum and manner where the
accusations were made. A failure to apologize within a reasonable period of
time after learning of the falseness of the accusations will create the
presumption that the conduct was intentional.
(Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.24 MEETING ATTENDANCE.
   All elected city officers and members of city boards and commissions are
expected to attend their meetings. It is a violation of this code to miss more
than one-half of the meetings in a 12-month period, absent a valid reason.
(Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.25 SOCIAL MEDIA.
   (A)   Elected city officials who want to interact with the community on
social media in their role as a city official are required to maintain a
separate social media account from their personal account if they have one.
   (B)   City officials shall not conduct city business through their social
media sites. If receiving a specific request from a citizen, the city official
shall state words to the effect of: "Thank you for your question. Please email
me at [official email address] or contact me at [phone number]. I look forward
to speaking with you."
   (C)   Elected officials shall not discuss issues pending before the Council.
Elected officials may seek public input but shall not respond to comments.
Engaging in substantive conversations on social media could require retention
of the posts and may violate the Open Meetings Act if other elected officials
are also engaging in the discussion.
   (D)   City employees are bound by any applicable city social media policies
that are adopted.
(Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.26 EMAIL.
   (A)   City officials shall maintain an official email address and shall
provide the email address to the City Clerk. This must be separate from their
personal email account.
   (B)   No city business shall occur through a personal email account.
   (C)   City officials shall retain emails according to the KDLA Record
Retention Schedule for emails. City officials shall direct any recordkeeping
questions to the City Clerk.
(Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
§ 38.40 WHO MUST FILE.
   The following classes of officers and employees of the city and city
agencies shall file an annual statement of financial interests with the Board
of Ethics:
   (A)   Elected city officers;
   (B)   Candidates for elected office;
   (C)   Officers and employees who hold policymaking positions, including
members of municipal boards, such as the Board of Ethics, Planning and Zoning
Boards, Boards of Adjustment, Code Enforcement Boards, Economic Development
Boards, and Parks and Recreation Boards;
   (D)   Officers or employees whose job descriptions or whose actual duties
involve:
      (1)   The negotiation, authorization, or approval of contracts, leases,
franchises, revocable consents, concessions, variances, special permits, or
licenses;
      (2)   The purchase, sale, rental, or lease of real property, personal
property, services, or a contract for any of these;
      (3)   The obtaining of grants of money or loans.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.41 WHEN TO FILE STATEMENTS; AMENDED STATEMENTS.
   (A)   All statements of financial interest shall be filed no later than 5:00
p.m. on April 30 of each year, provided that:
      (1)   An officer or employee newly appointed to fill an office or
position of employment with the city or a city agency shall file their initial
statement no later than 30 days after the date of the appointment.
      (2)   A candidate for city office shall file their initial statement no
later than 30 days after the date on which the person becomes a candidate for
elected office.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics may grant a reasonable extension of time for
filing a statement of financial interests for good cause shown.
   (C)   In the event there is a material change in any information contained
in a financial statement that has been filed with the Board of Ethics, the
officer or employee shall, no later than 30 days after becoming aware of the
material change, file an amended statement with the Board of Ethics.
   (D)   By June 15 of each year, the Board of Ethics must review all annual
financial disclosure statements filed with it to determine whether any person
required to file such a statement has failed to file it, has filed a deficient
statement, or has filed a statement that reveals a potential violation of this
code. If the Board of Ethics determines that an annual or transactional
disclosure statement is deficient or reveals a potential violation of this
code, the Board of Ethics will notify the person in writing of the deficiency,
potential violation, and of the penalties for failure to comply with this code.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 545-1997, passed 1-15-97; Am. Ord. 09-
2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.42 FORM OF THE STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.
   (A)   The statement of financial interests shall be filed on a form
prescribed by the Board of Ethics or the administrative official designated by
the Board of Ethics.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics, along with the City Administrator, will annually
review the list of officials and employees required to file annual disclosure
statements to determine whether the lists are complete and accurate. Within 90
days after it has been formed, and by February 1 each year thereafter, the
Board of Ethics, along with the City Administrator, must create a list of the
names and offices or positions of all officials and employees and others
required to file annual disclosure statements pursuant this section; and notify
all such persons of their obligation to file an annual disclosure statement.
   (C)   The Board of Ethics or the designated administrative official shall
deliver a copy of the form to each officer and employee required to file the
statement by first-class mail, email, or hand delivery no later than March 1 of
each year.
   (D)   The failure of the Board of Ethics or the designated administrative
official to deliver a copy of the form to any officer or employee shall not
relieve the officer or employee of the obligation to file the statement.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 545-1997, passed 1-15-97; Am. Ord. 09-
2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.43 CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE OF THE STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall be the "official custodian" of the statements of
financial interests and shall have control over the maintenance of the
statements of financial interests. The statements of financial interests shall
be maintained by the City Clerk as the "custodian" of public documents and be
available for public inspection immediately upon filing.
   (B)   A statement of financial interests shall be retained by the City Clerk
or the designated administrative official pursuant to the KDLA Record Retention
Schedule as follows:
      (1)   Upon the expiration of two years after a person ceases to be an
officer or employee of the city or a city agency, the Board of Ethics shall
have any statements of financial interests or copies of those statements filed
by the person destroyed.
      (2)   Upon the expiration of two years after any election at which a
candidate for elected city office was not elected or nominated, the Board of
Ethics shall have any statements of financial interests or copies of those
statements filed by the person destroyed.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.44 CONTENTS OF THE FINANCIAL INTERESTS STATEMENT.
   (A)   The statement of financial interests shall include the following
information for the preceding calendar year:
      (1)   The name, employer/business name; employer/business address,
employer/business telephone number, and home address of the filer;
      (2)   The title of the filer's office, office sought, or position of
employment;
      (3)   The occupation of the filer and the occupation of the filer's
spouse or domestic partner;
      (4)   Information that identifies each source of income of the filer and
the filer's immediate family members exceeding $5,000 during the preceding
calendar year and the nature of the income, e.g., salary, commission,
dividends, retirement fund distribution, etc;
      (5)   The name and address of any business located within the city in
which the filer or any member of the filer's immediate family had at any time
during the preceding calendar year an interest of $10,000 at fair market value
or 5% ownership interest or more;
      (6)   The name and address of any creditor owed more than $10,000, except
debts arising from the purchase of a primary residence, or the purchase of
consumer goods which are bought or used primarily for personal, family, or
household purposes;
      (7)   A designation as commercial, residential, or rural, and the
location of all real property within the city, other than the filer's primary
residence, in which the filer or any member of the filer's immediate family had
during the preceding calendar year an interest of $10,000 or more;
      (8)   Each source, by name and address, of gifts or honoraria having an
aggregate fair market value of $250 or more from any single source, excluding
gifts received from family members, received by the filer, or any member of the
filer's immediate family during the preceding calendar year.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any officer or
employee to disclose any specific dollar amounts, nor the names of individual
clients, nor customers of businesses listed as sources of income.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.45 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH FILING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics or the designated administrative official shall
notify by certified mail each person required to file a statement of financial
interests who fails to file the statement by the due date, files an incomplete
statement, or files a statement in a form other than that prescribed by the
Board of Ethics. The notice shall specify the type of failure or delinquency,
shall establish a date by which the failure or delinquency shall be remedied,
and shall advise the person of the penalties for a violation.
   (B)   Any person who fails or refuses to file the statement or remedy a
deficiency in the filing identified in the notice under division (A) within the
time established in the notice shall be guilty of a civil offense and shall be
subject to a civil fine imposed by the Board of Ethics in an amount not to
exceed $25 per day, up to a maximum civil fine of $500. Any civil fine imposed
by the Board of Ethics under this section, may be recovered by the city in a
civil action in the nature of debt if the offender fails or refuses to pay the
penalty within a prescribed period of time.
   (C)   Any person who intentionally files a statement of financial interests
which they know to contain false information or intentionally omits required
information, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
NEPOTISM
§ 38.60 NEPOTISM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or a city agency shall advocate,
recommend, or cause the employment, appointment, promotion, transfer,
advancement of a family member to an office or position of employment with the
city or a city agency.
   (B)   No officer or employee of the city or a city agency shall supervise or
manage the work of a family member.
   (C)   No officer or employee shall participate in any action relating to the
employment or discipline of a family member, except that this prohibition shall
not prevent an elected or appointed officer from voting on, or participating
in, the development of a budget, which includes compensation for a family
member provided that the family member is included only as a member of a class
of persons or a group, and the family member benefits to no greater extent than
any other similarly situated member of the class or group.
   (D)   The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to any relationship
or situation that would violate the prohibition, but which existed prior to
2024.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 38.80 BOARD OF ETHICS CREATED.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Ethics which shall have the
authorities, duties, and responsibilities as set forth in this chapter to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics shall consist of three members who shall be
appointed by the executive authority of the city, subject to the approval of
the legislative body. The initial members of the Board of Ethics shall be
appointed within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter. The members
shall serve for a term of three years; except that with respect to the members
initially appointed, one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, one
member shall be appointed for a term of two years, and one member shall be
appointed for a term of three years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for
a term of three years.
   (C)   A Board of Ethics member will serve until their successor has been
appointed in the same manner as the original appointment.
   (D)   Each member of the Board of Ethics shall reside in the city throughout
the term in office and shall not be a family member of a city employee or
officer. The members of the Board of Ethics shall be chosen by their known and
consistent reputation for integrity and their knowledge of local government
affairs.
   (E)   A member of the Board of Ethics may be removed by the executive
authority subject to the approval of the legislative body for misconduct,
incapacity, or willful neglect of duties. Before any member of the Board of
Ethics is removed from office under this section, the member shall be afforded
the opportunity for a hearing before the executive authority and the
legislative body.
   (F)   Vacancies on the Board of Ethics shall be filled within 60 days by the
executive authority subject to the approval of the legislative body. If a
vacancy is not filled by the executive authority within 60 days, the remaining
members of the Board of Ethics shall fill the vacancy. All vacancies shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.
   (G)   Members of the Board of Ethics shall serve without compensation unless
otherwise approved by the legislative body but shall be reimbursed for all
necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
   (H)   The Board of Ethics shall elect a chairperson from among the
membership annually at the January meeting which shall occur on the third
Tuesday of January each year. The chairperson shall be the presiding officer
and a full voting member of the Ethics Board.
   (I)   In addition to the annual meeting on the third Tuesday in January,
meetings of the Board of Ethics shall be held, as necessary, upon the call of
the chairperson or at the written request of a majority of the members. The
Board of Ethics shall follow the Open Meetings Act for all meetings.
   (J)   The presence of two or more members shall constitute a quorum and the
affirmative vote of two or more members shall be necessary for any official
action to be taken. Any member of the Board of Ethics who has a conflict of
interest with respect to any matter to be considered by the Board of Ethics
shall disclose the nature of the conflict, shall disqualify themselves from
voting on the matter, and shall not be counted for purposes of establishing a
quorum by removing themselves from the meeting room for the duration of the
consideration of the matter.
   (K)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Board of Ethics and
the vote of each member on any issue decided by the Board of Ethics shall be
recorded in the minutes.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.81 ALTERNATE MEMBERS.
   The executive authority of the city, with the approval of the legislative
body, may appoint two alternate members of the Board of Ethics, who may be
called upon to serve when any regular member of the Board of Ethics is unable
to discharge their duties. An alternate member shall be appointed for a term of
one year. Alternate members shall meet all qualifications and be subject to all
of the requirements of this chapter that apply to regular members.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.82 FACILITIES AND STAFF.
   Within the limits of the funds appropriated by the legislative body in the
annual budget, the city shall provide the Board of Ethics with the facilities,
materials, supplies, and staff needed for the conduct of its business.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.83 ANNUAL MEETING.
   The Board of Ethics will meet on the third Tuesday of each January to elect
a chair and a vice chair from among its regular members and set a plan for any
obligations for the year, including any annual reports, reviews of disclosures,
etc. A majority of the regular members is required for the Board of Ethics to
take any action. The chair or a majority of the regular members may call a
meeting of the Board of Ethics.
(Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.84 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ETHICS.
   The Board of Ethics shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To initiate on its own motion a complaint, receive a complaint from
outside of the Board of Ethics, investigate those complaints, hold hearings,
and make findings of fact and determinations with regard to alleged violations
of the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   To issue orders in connection with its investigations and hearings
requiring persons to submit in writing, under oath, reports and answers to
questions that are relevant to the proceedings and to order testimony to be
taken by deposition before any individual designated by the Ethics Board who
has the power to administer oaths;
   (C)   To administer oaths and to issue orders requiring the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of documentary evidence relating to
an investigation or hearing being conducted by the Board of Ethics;
   (D)   To refer any information concerning violations of this chapter to the
executive authority of the city, the city legislative body, the governing body
of any city agency, the County Attorney, or other appropriate persons, body, or
bodies, as necessary;
   (E)   To render advisory opinions to city and city agency officers and
employees regarding whether a given set of facts and circumstances would
constitute a violation of any provision of this chapter;
   (F)   To enforce the provisions of this chapter with regard to all officers,
employees of the city, and city agencies who are subject to its terms by
issuing appropriate orders and imposing penalties authorized by this chapter;
   (G)   To control and maintain all statements of financial interests that are
required to be filed by this chapter and to ensure that the statements are
available for public inspection in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and the Open Records Act;
   (H)   To adopt rules and regulations and to take other actions as necessary
to implement the provisions of this chapter, provided that the rules,
regulations, and actions are not in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter or any state or federal laws;
   (I)   To provide training and education on the City Ethics Code to officials
and employees;
   (J)   To prepare and submit an annual report and any recommended changes to
this code to the legislative body and to develop and submit any reports
regarding the conduct of its business that may be required by the executive
authority or legislative body of the city;
   (K)   The Board of Ethics along with the City Administrator will annually
review the list of officials and employees required to file annual disclosure
statements to determine whether the lists are complete and accurate;
   (L)   The Board of Ethics will prepare forms for complaints, financial
disclosure statements, and will make these forms available at the City Clerk's
Office and on the city's website for easy downloading. By June 15 of each year,
the Board of Ethics must review all annual financial disclosure statements
filed with it to determine whether any person required to file such a statement
has failed to file, has filed a deficient statement, or has filed a statement
that reveals a potential violation of this code. If the Board of Ethics
determines that an annual or transactional disclosure statement is deficient or
reveals a potential violation of this code, the Board of Ethics will notify the
person in writing of the deficiency, potential violation, and of the penalties
for failure to comply with this code.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.85 TRAINING AND EDUCATION.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics will, after passage or amendment of the Ethics
Code, make this Ethics Code available to all officials, employees, candidates,
and to municipal residents.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics will attempt to hold annual workshops for new and
experienced officials, Board of Ethics members, and employees to discuss this
code, its values and goals, its enforcement, and the ways in which it has
affected the officials' and employees' work and the working of the city
government.
(Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.86 ANNUAL REPORTS AND ANNUAL REVIEW OF ETHICS CODE.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics must prepare and submit an annual report to the
legislative body summarizing the activities, decisions, and advisory opinions
of the Board of Ethics. The report may also recommend changes to the text or
administration of this Ethics Code. The report must be submitted no later than
October 31 of each year, covering the previous year and must be filed with the
City Clerk and made available on the city website.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics will periodically (no less than every five years)
review this Ethics Code, the enforcement of the Ethics Code, and the Board of
Ethic's rules, regulations, and administrative procedures to determine whether
they promote integrity, public confidence, and participation in city
government, and whether they set forth clear and enforceable, common-sense
standards of conduct.
(Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.87 FILING AND INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   All complaints alleging any violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be submitted to the Board of Ethics or the administrative
official designated by the Board of Ethics. All complaints shall be in writing,
signed by the complainant, and shall meet any other requirements established by
the Board of Ethics. The Board of Ethics shall acknowledge receipt of a
complaint to the complainant within ten working days from the date of receipt.
The Board of Ethics shall forward within ten working days to each officer or
employee of the city or city agency who is the subject of the complaint, a copy
of the complaint and a general statement of the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics may, on its own initiative, determine through an
inquiry into informal allegations, information provided directly to the Board
of Ethics, by referral, or otherwise that a violation of this code may exist
and prepare a complaint of its own. The Board of Ethics may also amend a
complaint that has been filed with it by adding further allegations, adding
respondents involved in the same conduct, directly or indirectly, by action or
inaction, by deleting allegations that would not constitute a violation of this
code, by deleting allegations that have been made against persons or entities
not covered by this code, or by deleting allegations that do not appear to be
supported by the facts. The Board of Ethics may also consolidate complaints
where the allegations are materially related. Amended complaints must be sent
to the complainant and respondent by the Board of Ethics.
   (C)   Within 30 days of the receipt of a proper complaint, the Board of
Ethics shall conduct a preliminary inquiry concerning the allegations contained
in the complaint. The Board of Ethics shall afford the person who is the
subject of the complaint, an opportunity to respond to the allegations in the
complaint. The person shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to
appear and be heard under oath, and to offer evidence in response to the
allegations.
   (D)   The person who is the subject of the complaint (respondent), may file
with the Board of Ethics a response to the complaint within 30 days after their
receipt of the complaint. The response, if any, must be sent to the person
filing the original complaint (complainant) by the Board of Ethics within five
days after its filing. Within 15 days after receipt, the complainant may also
file with the Ethics Board a response to the respondent's response which the
Board of Ethics must send to the respondent within five days after its filing.
   (E)   Extensions of time to any of the time limitations specified in this
section may be granted by the Board of Ethics upon a vote of the majority of
the members. If no meeting can be held before such time limit runs, the chair
may extend the time frame until the following meeting. The Board of Ethics must
give written notice of any extensions of time to the respondent and the
complainant.
   (F)   All proceedings and records relating to a preliminary inquiry being
conducted by the Board of Ethics shall be confidential until a final
determination is made by the Board of Ethics, except:
      (1)   The Board of Ethics may turn over to the Commonwealth Attorney or
County Attorney evidence which may be used in criminal proceedings.
      (2)   If the complainant or alleged violator publicly discloses the
existence of a preliminary inquiry, the Board of Ethics may publicly confirm
the existence of the inquiry, and, at its discretion, make public any documents
which were issued to either party.
   (G)   The Board of Ethics shall make a determination based on its
preliminary inquiry whether the complaint is within its jurisdiction, and if
so, whether it alleges a minimal factual basis to constitute reasonable
suspicion as to a violation of this chapter. If the Board of Ethics concludes
that the complaint is outside of its jurisdiction, frivolous, or without
factual basis, the Board of Ethics shall immediately terminate the inquiry,
reduce the conclusion to writing, and transmit a copy of its decision to the
complainant and to all officers or employees against whom the complaint was
filed.
   (H)   If the Board of Ethics concludes, based upon its preliminary inquiry,
that the complaint is within its jurisdiction and contains allegations
sufficient to establish a minimal factual basis to constitute reasonable
suspicion as to a violation, the Board of Ethics shall notify the officer or
employee who is the subject of the complaint and may initiate a hearing to
determine whether there has been a violation.
   (I)   If a complaint is accepted or prepared pursuant to division (A), the
Board of Ethics must conduct an investigation. From this point on, the
complainant may not withdraw their complaint, although they may request that
the Board of Ethics either make a finding of no probable cause or no violation.
   (J)   In conducting an investigation, the Board of Ethics may administer
oaths, affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance, and require
the production of any books or records it deems relevant and material. The
Police Department and all city agencies, bodies, officials, and employees are
required to respond fully and truthfully to all inquiries and cooperate with
all requests of the Board of Ethics or its agents relating to an investigation.
It is a violation of this code for any official or employee to deny access to
information requested by the Board of Ethics in the course of an investigation
or a public hearing, except to the extent that such denial is required by
federal, state, or local laws.
   (K)   Nothing in this section may be construed to permit the Board of Ethics
to conduct an investigation of itself, any of its members, or staff. If the
Board of Ethics receives a complaint alleging that the Board of Ethics, any of
its members, or staff has violated any provision of this code or any other law,
the Board of Ethics must promptly transmit to the legislative body a copy of
the complaint.
   (L)   Any person who knowingly files with the Board of Ethics a false
complaint alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter by an officer
or employee of the city or any city agency, shall be guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.88 NOTICE OF HEARINGS.
   If the Board of Ethics determines that a hearing regarding allegations
contained in the complaint is necessary, the Board of Ethics shall issue an
order setting the matter for a hearing within 30 days of the date the order is
issued, unless the respondent petitions for and the Board of Ethics consents to
a later date. The order setting the matter for hearing, along with a copy of
any pertinent regulations of the Board of Ethics relating to the hearing, shall
be sent to the respondent within 24 hours of the time the order setting a
hearing is issued.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.89 HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure and the Kentucky Rules of
Evidence shall not apply to hearings conducted by the Board of Ethics; however,
the hearings shall be conducted in accordance with this section and in
accordance with any additional rules and regulations adopted by the Board of
Ethics so as to afford all parties the full range of due process rights
required by the nature of the proceedings.
   (B)   Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the respondent or their
representative shall have a reasonable opportunity to examine all documents and
records obtained or prepared by the Board of Ethics in connection with the
matter to be heard. The Board of Ethics shall inform the alleged violator or
their representative of any exculpatory evidence in its possession.
   (C)   All testimony in a Board of Ethics hearing shall be taken under oath,
administered by the presiding officer. All parties shall have the right to call
and examine witnesses, introduce exhibits, cross-examine witnesses, submit
evidence, and to be represented by counsel. All witnesses shall have the right
to be represented by counsel.
   (D)   Any person whose name may be adversely affected thereby may appear
personally before the Board of Ethics with or without counsel to give a
statement regarding the adverse mention or may file a written statement
regarding the adverse mention for incorporation into the record of the
proceeding.
   (E)   All hearings of the Board of Ethics shall be public unless the members
vote to go into executive session in accordance with KRS 61.810.
   (F)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Ethics shall, as
soon as practicable, begin deliberations in executive session for the purpose
of reviewing the evidence before it and making a determination whether a
violation of this chapter has been proven. Within 30 days after completion of
the hearing, the Board of Ethics shall issue a written report of its findings
and conclusions.
   (G)   If the Board of Ethics concludes in its report that no violation of
this chapter has occurred, it shall immediately send written notice of this
determination to the respondent and to the complainant.
   (H)   If the Board of Ethics concludes in its report that, in consideration
of the evidence produced at the hearing, there is clear and convincing proof of
a violation of this chapter, the Board of Ethics shall within 15 days:
      (1)   Issue an order requiring the respondent to cease and desist the
violation.
      (2)   In writing, publicly reprimand the respondent for the violations
and provide a copy of the reprimand to the executive authority and legislative
body of the city or governing body of the city agency with which the respondent
serves.
      (3)   In writing, recommend to the executive authority and the
legislative body or governing body of the city agency, that the respondent be
sanctioned, as recommended by the Board of Ethics, which may include a
recommendation for discipline, dismissal, or removal from office.
      (4)   Issue an order requiring the respondent to pay a civil penalty of
not more than $1,000.
      (5)   Refer evidence of criminal violations of this chapter or state laws
to the County Attorney or Commonwealth Attorney of the jurisdiction for
prosecution.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.90 APPEALS.
   Any person who is found guilty of a violation of any provision of this
chapter by the Board of Ethics may appeal the finding to the circuit court of
the county within 30 days after the date of the final action by the Board of
Ethics by filing a petition with the court against the Board of Ethics. The
Board of Ethics shall transmit to the clerk of the court all evidence
considered by the Board of Ethics at the public hearing.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.91 LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.
   Except when the period of limitation is otherwise established by state law,
an action for a violation of this chapter must be brought within one year after
the violation is discovered.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.92 ADVISORY OPINIONS.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics may render advisory opinions concerning matters
under its jurisdiction, based upon real or hypothetical facts and
circumstances, upon its own initiative, when requested by any officer or
employee of the city or a city agency covered by this chapter.
   (B)   An advisory opinion shall be requested in writing and shall state
relevant facts and ask specific questions. The request for an advisory opinion
shall remain confidential unless confidentiality is waived in writing by the
requestor. Any proposed advisory opinion filed by the requesting party shall be
submitted to the Board of Ethics’ legal counsel for review prior to the issuing
of the advisory opinion.
   (C)   All advisory opinions shall be public documents, except that before an
advisory opinion is made public, it shall be redacted so that the identity of
any person associated with the opinion shall not be revealed.
   (D)   A written advisory opinion issued by the Board of Ethics shall be
binding on the Board of Ethics in any subsequent proceeding concerning the
facts and circumstances of the particular case, if no intervening facts or
circumstances arise which would change the opinion of the Board of Ethics if
they existed at the time the opinion was rendered. However, if any fact
determined by the Board of Ethics to be material was omitted or misstated in
the request for an opinion, the Board of Ethics shall not be bound by the
opinion.
   (E)   A written advisory opinion issued by the Board of Ethics shall be
admissible in the defense of any criminal prosecution or civil proceeding for
violations of this chapter for actions taken in reliance on that opinion.
   (F)   Advisory opinions will be indexed and maintained on file by the Board
of Ethics, by the City Clerk, and will also be available on the city website
with unnecessary financial and personal details redacted. Officers, employees,
and businesses should be notified about advisory opinions that may directly
affect their conduct.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.93 REPRISALS AGAINST PERSONS DISCLOSING VIOLATIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall be subject
to reprisal, directly or indirectly, use or threaten to use any official
authority or influence in any manner whatsoever which tends to discourage,
restrain, deter, prevent, interfere with, coerce, or discriminate against any
person who, in good faith, reports, discloses, divulges, or otherwise brings to
the attention of the Board of Ethics, any other agency, officer of the city, or
the commonwealth, any facts or information relative to an actual or suspected
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed as: Prohibiting disciplinary or
punitive action if an officer or employee of the city or any city agency
discloses information which they know:
      (1)   To be false or which they disclose with reckless disregard for its
truth or falsity.
      (2)   To be exempt from required disclosure under the provisions of the
Kentucky Open Records Act, KRS 61.870 to 61.884.
      (3)   Is confidential under any other provision of law.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
§ 38.99 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Except when another penalty is specifically set forth in this chapter
or by state or federal laws, any officer or employee of the city or any city
agency who is found by the Board of Ethics to have violated any provision of
this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a civil offense and may be subject to a
civil fine imposed by the Board of Ethics not to exceed $1,000, which may be
recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender
fails to pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time.
   (B)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under this
chapter, any officer or employee of the city or any city agency who is found by
the Board of Ethics to have violated any provision of this chapter shall
forfeit to the city or the city agency an amount equal to the economic benefit
or gain, which the officer or employee is determined by the Board of Ethics to
have realized as a result of the violation. The amount of any forfeiture may be
recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender
fails to pay the amount of the forfeiture within a prescribed period of time.
   (C)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under this
chapter, a finding by the Board of Ethics that an officer or employee of the
city or any city agency is guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be
sufficient cause for removal, suspension, demotion, or other disciplinary
action by the executive authority of the city, city agency, or by any other
officer or agency having the power of removal or discipline.
   (D)   Any action to remove or discipline any officer or employee for a
violation of this chapter shall be taken in accordance with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the city and all applicable laws of the
Commonwealth.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 09-2024, passed 8-21-24)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SEWER REGULATIONS
      
51.   GARBAGE
CHAPTER 50: SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Enforcement
   
50.03   Damaging or interfering with sewer equipment
   
50.04   Permit required for plumbing alterations or construction
Use Regulations
   
50.15   Use of public sewers required
   
50.16   Securing of permit and payment of charges required
   
50.17   Grease traps or interceptors
   
50.18   Certain discharges prohibited
Connections
   
50.30   Application for connection with city sewer lines
   
50.31   Owner responsible for building sewer; permit
   
50.32   Prerequisites to issuance of connection permit
   
50.33   Connections to be made by licensed plumber
   
50.34   Tap-in fee; payment required
   
50.35   Inspection
   
50.36   Backfilling of excavations
Rates and Charges
   
50.45   [Reserved]
   
50.46   Billing and collection
   
50.47   Disconnection for late payment
   
50.48   Sanitation Maintenance and Replacement Fund
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "IMPROVED PROPERTY." All real estate upon which a residence, building, or
business establishment has been erected.
   "PLAN." The general sanitary sewer plan adopted by City Council on April 26,
1956.
   "UNIMPROVED PROPERTY." All real estate other than improved property.
   "UNIT." A residence building comprising not more than two single-family
apartments, or a business establishment containing commercial kitchens,
washrooms, bathrooms, or lavatories, the total of which does not exceed four in
number.
('77 Code, § 16-16) (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)
§ 50.02 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce the provisions of
the general sanitary sewer plan as adopted by the City Council, and to enforce
the provisions of this chapter and to investigate and determine that all sewer
connections have been properly made and maintained.
('77 Code, § 16-17) (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68; Am. Ord. 126-1975, passed 11-
14-75; Am. Ord. 176-1978, passed 11-10-78)
§ 50.03 DAMAGING OR INTERFERING WITH SEWER EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The act of covering, concealing, or interfering with manholes,
sanitary lines, storm lines, and the like and the act of throwing refuse in
catch basins and sewers in the city is absolutely prohibited and the failure of
any person to comply herewith shall constitute a misdemeanor as same may be
presented before the county district court.
   (B)   The Building Inspector-Zoning Administrator and the persons acting by
his authority shall each hereafter be deemed to have the full and complete
authority to go upon the premises of any person who has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter or who the Building Inspector-Zoning Administrator
and persons acting by his authority have reason to believe may have violated
this chapter in any respect. Interference by any person with the Building
Inspector-Zoning Administrator, or one acting by his authority, in the
performance of his duties as herein defined, shall be construed as a violation
of this section, subject to the penalty as specified herein.
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.04 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR PLUMBING ALTERATIONS OR CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   No person shall construct, install, or alter any plumbing, sewage, or
drainage system within the city without first having procured a building permit
from the City Building Inspector-Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   All applications for building and plumbing permits pursuant to this
chapter, the official zoning ordinance of this city, or any other ordinance of
this city, shall be accompanied by a plan for the proposed plumbing
installation. No building or plumbing permit shall be issued under this chapter
until the plans of the plumbing to be performed have been submitted and
approved by the City Building Inspector-Zoning Administrator.
Penalty, see § 50.99
Cross-reference:
   Building permit fee schedule, see §
150.16
USE REGULATIONS
§ 50.15 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   All buildings in the city used or occupied for residential or business
purposes shall be connected to and served by the sanitary sewer system. It
shall be unlawful to maintain outside facilities, cesspools, or open drainage
of raw sewage.
('77 Code, § 16-18) (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.16 SECURING OF PERMIT AND PAYMENT OF CHARGES REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant, or other person or corporation
to cause or permit the discharge of any sanitary sewage into the sanitary sewer
system of the city, without the securing of permits and the payment of all
service charges provided for in this chapter.
('77 Code, § 16-19) (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.17 GREASE TRAPS OR INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   All businesses and school buildings within the corporate limits of the
city in which there are in use any dishwashing machines, scullery and pot
sinks, steam cookers, or other fixtures discharging grease-laden waste shall be
provided with approved grease traps or interceptor to prevent grease from
entering any soil, waste, pipe, or any other line of the city sewer system.
   (B)   Grease traps or interceptors must be approved for design and
application by the State Plumbing Inspector, and shall have a certified minimum
grease-retention efficiency of 90% and be sized in accordance with the
established standards to correspond with the type and flow rate of the fixture.
   (C)   Grease traps shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be cleaned at designated intervals necessary to insure the exclusion of
grease from the drainage system.
   (D)   All existing businesses and school buildings within the corporate
limits of the city in which a grease trap or interceptor is not present at the
time of the enactment of this chapter, shall have 60 days from the date of the
enactment to provide for the installation of the approved grease trap or
interceptor as provided for within the provisions of this chapter.
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.18 CERTAIN DISCHARGES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cellar drainage
of ground water origin, cooling water, or unpolluted water or drainage to or
into any sanitary sewer, without the express written consent of the City
Council and the County Health Department and the County Sanitation District.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm
sewers, any sanitary sewage, combination of storm water and sanitary sewage,
garbage, solid food waste, leaves, trash, debris, water, or other liquid
containing solids or suspended solids.
Penalty, see § 50.99
CONNECTIONS
§ 50.30 APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION WITH CITY SEWER LINES.
   All service pipes and connections for sewer service in the city shall be
made at the expense of the owner of the abutting property, who shall make
application, in writing, to the City Building Inspector-Zoning Administrator,
for connection with the sewer lines of the city. The application shall be
considered and granted upon payment of the fee as specified by the Building
Inspector-Zoning Administrator to cover the cost of the inspection and
supervision of such installation and the maintenance thereof. The applicable
provisions of the official city zoning ordinance shall apply hereto.
§ 50.31 OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR BUILDING SEWER; PERMIT.
   The owner of the premises served by a sewer shall be responsible for the
operation, maintenance, cleaning, repair, and reconstruction of the building
sewer from the building to the point of connection with the public sewer. The
owner or his agent shall obtain a permit from the City Building Inspector-
Zoning Administrator prior to the commencing of any repair or reconstruction
work between the property line and the point of connection to the public sewer.
The permit shall be granted upon the payment of required fee to cover the cost
of the inspection and supervision of such installation.
§ 50.32 PREREQUISITES TO ISSUANCE OF CONNECTION PERMIT.
   (A)   All applications for permits under this subchapter shall bear the
signature of a master plumber and shall state the location of the premises, the
name of the owner thereof, and whether or not the building to be connected is a
new home in process of construction.
   (B)   All permits under this subchapter shall be issued only on the express
condition that the property to be served by the sanitary sewer system shall be
available for inspection by the Building Inspector-Zoning Administrator upon
reasonable notice at all reasonable times.
   (C)   Permits shall be issued only upon the express condition that the
master plumber responsible for the work shall in consideration of the
privileges thereby granted and enjoyed, indemnify the city against any loss or
damage that may result form the connections.
('77 Code, § 16-29) (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)
§ 50.33 CONNECTIONS TO BE MADE BY LICENSED PLUMBER.
   All connections with the sanitary sewer system shall be made only by
licensed plumbers under the general supervision of the Building Inspector-
Zoning Administrator.
('77 Code, § 16-30) (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.34 TAP-IN FEE; PAYMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owners of involved property in this city shall pay a sewer tap-in
fee of $100 for each unit or fraction thereof located within the boundaries of
the city. ('77 Code, § 16-32)
   (B)   No connection with the general sanitary sewer system of the city shall
be made until after the payment of the tap-in fee prescribed by division (A)
above. ('77 Code, § 16-31)
(Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.35 INSPECTION.
   Subsequent to the issuance of a permit under this subchapter, but at least
48 hours prior to the time any connection will be made, the master plumber
responsible for the work shall furnish a notice in writing to the Building
Inspector-Zoning Administrator stating the time when such connection will be
ready for inspection. All sewer conduits, trenches, and connections shall
remain open for inspection by the Building Inspector-Zoning Administrator, and
coloring matter shall be used by the Building Inspector-Zoning Administrator in
testing the connection.
('77 Code, § 16-33) (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.36 BACKFILLING OF EXCAVATIONS.
   All excavations at the place of a sanitary sewer connection shall be
backfilled with sand or gravel.
('77 Code, § 16-34) (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)
Penalty, see § 50.99
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 50.45 [RESERVED].
§ 50.46 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   The above scheduled charges shall be billed and collected by Sanitation
District No. 1 of Campbell and Kenton Counties by agreement with the city, and
in accordance with the policies and procedures of Sanitation District No. 1 of
Campbell and Kenton Counties.
(Ord. 270-1982, passed 9-1-82)
§ 50.47 DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.
   The city shall notify the Sanitation District to disconnect water service in
accord with the following policies:
   (A) When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue water service to a
customer for nonpayment of the sewer use charge, request for water service
reinstated will be made only after all bills for the charge then due have been
paid and any deposit required has been made.
   It is the policy of the city to discontinue water service to customers by
reason of nonpayment of the sewer use charge only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed charges:
      (1) That all charges are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the water bill; and
      (2) That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
for the water charge will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the
charge is not paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, the
city's request to discontinue service for nonpayment will be sent to the
Sanitation District; and
      (3) That any customer disputing the correctness of his charge shall have
a right to a hearing at which time he may be represented in person and by
counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present orally or in
writing his complaint and contentions to the City Administrator. The City
Administrator shall be authorized to request that the customer's service not be
discontinued for nonpayment of the charge and shall have the authority to make
a final determination of the customer's complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of charge payment will not be
entertained; only questions of proper and correct charge will be considered. In
the absence of payment of the charge rendered or resort to the hearing
procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified.
§ 50.48 SANITATION MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT FUND.
   A Sanitation Maintenance and Replacement Fund for the city is hereby
established. The Fund shall be used for operating, maintaining, and improving
the sanitary and storm sewer systems, and sanitation and water disposal systems
of the city. The Fund shall also be used to accumulate a reserve fund to pay
for large unanticipated repairs or replacements, and to provide funds for a
long-range program of improvements for the city's sanitary sewer system.
(Ord. 270-1982, passed 9-1-82; Am. Ord. 501-95, passed 6-7-95; Am. Ord. 515-95,
passed 10-4-95)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any person deemed to be violating the terms of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined in an amount not less
than $10 nor more than $500 for each and every day of each offense.
CHAPTER 51: GARBAGE
Section
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Preparation for collection
   
51.03   Container requirements
   
51.04   Storage regulations
   
51.05   Place of collection
   
51.06   Frequency of collection
   
51.07   Licensing of collectors
   
51.08   Collection vehicles
   
51.09   Waste collection assessment
   
51.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Open burning of trash, see §
93.22
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "ASHES." The residue resulting from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or
other combustible material.
   "DISPOSAL." The storage, collection, disposal, or handling of refuse.
   "GARBAGE." All animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, or consumption of foods.
   "REFUSE." All solid wastes, except body wastes, and includes garbage, ashes,
and rubbish.
   "RUBBISH." Includes glass, metal, paper, plant growth, wood, or
nonputrescible solid wastes.
('77 Code, § 8-2) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.02 PREPARATION FOR COLLECTION.
   (A)   All refuse shall be drained free of liquids before disposal.
   (B)   Garbage shall be wrapped in paper or similar material.
   (C)   All cans, bottles, or other food containers shall be rinsed free of
food particles and drained before disposal.
   (D)   Rubbish shall be placed in approved containers or cut and baled, tied,
bundled, stacked, or packaged so as not to exceed 60 inches in length and 50
pounds in weight.
('77 Code, § 8-3) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.03 CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Refuse containers shall be made of durable, watertight, rust-resistant
material having a close-fitting lid and handles to facilitate collection.
   (B)   Refuse containers for residences shall be of not less than ten
gallons, nor more than 32 gallons in capacity. Containers for commercial
establishments shall not exceed 40 gallons in capacity.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to permit the accumulation or residue of liquids,
solids, or a combination of such material on the bottom or sides of refuse
containers, it being the intention of this provision that the interior of
containers shall be kept clean by thorough rinsing and draining as often as
necessary.
   (D)   Paper or wooden boxes may be used as containers for rubbish, provided
such boxes when filled do not exceed 32 pounds in weight. Large stones and hot
ashes will not be collected.
   (E)   Large refuse containers to be handled by special equipment may be used
if the contract collector has equipment to handle such containers. Such
containers must have tight lids, and be placed on the premises where the
collector has ready access.
('77 Code, § 8-4) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.04 STORAGE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Each householder, commercial establishment, or person having refuse
shall provide himself with approved refuse containers and shall place and keep
all refuse therein.
   (B)   Refuse containers shall not be placed on the street right-of-way prior
to 6:00 p.m., local time, on the day before schedule collections.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to place refuse in any street, alley, stream,
body of water, or any other public place, or upon private property, whether
owned or not, unless such refuse is placed in an approved container.
('77 Code, § 8-5) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.05 PLACE OF COLLECTION.
   (A)   Refuse containers shall, for the purpose of collection, be placed at
ground level, and be made readily accessible to the collector. They shall be
placed on the side of the street from which collection is to be made at the
curbline of the property.
   (B)   Notwithstanding provisions of division (A) above, householders,
commercial establishments, or other persons may by contract with collectors be
permitted to place containers at agreed places upon their premises.
('77 Code, § 8-6) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.06 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
   (A)   Refuse shall be collected twice weekly.
   (B)   Hotels, restaurants, institutions, and commercial establishments may
be required to have more frequent collection, if determined by the City Council
to be essential to protect the public health.
('77 Code, § 8-7) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)
§ 51.07 LICENSING OF COLLECTORS.
   (A)   No person shall collect, remove, haul, or convey any refuse through or
upon any of the streets or alleys of the city or dispose of the same in any
manner or place without obtaining a license from the city.
   (B)   Every person who shall apply for a license under this section shall
state the type of refuse to be collected, the manner of collection, and the
place and method of disposal.
('77 Code, § 8-8) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.08 COLLECTION VEHICLES.
   All vehicles used for collection of garbage shall be equipped with
compacting devices or equivalent types of closed bodies and shall have an
enclosed cargo space.
('77 Code, § 8-9) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.09 WASTE COLLECTION ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   A waste collection assessment of $216 per year per dwelling unit is
hereby levied for the two assessment years beginning July 1, 2023 and July 1,
2024, and ending respectively on June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025, for the
purpose of defraying the cost of waste collection in the city.
   (B)   A "DWELLING UNIT" is hereby defined as a one-family residence, the
premises in which a family of one or more resides and, in the case of apartment
buildings, each apartment shall be considered a separate dwelling unit unless
the apartment building is served by a dumpster.
   (C)   The waste collection assessment levied by the City Council for the
assessment years beginning July 1, 2023 through June 30, 2024, and beginning
July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2025, shall be due and payable to the City of
Fort Wright in care of the City Clerk from and after passage of Ordinance 11-
2023. The amount shall be stated on the tax bill. Anyone failing to pay the
assessment by December 29, 2023 and December 31, 2024, respectively, shall be
deemed delinquent, and the bill shall have added thereto a penalty of 20% of
the amount thereof, and shall bear interest rate of 12% per annum from January
1, 2024 and January 1, 2025, respectively, until paid. The assessment shall
constitute a lien upon the property and be collectable in the same manner as
tax levied against real estate.
(Ord. 350-1985, passed 10-7-85; Am. Ord. 392-1988, passed 9-7-88; Am. Ord. 407-
1989, passed 10-4-89; Am. Ord. 434-1990, passed 10-3-90; Am. Ord. 453-1991,
passed 10-17-91; Am. Ord. 462-1992, passed 10-7-92; Am. Ord. 512-95, passed 9-
14-95; Am. Ord. 557-97, passed 10-1-97; Am. Ord. 573-98, passed 9-2-98; Am.
Ord. 589-99, passed 9-8-99; Am. Ord. 13-00, passed 9-13-00; Am. Ord. 16-06,
passed 9-8-06; Am. Ord. 5-07, passed 9-5-07; Am. Ord. 12-08, passed 9-9-08; Am.
Ord. 15-09, passed 9-2-09; Am. Ord. 5-10, passed 9-1-10; Am. Ord. 6-11, passed
9-7-11; Am. Ord. 13-12, passed 9-5-12; Am. Ord. 3-13, passed 9-5-13; Am. Ord.
10-13, passed 9-4-13; Am. Ord. 12-14, passed 9-3-14; Am. Ord. 13- 2015, passed
9-2-15; Am. Ord. 08-2016, passed --; Am. Ord. 12-2017, passed 10-11-17; Am.
Ord. 12-2018, passed 10-17-18; Am. Ord. 05-19, passed 6-19-19; Am. Ord. 5-2020,
passed 10-21-20; Am. Ord. 11-2021, passed 10-6-21; Am. Ord. 12-2023, passed 11-
4-23)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense.
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Required obedience to traffic directions
   
70.03   Powers and duties of Police Department
   
70.04   Authority for enforcement
   
70.05   Temporary regulations
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.15   Signal legends
   
70.16   Establishment and maintenance of traffic-control devices
   
70.17   Obedience to signals
   
70.18   Interference with signals
   
70.19   Unauthorized signals or markings
   
70.20   Device to be legible and in proper position
   
70.21   Temporary disregard of devices by police officers
 
   
70.99   General penalty
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES." Vehicles of the Fire Department, Police,
Public Works Department, vehicles of the Commonwealth Attorney's office when on
official business, and ambulances on an authorized emergency run.
   "BOULEVARD." Any legally designated street at which cross traffic is
required to stop before entering or crossing such boulevard.
   "BUSINESS DISTRICT." Any portion of any street between two consecutive
intersections in which 50% or more of the frontage on either side of the street
is used for business purposes.
   "CROSSWALK." That portion of the roadway included within the extension of
the sidewalk across any intersection, and such other portions of the roadway
between two intersections, as may be legally designated as crossing places and
marked by stanchions, paint lines, or otherwise.
   "CUL-DE-SAC." A cul-de-sac is that portion of a dead-end street (a street
with only one intended inlet and outlet for vehicular traffic) which provides
the vehicle ability to reverse its direction, including entire Perimeter of the
traditional circle (an outlet at one end of a street with a permanent circular
turn-around) and T-type turn-arounds (including temporary turn-arounds
constructed to provide a method to turn around a vehicle during construction
and development periods or during special events, that is not intended to be
permanent).
   "CURB." The boundary of that portion of the street used for vehicles whether
marked by curbstones or not.
   "INTERSECTION." That part of the public way embraced within the extensions
of the street lines of two or more streets which join at an angle whether or
not one such street crosses the other.
   "OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES." All signs, signals, warnings,
directions, markings, and devices placed or erected or maintained by authority
of the Chief of Police or the Fort Wright City Council.
   "ONE-WAY STREET." A street on which vehicles are permitted to move in one
direction only.
   "OPERATOR." Every person who is in actual physical control of the guidance,
starting, and stopping of a vehicle.
   "PARK." When applied to vehicles, to leave a vehicle standing, whether
occupied or not, for a period of time longer than is necessary to receive or
discharge passengers or property.
   "PEDESTRIAN." Any person afoot.
   "PLAY STREET." Any street or portion thereof so designated by the Chief of
Police and reserved as a play area for children, from which all traffic is
barred, except vehicles to and from abutting properties.
   "POLICE DEPARTMENT." The Police Department or other persons or agency
authorized to perform the duties of §
70.03  or any other acts necessary to implement and enforce this traffic code.
   "PUBLIC WAY." The entire width between property lines of every way,
dedicated passway, or street set aside for public travel, except bridle paths
and foot paths.
   "REVERSE TURN." To turn a vehicle on any street in such a manner as to
proceed in the opposite direction.
   "RIGHT-OF-WAY." The privilege of the immediate and preferential use of the
street.
   "ROADWAY." That portion of any street, improved, designated, or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel.
   "SIDEWALK." That portion of the street between the curb and the property
line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   "STOPPING." As applied to vehicles, to stop a vehicle longer than is
actually necessary to receive or discharge passengers.
   "STREET." Every public way, including alleys.
   "TRAFFIC." Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, buses, and other
conveyances, individually or collectively, while using any street for the
purpose of travel.
   "TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE." Includes stop signs, traffic signals (red-yellow-
green lights including arrowed lights), yellow flashing lights, and any other
official traffic-control devices; the term shall include all temporary signs,
signals, warnings, directions, markings, and devices placed or erected or
maintained by authority of the Chief of Police.
   "VEHICLE." Every device in, on, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn on any street except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks
(Am. Ord. 01-2022, passed 2-2-22; Am. Ord. 12-2024, passed 11-6-24)
§ 70.02 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC DIRECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with
any lawful order, signal, or direction given by a uniformed police officer, or
to fail or refuse to comply with any of the traffic regulations of this traffic
code.
   (B)   The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the driver of any
vehicle owned or used in the service of the United States government, this
state, county, or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate
any of the provisions of this traffic code, except as otherwise permitted in
this traffic code or by state statute.
   (C)   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal
on any roadway, and every person driving any animal on any roadway, and every
person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of
this traffic code applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this traffic code which by their very nature can have no
application.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to direct all traffic in
conformance with this traffic code and to enforce the traffic regulations as
set forth in this traffic code, to make arrest for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents, and to cooperate with other officers of the city in the
administration of the traffic laws, and in developing ways and means to improve
traffic conditions.
§ 70.04 AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   Authority to direct and enforce all traffic regulations of this city in
accordance with the provisions of this traffic code and to make arrests for
traffic violations is given to the Police Department, and, except in case of
emergency, it shall be unlawful for any other person to direct or attempt to
direct traffic by voice, hand, whistle, or any other signal.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.05 TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.
   When required for the convenience and safety of the public and to alleviate
unusual traffic problems, the Chief of Police or other authorized city official
shall, at his discretion, have authority to impose such traffic regulations as
he may deem necessary for temporary periods not to exceed two weeks. If these
temporary regulations are necessary for a period longer than two weeks, the
City Clerk shall be notified in writing of the extended order.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.15 SIGNAL LEGENDS.
   Whenever traffic is regulated or controlled exclusively by a traffic-control
sign or signs exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution," or "Stop," or exhibiting
different colored lights for purposes of traffic control, the following colors
only shall be used, and these terms and lights shall indicate and be obeyed as
follows:
   (A)   Green alone or "Go": Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits
either such turn. However, vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time
such signal is exhibited.
   (B)   Steady yellow alone or "Caution" when shown following the green or
"Go" signal: Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned
that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication
will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter
the intersection. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal may enter and
clear the intersection.
   (C)   Red alone or double red or "Stop": Vehicular traffic facing the signal
shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such
other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall remain
standing until green or "Go" is shown alone.
   (D)   Flashing red alone: Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop
before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point
as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall not again proceed
until it can do so without danger.
   (E)   Flashing amber alone: Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall reduce
its speed and proceed cautiously across the intersection controlled by such
signal.
   (F)   "Yield Right-of-Way": Vehicular traffic facing the "Yield Right-of-
Way" sign shall bear the primary responsibility of safely entering the primary
intersecting or merging right-of-way. All traffic facing the sign shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians within such primary
intersecting or merging right-of-way. No vehicle facing a "Yield Right-of-Way"
sign shall enter the merging or intersecting right-of-way at a speed in excess
of 15 miles per hour, except that this speed limit shall not apply to vehicles
entering an expressway.
   (G)   Lane lights: When lane lights are installed over any street for the
purpose of controlling the direction of flow of traffic, vehicular traffic
shall move only in traffic lanes over which green arrows appear. However, when
flashing amber lights appear above a lane all left turns shall be made from
that lane. Where red arrows appear above such lanes, vehicles shall not move
against them. If flashing amber lights show above a lane, that lane shall be
used only for passing and for left turns unless a sign at such place prohibits
such turn.
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Traffic-control signals, see KRS 189.338
§ 70.16 ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The city shall establish and maintain all official traffic-control devices
necessary within the city. All traffic-control devices, including signs, shall
be employed to indicate one particular warning or regulation, shall be uniform,
and as far as possible shall be placed uniformly. All traffic-control devices
and signs shall conform to required state specifications.
Cross-reference:
   Traffic schedules, stop signs, see
Ch. 74, Sch. I
§ 70.17 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the
signal of any official traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code or of a traffic barrier or sign erected by any
of the public departments or public utilities of the city, or any electric
signal, gate, or watchman at railroad crossings, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer. However, the type and the right to or necessity for such
barrier or sign must be approved by the city.
   (B)   Such sign, signal, marking, or barrier shall have the same authority
as the personal direction of a police officer.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.18 INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNALS.
   No person shall without authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down, or remove any official control device or any railroad sign
or signal, or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any part
thereof.
Penalty see § 70.99
§ 70.19 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, or display on
or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device
which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic
device or railroad sign or signal which attempts or purports to direct the
movement of traffic, or which conceals or hides from view or interferes with
the effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or
signal. No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority
permit on any street, any traffic sign or signal bearing any commercial
advertising. Nothing in this section shall be construed as restricting any
public department or public utility of the city in any emergency or temporarily
from marking or erecting any traffic barrier or sign whose placing has been
approved by the city.
   (B)   Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is declared to be a
public nuisance and the city is empowered forthwith to remove it or cause it to
be removed.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.20 DEVICE TO BE LEGIBLE AND IN PROPER POSITION.
   No provision of this traffic code for which signs or any other traffic-
control device is required shall be enforceable against an alleged violator if
at the time and place of the alleged violation the required device was not in
proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person.
§ 70.21 TEMPORARY DISREGARD OF DEVICES BY POLICE OFFICERS.
   In an emergency any police officer may at his discretion disregard traffic-
control lights or signals or established regulations in order to facilitate the
movement of traffic.
§ 70.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   The following are established as the penalties for non-moving
violations of motor vehicles (prepayment of parking citations forth in §
72.98 is permissible):
(1)  Handicapped Parking Violation                                 $100.00
(2)  Failure to display handicapped placard. Parking in designated $25.00
     handicapped parking area or space
(3)  Fire lane violation                                           $50.00
(4)  Expired registration plate                                    $35.00
(5)  Snow emergency violation                                      $30.00
(6)  Improper parking                                              $25.00
(7)  Parking in or within 30 feet of an intersection               $25.00
(8)  For sale vehicle parked on a city street                      $25.00
(9)  Blocking driveway, street, or parking in circle/cul-de- sac   $25.00
(10) Parking violation of unpaved surface                          $25.00
(11) Parking recreational vehicle/trailer on street                $25.00
(12) Parking with 15 feet of fire hydrant                          $25.00
(13) Large truck parked in residential area                        $25.00
(14) Parking on sidewalk                                           $25.00
(15) Any other city ordinance violation not listed above           $25.00
 
(Ord. 406-1989, passed 9-6-89; Am. Ord. 490-1994, passed 6-1-94; Am. Ord. 13-
2009, passed 8-5-09)
   (B)   Violation of any provisions of §§ 70.30 - 70.38 shall first be given a
citation advising of the violation and of the opportunity to pay the penalty by
U.S. mail. If the penalty is not paid within five (5) days from the date the
citation was issued, the fine established shall double and a written notice
shall be forwarded to the violator advising of the additional penalty, and
advising that if payment is not received within five (5) days from receipt of
the notice the offender will be prosecuted in Kenton District Court where he/
she will be subject to the penalty provision of §
70.99(C).
(Ord. 490-1994, passed 6-1-94)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provisions of this traffic code where no
other penalty is specifically provided shall be guilty of a violation and shall
be fined not less than $20 nor more than $250.
(KRS 189.990(1))
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
Operation Generally
   
71.01   Obstructing traffic
   
71.02   Reverse or U turns
   
71.03   Backing vehicles
   
71.04   Vehicles crossing sidewalks
   
71.05   Speed limit
   
71.06   Trucks prohibited on certain streets
Accidents
   
71.15   Duty of operator
   
71.16   Accident report
Prohibitions
   
71.25   Operator of vehicle to drive carefully
   
71.26   Right-of-way of emergency vehicles; following emergency vehicles;
driving over fire hose
   
71.27   Smoke emission or other nuisance
Parades
   
71.40   Definitions
   
71.41   Permit required
   
71.42   Application for permit
   
71.43   Standards for issuance of permit
   
71.44   Notice of rejection of permit
   
71.45   Appeal procedure when permit denied
   
71.46   Alternative permit
   
71.47   Notice to city and other officials when permit issued
   
71.48   Contents of permit
   
71.49   Duties of permittee
   
71.50   Public conduct during parades
   
71.51   Revocation of permit
OPERATION GENERALLY
§ 71.01 OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or permit it to remain
standing in any street in such manner as to create an obstruction thereof.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter any
intersection or crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of
the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing
the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding the indication of
any traffic-control signal which may be located at the intersection or
crosswalk.
   (C)   Any intersection deemed by the city to be of special or critical
importance to the movement of traffic shall be marked in a distinctive manner
in order to indicate its importantance. Should the operator of any vehicle
enter any intersection so marked when there is insufficient room on the other
side of the intersection to accommodate the vehicle, the indication of any
traffic-control signal notwithstanding, he shall be deemed to have violated
this division rather than division (B) above.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.02 REVERSE OR U TURNS.
   The operator of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in
the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety without
interfering with other traffic.
(KRS 189.330(8))
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.03 BACKING VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to back the vehicle at
any intersection for the purpose of executing a turning movement. A vehicle
from any parking position shall be backed by the operator in such manner as to
proceed on the same side of the roadway in the lawful direction of travel.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.04 VEHICLES CROSSING SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive within
any sidewalk space except at a permanent or temporary driveway or by special
permit from the Chief of Police or other authorized city official.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the
vehicle out of any alley, driveway, building, or lot and across a sidewalk, or
its extension across the alley, unless the vehicle has been brought to a
complete stop immediately prior to crossing the sidewalk or its extension. On
entering the roadway from the alley, driveway, or building the operator shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. The operator
of any vehicle intending to cross a sidewalk and turn into an alley from the
roadway may do so at low speed and with caution.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.05 SPEED LIMIT.
   (A)   No operator of a vehicle upon a local city street or alley shall drive
at a greater speed than is reasonable and prudent, having regard for the
traffic and for the condition and use of the street or alley and in no event
exceed a speed of 25 miles per hour except where otherwise posted, including on
Farrell Drive where speed shall be limited to 20 miles per hour.
   (B)   Whoever violates the speed limit set forth in this section shall be
subject to the fine schedule set forth in KRS 189.394.
(Ord. 4-01, passed 5-23-01; Am. Ord. 01-2022, passed 2-2-22; Am. Ord. 12-2024,
passed 11-6-24)
§ 71.06 TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   Definitions. As used herein, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings indicated for them.
      "ANYBODY." Any human being, or any organization or combination thereof,
in the form of a corporation, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated
association or otherwise.
      "COMMERCIAL TRUCK." Any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating
(GVWR) of more than 33,000 pounds.
      "MOTOR VEHICLE." Any wheeled vehicle propelled by any means other than
gravity or muscular power.
      "NOBODY." No human being, or any organizations or combination thereof, in
the form of a corporation, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated
association or otherwise.
      "SIGN." A sign designed, made, installed and maintained according to the
specifications of the Bureau of Highways of the Transportation Cabinet of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky.
   (B)   Sign location. The Public Works Department shall cause signs
prohibiting commercial trucks to be installed, located and maintained at the
following locations.
      (1)   Within the southern side of the right-of-way of the street
identified and known as East Henry Clay, in the vicinity thereof in the right-
of-way near 200 Kyles Lane, so that the sign is facing motor vehicle traffic
proceeding in an easterly direction on East Henry Clay.
      (2)   Within the northern side of the right-of-way of the street
identified and known as East Henry Clay, in the vicinity thereof in the right-
of-way near 1206 East Henry Clay, so that the sign is facing motor vehicle
traffic proceeding in a westerly direction on East Henry Clay.
      (3)   Within the northern side of the right-of-way of the street
identified and known as West Henry Clay, in the vicinity thereof in the right-
of-way near 117 Kyles Lane, so that the sign is facing motor vehicle traffic
proceeding in a westerly direction on West Henry Clay.
   (C)   Prohibition. Nobody shall cause, promote, aid, assist, encourage,
allow or engage in the operation of any commercial truck with a GVWR of more
than 33,000 pounds (including the load) to travel on or use any portion of the
following city streets as a thoroughfare, except in connection with and in the
ordinary course of business, such as loading and/or unloading for the purpose
of the delivery of goods and services from a seller to a buyer who is either a
resident or owner of real estate contiguous to any portion of the street on
either:
 
      (1)   Any portion of the street identified and known as East Henry Clay
Drive; or
      (2)   Any portion of the street identified and known as West Henry Clay
Drive.
   (D)   Penalties. Each violation and every other failure to comply with the
provisions of this section shall be a violation; and each day of the
continuation thereof shall be a separate and distinct offense; for which
everybody convicted thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction shall be
sentenced to pay a criminal fine not to exceed the maximum amount of $250 as
set forth in KRS 534.040(2)(c).
(Ord. 03-2021, passed 5-5-21)
ACCIDENTS
§ 71.15 DUTY OF OPERATOR.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of, operator of, or passenger in any motor
vehicle which is involved in an accident in which any person is injured or
property damaged to stop immediately and ascertain the extent of the injury or
damage and render such assistance as may be needed.
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Duty in case of accident, see KRS 189.580
§ 71.16 ACCIDENT REPORT.
   The operator, owner, or passenger involved in an accident resulting in the
injury or death of any person, or an accident in which property is damaged,
shall immediately report the accident or property damage to the Police
Department.
Penalty, see § 70.99
PROHIBITIONS
§ 71.25 OPERATOR OF VEHICLE TO DRIVE CAREFULLY.
   (A)   The operator of any vehicle upon a highway shall operate the vehicle
in a careful manner, with regard for the safety and convenience of pedestrians
and other vehicles upon the highway.
   (B)   A person shall not willfully operate any vehicle on any highway in
such a manner as to injure the highway.
   (C)   A person shall not willfully operate any vehicle on any highway in
such manner as to injure vehicles or equipment located in or near a highway
work zone.
   (D)   A person shall not operate any vehicle in a reckless or negligent
manner as to endanger persons or property in or near a highway, or in or near a
highway work zone.
   (E)   In addition to any other penalty, an operator who violates divisions
(C) and (D) above shall be subject to revocation of his or her operator’s
license under KRS 186.560.
(KRS 189.290)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.26 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES; FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES;
DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   Upon the approach of an emergency vehicle equipped with, and
operating, one or more flashing, rotating, or oscillating red or blue lights
visible under normal conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
emergency vehicle; or when the driver is giving audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle, or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way, immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as
possible to, the edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection, and
stop and remain stopped until the emergency vehicle has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer or firefighter.
   (B)   Upon the approach of any emergency vehicle operated in conformity with
the provisions of division (A) above, the operator of every vehicle shall
immediately stop clear of any intersection and shall remain stopped until the
emergency vehicle has passed, unless directed otherwise by a police officer or
firefighter.
   (C)   No operator of any vehicle, unless he or she is on official business,
shall follow any emergency vehicle being operated in conformity with the
provisions of division (A) above closer than 500 feet, nor shall he or she
drive into, park the vehicle into, or park the vehicle within the block where
the vehicle has stopped in answer to an emergency call or alarm, unless he or
she is directed otherwise by a police officer or firefighter.
   (D)   No vehicle, train, or other equipment shall be driven over any
unprotected hose of a fire department when the hose is laid down on any street,
private driveway, or track for use at any fire or fire alarm unless the fire
department official in command consents that the hose be driven over.
   (E)   The provisions of division (F) below shall apply to any driver
approaching a stationary:
      (1)   Emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when the emergency
vehicle or public safety vehicle is giving a signal by displaying alternately
flashing yellow, red, red and white, red and blue, or blue lights; or
      (2)   Disabled vehicle, when the disabled vehicle is displaying some type
of warning signal, such as emergency flashers, flares, or retroreflective
signals.
   (F)   The driver of a vehicle that is approaching a vehicle described in
division (E) above, shall, while proceeding with due caution:
      (1)   Yield the right-of-way by moving to a lane not adjacent to that of
the vehicle, if:
         (a)   The person is driving on a highway having at least four lanes,
with at least two lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching
vehicle; and
         (b)   It is possible to make the lane change with due regard to safety
and traffic conditions; or
      (2)   Reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining a safe speed to road
conditions, if the road has less than four lanes or if changing lanes would be
impossible or unsafe.
   (G)   This section does not operate to relieve the person who drives an
emergency vehicle from the duty to operate the vehicle with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the highway.
(KRS 189.930)
   (H)   Whoever violates this section shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of KRS 189.993(8).
Cross-reference:
   Emergency medical and transportation services,
Ch. 96
§ 71.27 SMOKE EMISSION OR OTHER NUISANCE.
   Every vehicle when on a highway shall be so equipped as to make a minimum of
noise, smoke, or other nuisance, to protect the rights of other traffic, and to
promote the public safety.
(KRS 189.020)
Penalty, see § 70.99
PARADES
§ 71.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "CRUISING." The repeated operation of two or more vehicles in a continuous
or nearly continuous flow through a parking lot.
   "PARADE." Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or
procession of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk,
park, or other public place in the city, or "CRUISING" as defined herein.
   "PARADE PERMIT." A permit required by this subchapter.
   "PARKING LOT." Any paved or unpaved area used by a place of business or
shopping center for the parking of vehicles of their customers, but shall not
include those operated for hire as defined in KRS 189.700.
§ 71.41 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person or persons shall engage in, participate in, aid, form, or
start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the Chief of
Police or other authorized city official.
   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:
      (1) Funeral processions;
      (2) Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, providing the conduct is under the immediate direction
and supervision of the proper school authorities;
      (3) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.42 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with
the Chief of Police or other authorized city official on forms provided by such
officer.
   (A)   Filing period. The application for a parade permit shall be filed not
less than five days or not more than 60 days before the date on which it is
proposed to conduct the parade.
   (B)   The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
      (1) The name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the parade;
      (2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of the
organization;
      (3) The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the
parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct;
      (4) The date when the parade is to be conducted;
      (5) The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination
point;
      (6) The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles which will
constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the description of the
vehicles;
      (7) The hours when the parade will start and terminate;
      (8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park, or other public place
proposed to be traversed;
      (9) The location by street of any assembly area for the parade;
      (10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area or areas;
      (11) The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade;
      (12) If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for,
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file a
communication in writing from the person authorizing the applicant to apply for
the permit on his behalf;
      (13) Any additional information reasonably necessary to a fair
determination as to whether a permit should issue.
   (C)   There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a parade
permit a fee in an amount as established by the City Council.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.43 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall issue a permit
when, from a consideration of the application and from other information
obtained, he finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement
and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the
city;
   (C)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the
city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas
contiguous thereto;
   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection
of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas;
   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of fire
fighting equipment enroute to a fire;
   (F)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute;
   (G)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods, or event, and is not designated to be held purely for private
profit;
   (H)   The parade, if it takes the form of cruising, has the approval in
writing of the owner or an authorized agent of the owner for the use of the
parking lot which is the site of the parade.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.44 NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall act on the
application for a parade permit within three days, Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays excepted, after filing thereof. If he disapproves the application, he
shall mail to the applicant within the three days, Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays excepted, after the date on which the application was filed, a notice
of his action stating the reasons for his denial of the permit.
§ 71.45 APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.
   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days after
notice of denial. The City Council shall act on the appeal within 30 days after
its receipt.
§ 71.46 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official, in denying an
application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of
the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different than that named by
the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a
written notice of his acceptance. An alternate parade permit shall conform to
the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this
subchapter.
§ 71.47 NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.
   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be sent
to the following persons:
   (A)   The Mayor;
   (B)   The City Attorney;
   (C)   The Fire Chief;
   (D)   The general manager or responsible head of each public utility, the
regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed
parade.
§ 71.48 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   Each parade permit shall state the following information:
   (A)   Starting time;
   (B)   Minimum speed;
   (C)   Maximum speed;
   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade;
   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park, or other public place to
be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;
   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
   (G)   Such other information as is reasonably necessary to the enforcement
of this subchapter.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.49 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions
and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairman or other
person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit on his
person during the conduct of the parade.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.50 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.
   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede,
or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle, or
animal participating or used in a parade.
   (B)   Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle except a police car or
other emergency vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising
a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously
designated as a parade.
Penalty, see § 70.99
Cross-reference:
   Parking on parade route, see §
72.07
§ 71.51 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The city shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder
on application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
Parking Generally
   
72.01   Obstructional parking; double parking
   
72.02   Manner of parking
   
72.03   Limitations of stopping and parking
   
72.04   Restrictions and prohibitions on designated streets
   
72.05   Parking restricted to allow street cleaning
   
72.06   Parking in excess of certain number of hours prohibited; towing
authorized
   
72.07   Parking on parade route
   
72.08   Parking on off-street facility
   
72.09   Owner responsibility
   
72.10   Parking in parks
   
72.11   Display of parked vehicle for sale
   
72.12   Parking with handicapped permits
   
72.13   Parking trucks in residential section
   
72.14   Parking recreational vehicles
Impounding
   
72.20   Impoundment of vehicles for parking violations
   
72.21   Required notice to owner
   
72.22   Sale of vehicle
Snow Emergency
   
72.35   Snow emergency
 
   
72.98   Prepayment of parking citations
   
72.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Revenues from fees, fines, and forfeitures related to parking, see KRS
65.120
PARKING GENERALLY
§ 72.01 OBSTRUCTIONAL PARKING; DOUBLE PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle or any other
thing that may be a nuisance, obstruction, or hindrance in or on any street,
alley, or sidewalk within the city either during the day or night.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any vehicle on the
roadway side of any other vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.02 MANNER OF PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or park
the vehicle in a manner other than with its right-hand side toward and parallel
with the curb, except that where parking is permitted on the left side of a
one-way street, the left-hand side shall be so parked, and except for
commercial loading and unloading on one-way streets.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any street unless its
two right wheels are within six inches of and parallel with the curb, except
that on one-way streets where parking is permitted on the left side the two
left wheels are to be within six inches of and parallel with the curb.
   (C)   No vehicle shall be backed to the curb on any street, except that
wagons and trucks may do so when loading and unloading provided that such
loading and unloading and delivery of property and material shall not consume
more than 30 minutes. Such backing of trucks or wagons is prohibited at all
times and on all streets in the city where any truck or wagon so backed
interferes with the use of the roadway of moving vehicles or occupies road
space within ten feet of the center line of the street.
   (D)   The city may establish diagonal parking at certain places, requiring
the parking of vehicles at a certain angle to the curb and within a certain
portion of the roadway adjacent thereto. However, diagonal parking shall not be
established where the roadway space required therefor would be within ten feet
of the center line of any street. Such diagonal parking places shall be
designated by suitable signs, and shall indicate by markings on the pavement
the required angle and the width of the roadway space within which such vehicle
shall park.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to so park such
vehicle that any part thereof shall extend beyond the lines marking the side or
the rear of the space assigned for one vehicle.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.03 LIMITATIONS OF STOPPING AND PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or park such
vehicle except in a case of a real emergency or in compliance with the
provisions of this traffic code or when directed by a police officer or traffic
sign or signal at any time in the following places:
   (A)   On the mainly-traveled portion of any roadway or on any other place in
the roadway where vehicles stand in any manner other than as specified in §
72.02.
   (B)   On a sidewalk.
   (C)   In front of sidewalk ramps provided for handicapped persons.
   (D)   In front of a public or private driveway.
   (E)   Within an intersection or crosswalk.
   (F)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking. This
does not apply to police officers when operating properly identified vehicles
during the performance of their official duties.
   (G)   Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, traffic sign, stop sign, or
traffic-control device.
   (H)   On any controlled access highway.
   (I)   Within a highway tunnel.
   (J)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
   (K)   In an area between the roadways of a divided highway.
   (L)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area (see KRS 189.450(5), (6)).
   (M)   In a bus stop.
   (N)   In a loading zone.
('77 Code, § 15-11) (Ord. 162-1978, passed 5-5-78)
   (O)   On any unpaved surface in any zone within the city.
   (P)   In any cul-de-sac.
   (Q)   In any area so designated and identified by temporary signs, signals,
warnings, directions, markings, and devices placed or erected or maintained by
authority of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 2-00, passed 1-26-00; Am. Ord. 01-2022, passed 2-2-22; Am. Ord. 12-2024,
passed 11-6-24) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON DESIGNATED STREETS.
   (A)   The provisions of this section prohibiting the stopping and parking of
a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as
indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or official traffic-control devices.
   (B)   The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on parking shall
not relieve any person from his duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping or parking of vehicles in
specific places or at specified times.
   (C)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of division
(F) below giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time on
any street so marked by official signs.
   (D)   When a curb has been painted in compliance with the provisions of
division (F) below, no person shall park a vehicle at any time at or adjacent
to any curb so marked.
   (E)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of division
(F) below, in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified by official signs on any day except Sundays on any
street so marked.
   (F)   (1)   The city shall determine on what streets or portions thereof
stopping or parking shall be restricted or prohibited. Whenever under authority
of or by this traffic code or any other ordinance any parking limit is imposed
or parking is prohibited on designated streets, or parking areas are restricted
to handicapped parking, appropriate signs shall be erected giving notice
thereof. However, in lieu of erecting such signs or in conjunction therewith,
the face and top of a curb or curbs at or adjacent to which parking is
prohibited at all times may be painted a solid yellow color.
      (2) No such regulations or restrictions shall be effective unless the
signs have been erected and are in place or the curbs are painted yellow at the
time of any alleged offense, except in the case of those parking restrictions
which by their very nature would not require such signs and markings.
   (G)   When signs are erected in compliance with division (F) above in each
block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a time longer
than specified on official signs any day except Sunday and on any street so
marked.
Penalty, see § 72.99
Cross-reference:
   Parking schedules, restricted parking areas, see
Ch. 75, Sch. I
§ 72.05 PARKING RESTRICTED TO ALLOW STREET CLEANING.
   The city is authorized to designate street cleaning areas and shall provide
suitable signs and markings on the street to be cleaned, restricting parking on
that particular day. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
stop on any street so designated.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.06 PARKING IN EXCESS OF CERTAIN NUMBER OF HOURS PROHIBITED; TOWING
AUTHORIZED.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to park in any one place any vehicle on any
of the public ways or streets of the city for a period of 24 hours or longer.
Any vehicle left parked in any one place on any of the public ways or streets
of the city for a period of 24 hours or longer shall be deemed abandoned, and
shall be subject to all existing regulations of the city pertaining to
abandoned motor vehicles.
Penalty, see § 72.99
Cross-reference:
   Removal of abandoned vehicles, see §
72.21 et seq.
§ 72.07 PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall have the
authority, whenever in his judgment it is necessary, to prohibit or restrict
the parking of vehicles along a street or part thereof constituting a part of
the route of a parade or procession, to erect temporary traffic signs to that
effect, and to prohibit and prevent such parking.
   (B)    It shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation of such signs or directions.
Penalty, see § 72.99
Cross-reference:
   Parades, see §§
71.40 through
71.51
§ 72.08 PARKING ON OFF-STREET FACILITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to park or
abandon the vehicle or drive on or otherwise trespass on another's property, or
on an area developed as an off-street parking facility, without the consent of
the owner, lessee, or person in charge of any such property or facility.
   (B)   If at any time a vehicle is parked, abandoned, or otherwise trespasses
in violation of division (A) of this section, the owner, lessee, or person in
charge of the property or facilitymay have the unauthorized vehicle removed in
accordance with the provisions of §§
72.20 through
72.22.
   (C)   Every property owner or operator of an off-street parking facility
shall post signs stating thereon that the property or parking lot or facility
is privately owned and that unauthorized vehicle will be removed at the owner's
expense before exercising the authority granted in division (B).
Penalty, see § 72.99
Statutory reference:
   Removal of vehicles by owners of private parking lots; signs, see KRS
189.725
§ 72.09 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   If any vehicle is found illegally parked in violation of any provisions of
this subchapter regulating stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles, and the
identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name
the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for the
violation.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.10 PARKING IN PARKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in or on any
section of any public park, playground, play lot, or tot lot within the city
not designed as a parking area or designed and regularly maintained as a
roadway. Parking shall be prohibited within any park from dusk to dawn.
(Am. Ord. 01-2022, passed 2-2-22; Am. Ord. 12-2024, passed 11-6-24) Penalty,
see §
72.99
§ 72.11 DISPLAY OF PARKED VEHICLE FOR SALE.
   It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle displayed for sale or a motor
vehicle on which demonstrations are being made on any street.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.12 PARKING WITH HANDICAPPED PERMITS.
   (A)   Any other provision to the contrary notwithstanding, a motor vehicle
bearing a decal in its front windshield issued by the County Clerk pursuant to
appropriate county ordinances for handicapped persons, when operated by a
handicapped person or when transporting a handicapped person, may be parked in
a designated handicapped parking place, or when parked in a metered parking
space may be parked for two hours for no fee, or when parked where any parking
limit is imposed may be parked for two hours in excess of the parking limit.
The motor vehicle may be parked in a loading zone for that period of time
necessary to permit entrance or exit of the handicapped person to or from the
parked vehicle, but in no circumstances longer than 30 minutes.
   (B)   This section shall not permit parking in a "no stopping" or "no
parking" zone nor where parking is prohibited for the purpose of creating a
fire lane or to accommodate heavy traffic during morning, afternoon, or evening
hours, nor permit a motor vehicle to be parked in such a manner as to
constitute a traffic hazard.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.13 PARKING TRUCKS IN RESIDENTIAL SECTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a truck over one ton in capacity
in any residential section for longer than one hour, except when loading or
unloading.
('77 Code, § 15-21)
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.14 PARKING RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   "RECREATIONAL VEHICLE," for purposes of this section, shall be defined
to include campers, trailers, boats, house trailers, mobile homes, or any other
such device designed to be mounted upon any other motor vehicle, towed behind
any motor vehicle, or in any way integrated into a movable, temporary housing
facility.
   (B)   No person shall allow a recreational vehicle, not in daily use, to be
parked or otherwise located on a public street or between the front property
line and the setback line as established by city ordinance, on any property
located in the city.
   (C)   All recreationel vehicles must be stored in an inconspicuous manner so
as not to detract from the residential atmosphere of the community, nor may
such vehicles be parked or stored so as to create a nuisance condition as
defined by the ordinances of the city.
('77 Code, § 15-22) (Ord. 104-1974, passed 6-14-74)
Penalty, see § 72.99
IMPOUNDING
§ 72.20 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any vehicle parked upon the streets of the city at a place, in a
manner or for a length of time prohibited by this chapter, is, if unoccupied,
declared to be an obstruction in such streets and a public nuisance, and any
police officer of the city is authorized to cause the same to be removed to and
impounded in the depository provided by the city for such purpose.
   (B)   All charges shall be paid to the city for any fine, storage charges,
or hauling charges before the release of an impounded vehicle is authorized.
('77 Code, § 15-23)
Cross-reference:
   Impoundment for failure to obtain vehicle license sticker, see § 70.37
   Impoundment during snow emergency, see § 72.42
§ 72.21 REQUIRED NOTICE TO OWNER.
   (A)   When a motor vehicle has been involuntarily towed or transported
pursuant to order of police, other public authority, or private person or
business for any reason or when the vehicle has been stolen or misappropriated
and its removal from the public ways has been ordered by police, other public
authority, or by private person or business, or in any other situation where a
motor vehicle has been involuntarily towed or transported by order of police,
other authority, or by private person or business, the police, other authority,
or private person or business shall attempt to ascertain from the State
Transportation Cabinet the identity of the registered owner of the motor
vehicle or lessor of a motor carrier as defined in KRS Chapter 281 and within
ten business days of the removal shall, by certified mail, attempt to notify
the registered owner at the address of record of the make, model, license
number, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle, of the location of
the vehicle, and of the requirements for securing the release of the motor
vehicle.
   (B)   If a vehicle described in division (A) is placed in a garage or other
storage facility, the owner of the facility shall attempt to provide the notice
provided in division(A) by certified mail to the registered owner at the
address of record of the motor vehicle or lessor of a motor carrier as defined
in KRS Chapter 281 within ten business days of recovery of, or taking
possession of the motor vehicle. This notice shall contain the information as
to the make, model, license number, and vehicle identification number of the
vehicle, the location of the vehicle, and the amount of reasonable charges due
on the vehicle. When the owner of the facility fails to provide notice as
provided herein, the motor vehicle storage facility shall forfeit all storage
fees accrued after ten business days from the date of tow. This division (B)
shall not apply to a tow lot or storage facility owned or operated by the city.
§ 72.22 SALE OF VEHICLE.
   Any person engaged in the business of storing or towing motor vehicles, who
has substantially complied with the aforementioned requirements of §
72.21, shall have a lien on the motor vehicle, for the reasonable or agreed
charges for storing or towing the motor vehicle, as long as it remains in his
possession. If after a period of forty-five (45) days the reasonable or agreed
charges for storing or towing a motor vehicle have not been paid the motor
vehicle may be sold to pay the charged after the owner has been notified by
certified mail ten (10) days prior to the time and place of the sale. If the
proceeds of the sale of any vehicle pursuant to this section are insufficient
to satisfy accrued charges for towing, transporting, and storage, the sale and
collection of proceeds shall not constitute a waiver or release of
responsibility for payment of unpaid towing, transporting, and storage charges
by the owner or responsible casualty insurer of the vehicle. This lien shall
subject to prior recorded liens.
SNOW EMERGENCY
§ 72.35 SNOW EMERGENCY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      “MOTOR VEHICLE.” Any vehicle that is operated by means other than
muscular power.
      “PERSON.” Any natural person, company, corporation, partnership, joint
venture, unincorporated association, or any combination thereof.
   (B)   The provisions of this section are applicable to all streets in the
city.
   (C)   No person shall cause or permit any motor vehicle to be located upon
the pavement or right-of-way of any portion of any street in the city at any
time during which a snow emergency has been declared by the Mayor or the city's
Chief Administrative Officer.
   (D)   A snow emergency shall be declared by the Mayor or the Chief
Administrative Officer, at such time as he or she determines that falling snow,
sleet, or freezing rain requires restrictions of vehicular traffic for the
purpose of plowing, cleaning of snow or ice, or at such time as three inches or
more of new snow has fallen.
   (E)   Upon the declaration of any snow emergency, the Mayor or the Chief
Administrative Officer shall, as soon as possible, notify local radio stations,
television stations, newspapers, and other members of the news media as will,
in the judgment of the Mayor or the Chief Administrative Officer, afford the
earliest and best information to persons using the public ways of the city of
the existence of the snow emergency. The Mayor or the Chief Administrative
Officer should also attempt, to the extent possible, to get the notification
placed on the city's website. In notifying the members of the news media, the
Mayor or the Chief Administrative Officer shall request that the notice of the
snow emergency and its requirements be broadcast or published as soon as
possible. No other notices of the existence of the snow emergency shall be
required. Owners and operators of motor vehicles shall be deemed to have notice
of the snow emergency two hours after the broadcast or publishing of the
announcement and are subject to the prohibitions of this section. Posting on
the city's website constitutes official notice.
   (F)   The Head of Public Works of the city is hereby authorized to install
at all entrance points to the city signs containing the following information:
   NO PARKING ON CITY STREETS DURING A DECLARED SNOW EMERGENCY
   (G)   A vehicle parked on the pavement or right-of-way of any dedicated
street at the time a snow emergency is declared shall be removed from the
street within three hours if a snow emergency is declared between 6:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. If declared between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., the vehicle shall be
removed prior to 9:00 a.m. of that morning. The owner or operator of a motor
vehicle found in violation of this section shall be responsible for all towing
and storage costs for such vehicle during the snow emergency.
   (H)   All peace officers of the Commonwealth are hereby authorized and
directed to cause all motor vehicles located upon any portion of the streets of
the city in violation of the terms of this section to be removed from said
streets. Additionally, all peace officers of the Commonwealth of Kentucky are
hereby authorized and directed to cite all motor vehicles located upon any
portion of the streets of the city in violation of the terms of this section in
the following manner:
      (1)   A citation shall be issued and served by regular U.S. mail service
upon the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle in violation of this
section.
      (2)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined
$30 which shall become due and payable to the City Clerk of the city within
five business days of the date of the issuance of the citation.
      (3)   The amount of the fine shall double if not paid within five
business days of the date of issuance of the citation.
   (I)   In any prosecution for a violation of the terms and provisions of this
section, it shall be presumed in the absence of conclusive evidence to the
contrary that the person to whom the motor vehicle is registered caused or
permitted the vehicle to be in violation of this section.
(Ord. 1-2017, passed 2-1-17) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.98 PREPAYMENT OF PARKING CITATIONS.
   Violators of any provision of this chapter relating to parking, shall first
be given a citation advising of the violation and of the opportunity to pay the
penalty by use of the U.S. mail. If the penalty is not paid within five days
from the date the citation was issued, a written notice shall be forwarded to
the violator advising that an additional penalty of $10 has been added to the
original penalty of $20, and advising that if payment is not received within
five days from receipt of the notice, the offender will then be prosecuted in
Kenton District Court where he will be subject to the penalty provisions of §
72.99.
('77 Code, § 15-ll) (Ord. 162-1978, passed 5-5-78)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   Any person receiving a citation for any parking violation in the city shall
be deemed to have committed a violation and shall be subject to the penalty
provisions set forth in §
70.99.
CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
Section
   
73.01   Operation of bicycles
   
73.02   Operation of motorcycles and motorscooters
   
73.03   Skating and coasting
   
73.04   Clinging to vehicles
   
73.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Required obedience to traffic directions, see §
70.02(C)
§ 73.01 OPERATION OF BICYCLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a bicycle on the sidewalks of the city.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle on any section of a public
park, playground, play lot, or tot lot, except on a roadway or in a parking
area.
   (C)   No operator of any bicycle shall carry another person on such bicycle.
Penalty, see § 73.99
Statutory reference:
   Bicycles; safety regulations and standards, see KRS 189.287
§ 73.02 OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES AND MOTORSCOOTERS.
   (A)   No operator of any motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven
bicycle shall carry another person except on a seat attached thereto or in a
side car attached to the vehicle.
   (B)   No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven bicycle
shall operate such vehicle in any public park, except on a roadway or in a
parking area.
   (C)   No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven bicycle
shall operate such vehicle in any play lot or tot lot.
Penalty, see § 73.99
Statutory reference:
   Regulations for operating and riding on motorcycles, see KRS 189.285
§ 73.03 SKATING AND COASTING.
   Except on streets which may be declared from time to time as "play streets"
by the city and protected by barriers or official signs, it shall be unlawful
for any person on skates or riding on a coaster sled or toy vehicle of any
kind, to go on any roadway except at a crosswalk.
Penalty, see § 73.99
§ 73.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person while riding on a bicycle, coaster sled, roller skates, or
any toy vehicle shall cling to any moving vehicle on any street, or fasten or
attach the vehicle on which he is riding thereto.
   (B)   No person shall ride on the projection, running board, or fenders of
any vehicle.
Penalty, see § 73.99
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to have
committed a violation and shall be fined not more than $50 for each offense.
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.    Stop signs
   
II.   One-way streets
   
III.   Streets closed to vehicular traffic
SCHEDULE I. STOP SIGNS.
   (A)   Nobody shall cause, promote, aid, assist, encourage, allow, or engage
in the operation of any motor vehicle in the city, in such a manner that the
motor vehicle passes any stop sign facing the motor vehicle and installed,
located and maintained at any location indicated in the following schedule of
stop sign locations, without the movement of the motor vehicle being fully and
completely stopped immediately before passing the stop sign and the right-of-
way yielded to any other motor vehicle at the intersection.
   (B)   The Public Works Department of the city will cause a stop sign to be
installed, located and maintained within the rights-of-way at the intersections
of streets identified in the following schedule so that the stop sign is facing
motor vehicle traffic approaching the intersection in the direction and on the
street indicated: Stop signs shall be erected at the following locations:
Street Intersection Direction
Street             Intersection       Direction
Alex Court         Williamscreek Way  Southerly direction on Alex Court
Amsterdam Road     General Drive      Southwesterly direction on Amsterdam
                                      Road
Amsterdam Road     General Drive      Northeasterly direction on Amsterdam
                                      Road
Amsterdam Road     Morris Road        Westerly direction on Amsterdam Road
Amsterdam Road     Morris Road        Easterly direction on Amsterdam Road
Amsterdam Road     Park Road          Easterly direction on Amsterdam Road
Amsterdam Road     Park Road          Westerly direction on Amsterdam Road
Amsterdam Road     Redwood Drive      Westerly direction on Amsterdam Road
Amsterdam Road     Redwood Drive      Easterly direction on Amsterdam Road
Ashlawn Place      Highland Pike      Westerly direction on Ashlawn Place
Ashlawn Place      Monticello Drive   Westerly direction on Ashlawn Place
Ashlawn Place      Monticello Drive   Easterly direction on Ashlawn Place
Ashlawn Place      Mt. Vernon Drive   Westerly direction on Ashlawn Place
Ashlawn Place      Mt. Vernon Drive   Easterly direction on Ashlawn Place
Ashwood Circle     George Huser Drive Northerly direction on Ashwood Circle
Augusta Avenue     Rosa Avenue        Northerly direction on Augusta Avenue
Barbara Circle     Augusta Avenue     Northerly direction on Barbara Circle
Barbara Circle     West Crittenden    Northerly direction on Barbara Circle
                   Avenue
Barrington Road    Glazier Road       Northerly direction on Barrington Road
Barrington Road    Glazier Road       Southerly direction on Barrington Road
Barrington Road    Howard Road        Northerly direction on Barrington Road
Barrington Road    Park Road          Northerly direction on Barrington Road
Barrington Road    Park Road          Southerly direction on Barrington Road
Basswood Circle    East Henry Clay    Westerly direction on Basswood Circle
                   Avenue
Beacon Hill Court  Mt. Vernon Drive   Northerly direction on Beacon Hill Court
Beaumont Court     Montpelier Court   Northerly direction on Beaumont Court
Beaumont Court     Mt. Vernon Drive   Easterly direction on Beaumont Court
Beaumont Court     Mt. Vernon Drive   Westerly direction on Beaumont Court
Birchwood Road     Amsterdam Road     Northwesterly direction on Birchwood
                                      Road
Birchwood Road     Park Road          Easterly direction on Birchwood Road
Bluegrass Avenue   East Henry Clay    Westerly direction on Bluegrass Avenue
                   Avenue
Bunker Court       Fort Henry Drive   Southerly direction on Bunker Court
Cherokee Drive     Morris Road        Northeasterly direction on Cherokee
                                      Drive
Chestnut Road      Redwood Drive      Easterly direction on Chestnut Road
Christine Court    East Henry Clay    Easterly direction on Christine Court
                   Avenue
Cumberland Avenue  Basswood Circle    Northerly direction on Cumberland Avenue
Cumberland Avenue  Kyles Lane         Southerly direction on Cumberland Avenue
Don Martin Drive   Lookout Heights    Southerly direction on Don Martin Drive
                   Lane
Dorisway Drive     Williamscreek Way  Northerly direction on Dorisway Drive
East Crittenden    Basswood Circle    Northerly direction on East Crittenden
Avenue                                Avenue
East Crittenden    Kyles Lane         Southerly direction on East Crittenden
Avenue                                Avenue
East Henry Clay    Fayette Circle     Easterly direction on East Henry Clay
Avenue                                Avenue
East Henry Clay    Highland Pike      Easterly direction on East Henry Clay
Avenue                                Avenue
East Henry Clay    Ridgemont Avenue   Northeasterly direction on East Henry
Avenue                                Clay Avenue
East Henry Clay    Upland Avenue      Westerly direction on East Henry Clay
Avenue                                Avenue
Edna Lane          Augusta Avenue     Southerly direction on Edna Lane
Elder Court        Redwood Drive      Northeasterly direction on Elder Court
Farrell Drive      Kyles Lane         Westerly direction on Farrell Drive
Fayette Circle     East Henry Clay    Westerly direction on Fayette Circle
                   Avenue
Fort Henry Drive   Amsterdam Road     Southerly direction on Fort Henry Drive
Fort Henry Drive   Bunker Court       Westerly direction on Fort Henry Drive
Fort Henry Drive   General Drive      Westerly direction on Fort Henry Drive
Fort Henry Drive   Lookout Court      Easterly direction on Fort Henry Drive
Fort Henry Drive   Lookout Court      Northwesterly direction on Fort Henry
                                      Drive
Fort Henry Drive   Pickett Court      Easterly direction on Fort Henry Drive
Fort Henry Drive   Pickett Court      Westerly direction on Fort Henry Drive
General Drive      Amsterdam Road     Easterly direction on General Drive
General Drive      Fort Henry Drive   Northerly direction on General Drive
General Drive      Fort Henry Drive   Southerly direction on General Drive
General Drive      Pickett Drive      Northerly direction on General Drive
General Drive      Pickett Drive      Southerly direction on General Drive
General Drive      Sentinel Point     Northwesterly direction on General Drive
General Drive      Sentinel Point     Southeasterly direction on General Drive
George Huser Drive Dixie Highway      Easterly direction on George Huser Drive
George Huser Drive Park Road          Northwesterly direction on George Huser
                                      Drive
Glasgow Court      Glengarry Way      Easterly direction on Glasgow Court
Glazier Court      Barrington Road    Westerly direction on Glazier Court
Glazier Court      Barrington Road    Easterly direction on Glazier Road
Glengarry Way      Fort Henry Drive   Westerly direction on Glengarry Way
Goebel Court       Morris Road        Southeasterly direction on Goebel Court
Grove Park Drive   Park Road          Westerly direction
Hazelwood Drive    Park Road          Easterly direction on Hazelwood Drive
Hazelwood Drive    Redwood Drive      Westerly direction on Hazelwood Drive
Helen Ruth Drive   Old Madison Pike   Easterly direction on Helen Ruth Drive
Henry Clay Court   East Henry Clay    Easterly direction on Henry Clay Court
                   Avenue
Hermitage Court    Monticello Drive   Westerly direction on Hermitage Court
Highland Place     Kyles Lane         Northerly direction on Highland Place
Highview Drive     Rivard Drive       Westerly direction on Highview Drive
Howard Road        Barrington Road    Northeasterly direction on Howard Road
Howard Road        Morris Road        Southwesterly direction on Howard Road
Kennedy Road       Kyles Lane         Easterly direction on Kennedy Road
Kennedy Road       Rivard Drive       Westerly direction on Kennedy Road
Kentucky Drive     Highland Pike      Easterly direction on Kentucky Drive
Kentucky Drive     Lorup Avenue       Westerly direction on Kentucky Drive
Knob Hill Court    Mt. Vernon Drive   Easterly direction on Knob Hill Court
Lake Street        Kennedy Road       Northerly direction on Lake Street
Lake Street        Kennedy Road       Southerly direction on Lake Street
Lemon Tree Lane    Grove Park Drive   Northerly direction
Lookout Court      Fort Henry Drive   Southeasterly direction on Lookout Court
Lookout Heights    Sleepy Hollow Road Easterly direction on Lookout Heights
Lane                                  Drive
Lorup Avenue       Highland Pike      Easterly direction on Lorup Avenue
Lorup Avenue       Kentucky Drive     Southerly direction on Lorup Avenue
Lorup Avenue       Kentucky Drive     Northerly direction on Lorup Avenue
Lorup Avenue       Kyles Lane         Northerly direction on Lorup Avenue
Lorup Avenue       Werner Drive       Easterly direction on Lorup Avenue
Lorup Avenue       Werner Drive       Westerly direction on Lorup Avenue
Marcella Drive     St. Anthony Circle Easterly direction on Marcella Drive
Monticello Drive   Ashlawn Place      Southerly direction on Monticello Drive
Monticello Drive   Ashlawn Place      Northerly direction on Monticello Drive
Monticello Drive   Kyles Lane         Northerly direction on Monticello Drive
Montpelier Court   Beaumont Court     Westerly direction on Montpelier Court
Montpelier Court   Beaumont Court     Easterly direction on Montpelier Court
Montpelier Court   Mt. Vernon Drive   Southerly direction on Montpelier Court
Morris Road        Amsterdam Road     Northwesterly direction on Morris Road
Morris Road        Amsterdam Road     Southeasterly direction on Morris Road
Morris Road        Cherokee Drive     Northwesterly direction on Morris Road
Morris Road        Cherokee Drive     Southeasterly direction on Morris Road
Morris Road        Goebel Court       Southwesterly direction on Morris Road
Morris Road        Goebel Court       Northeasterly direction on Morris Road
Morris Road        Howard Road        Southeasterly direction on Morris Road
Mt. Vernon Drive   Ashlawn Place      Southerly direction on Mt. Vernon Drive
Mt. Vernon Drive   Ashlawn Place      Northerly direction on Mt. Vernon Drive
Mt. Vernon Drive   Beaumont Court     Southerly direction on Mt. Vernon Drive
Mt. Vernon Drive   Beaumont Court     Northerly direction on Mt. Vernon Drive
Mt. Vernon Drive   Knob Hill Court    Southerly direction on Mt. Vernon Drive
Mt. Vernon Drive   Knob Hill Court    Northerly direction on Mt. Vernon Drive
Mt. Vernon Drive   Kyles Lane         Northerly direction on Mt. Vernon Drive
Mt. Vernon Drive   Oak Hill Court     Easterly direction on Mt. Vernon Drive
Mt. Vernon Drive   Oak Hill Court     Westerly direction on Mt. Vernon Drive
Mt. Vernon Drive   Wolfzorn Court     Easterly direction on Mt. Vernon Drive
Mt. Vernon Drive   Wolfzorn Court     Westerly direction on Mt. Vernon Drive
Normandy Court     Monticello Drive   Westerly direction on Normandy Court
Oak Hill Court     Mt. Vernon Drive   Northerly direction on Oakhill Court
Old Madison Road   Madison Pike       Easterly direction
Old State Road     Sleepy Hollow Road Southwesterly direction on Old State
                                      Road
Olivia Lane        Highland Pike      Easterly direction on Olivia Lane
Olivia Lane        Lorup Avenue       Westerly direction on Olivia Lane
Orange Blossom     Grove Park Drive   Northerly direction
Court
Park Road          Barrington Road    Easterly direction on Park Road
Pickett Court      Fort Henry Drive   Northerly direction on Pickett Court
Pickett Drive      General Drive      Westerly direction on Pickett Court
Pickett Drive      Pickett Court      Easterly direction on Pickett Drive
Redwood Drive      Amsterdam Road     Northerly direction on Redwood Drive
Redwood Drive      Elder Court        Northwesterly direction on Redwood Drive
Redwood Drive      Elder Court        Southeasterly direction on Redwood Drive
Redwood Drive      Park Road          Easterly direction on Redwood Drive
Reeves Drive       Highland Pike      Northerly direction on Reeves Drive
Ridgemont Avenue   East Henry Clay    Northwesterly direction on Ridgemont
                   Avenue             Avenue
Rivard Drive       Dixie Highway      Southerly direction on Rivard Drive
Rosa Avenue        Kennedy Road       Westerly direction on Rosa Avenue
Rosa Avenue        West Crittenden    Easterly direction on Rosa Avenue
                   Avenue
Rosa Court         Kennedy Road       Easterly direction on Rosa Court
Sentinel Point     General Drive      Northeasterly direction on Sentinel
                                      Point
St. Agnes Circle   Park Road          Westerly direction on St. Agnes Circle
St. Agnes Circle   Vidot Court        Easterly direction on St. Agnes Court
St. Anthony Circle Kyles Lane         Southerly direction on St. Anthony
                                      Circle
Stonewell Trail    Parkside Place     Northerly direction on Stonewell Trail
Tartan Drive       Glengarry Way      Easterly direction on Tartan Drive
Tyler Court        Fort Henry Drive   Northeasterly direction on Tyler Court
Upland Avenue      East Henry Clay    Easterly direction on Upland Avenue
                   Avenue
Valley Drive       Kyles Lane         Northerly direction on Valley Drive
Vidot Court        Amsterdam Road     Northerly direction on Vidot Court
Vidot Court        St. Agnes Circle   Southerly direction on Vidot Court
Vidot Court        St. Agnes Circle   Northerly direction on Vidot Court
Viewpoint Drive    Valley Plaza       Easterly direction on Viewpoint Drive
                   Parkway
Werner Drive       Highland Pike      Easterly direction on Werner Drive
Werner Drive       Lorup Avenue       Northerly direction on Werner Drive
West Crittenden    Augusta Avenue     Southerly direction on West Crittenden
Avenue                                Avenue
West Crittenden    Kyles Lane         Northerly direction on West Crittenden
Avenue                                Avenue
West Crittenden    Rosa Avenue        Northerly direction on West Crittenden
Avenue                                Avenue
West Crittenden    Rosa Avenue        Southerly direction on West Crittenden
Avenue                                Avenue
West Henry Clay    Rosa Avenue        Southerly direction on West Henry Clay
Avenue                                Avenue
Williamscreek Way  Dorrisway Drive    Easterly direction
Williamscreek Way  Old Madison Pike   Easterly direction on Williams Creek Way
Wolfzorn Court     Mt. Vernon Drive   Northerly direction on Wolfzorn Court
Wright’s Summit  Dixie Highway      Northerly direction on Wright’s Summit
Parkway                               Parkway
Wright’s Summit  Kyles Lane         Easterly direction
Parkway
Wright’s Summit  Frisch’s lot     Easterly direction
Parkway
Wright’s Summit  Frisch’s lot     Westerly direction
Parkway
 
   (C)   Any violation of the provisions of division (A) of this schedule shall
be a violation and a fine of not less than $20 nor more than $100 shall be
imposed for each offense.
(Ord. 1-00, passed 1-12-00; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 8-22-01; Am. Ord. 12-01,
passed 11-14-01; Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 3-1-17; Am. Ord. 01-2022, passed 2-2-
22; Am. Ord. 12-2024, passed 11-6-24)
SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   No person shall cause, permit, aid, assist, encourage, or engage in
the operation of a motor vehicle on the following streets at the locations
identified:
 
Street          Location                             Direction Ord. No. Date
Barrington Road Between Dixie Highway and the        North     01-2022  2-2-22
                entrance to the water tower driveway
 
   (B)   Any violation of the provisions of division (A) of this schedule shall
be a violation and a fine of not less than $20 nor more than $100 shall be
imposed for each offense.
(Ord. 01-2022, passed 2-2-22; Am. Ord. 12-2024, passed 11-6-24)
SCHEDULE III. STREETS CLOSED TO VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.
   (A)   No person shall cause, permit, aid, assist, encourage, or engage in
the operation of a motor vehicle on the following streets at the locations
identified:
 
Street           Location                      Direction(s)    Ord. No. Date
                 Between that point just south
                 of the existing driveway to
Old Madison Pike 3864 Old Madison Pike, and    Both directions 09-2022  10-5-22
                 the city boundary to its
                 south
 
   (B)   Any violation of the provisions of division (A) of this schedule shall
be a violation and a fine of not less than $20 nor more than $100 shall be
imposed for each offense.
(Ord. 09-2022, passed 10-5-22)
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Restricted parking areas
SCHEDULE I. RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   No person shall cause, permit, aid, assist, encourage, or engage in
the location of a parked motor vehicle on any portion of the following
described sections of streets within the city and it shall be unlawful to park
a vehicle or truck at the following locations:
LOCATION SIDE HOURS ORD. NO. DATE PASSED
LOCATION                                  SIDE       HOURS ORD. NO. DATE PASSED
Amsterdam Road for entire length          Both       all   3-03     1-22-03
Barbara Circle for 85 Feet from the       North      all   3-09     3-4-09
intersection of Augusta Avenue
Beaumont Court from intersection of       East       all   1-09     2-4-09
Highland Pike
East Henry Clay Avenue from Kyles Lane to Both       all   14-13    10-2-13
Basswood Avenue
Fort Henry Drive between Amsterdam Road   North/East all   1-23     2-1-23
and Lookout Court
Fort Henry Drive between driveway to 422  South/West all   1-23     2-1-23
Ft. Henry to Amsterdam Road
Rivard Drive from Kennedy Road to         Both       all   13-13    10-2-13
Highview Drive
 
   (B)   Additional restricted parking areas added in 2022 include:
Street Side Location
Street                  Side  Location
Ashwood Circle               Neither side of road
Augusta Avenue          North 30' from end of radius at intersection of West
                              Crittenden
Augusta Avenue          North In the curve in front of 35 Augusta Avenue
Barbara Circle          South In the curve between 20 - 26 Barbara Circle
Barbara Circle          South In the curve between 10 - 12 Barbara Circle
Barrington Road         North Between Dixie Highway and 4 Barrington Road
Barrington Road         North Between 14 Barrington Road and Park Road
Barrington Road              Either side between Park Road and Glazier Court
Christine Court              No parking on either side of the road
Dudley Pike                  No parking on the bridge
East Henry Clay Avenue       No parking on either side between Kyles Lane and
                              Bluegrass Avenue
East Henry Clay Avenue  East  Blocking fire hydrant between 1206 East Henry
                              Clay Avenue and Highland Avenue
Eaton Drive                  No parking on either side of the road
Fort Henry Drive        East  Blocking fire hydrant in front of 1727 Fort Henry
                              Drive
Fort Henry Drive        East  Blocking fire hydrant in front of 1715 Fort Henry
                              Drive
Fort Henry Drive        East  In the curve between 1705 - 441 Fort Henry Drive
Fort Henry Drive        South Within 30' of entrance and exit to 429 Fort Henry
                              Drive
General Drive           South Across from northern edge of driveway at 412
                              General Drive to Amsterdam Road
George Huser                 No parking on either side of road
Grove Park Drive             No parking on either side of road
Hazelwood Drive         East  In the curve of 317 Hazelwood Hazelwood
Highland Place          West  Within the turn-around across from 1707 Highland
                              Place
Howard Road             East  Between 13 - 15 Howard Road
Howard Road             East  In the curve between Howard Road and Morris Road
Kennedy Road            West  Within 30' of the private drive intersecting
                              Kennedy Road between Lake Street and Kyles Lane
Kennedy Road                 No parking on either side between Rosa Avenue and
                              Rivard Drive
Kennedy Road                 Within 50' of Rosa Court
Morris Place            South In the curve between 51 - 53 Morris Place
Morris Place            South In the curve at intersection with Glazier Road
Morris Road             South Between 101 - 109 Morris Road
Mt. Vernon Drive        East  In the curve between 1808 - 1818 Mt. Vernon Drive
Mt. Vernon Drive        North In the curve between 1856 - 1862 Mt. Vernon Drive
Mt. Vernon Drive        East  Blocking fire hydrant in front of 1904 Mt. Vernon
Old State Road               Either side between Sleepy Hollow Road and Mulloy
                              Drive
Olivia Lane             North 30' from end of radius at intersection of
                              Highland Pike
Rosa Avenue             North Between 8 Rosa Avenue and Kennedy Road
Rosa Avenue             North 30' from end of radius at intersection of West
                              Crittenden
Park Road               West  In the curve at intersection with Morris Place
Redwood Drive           South Between 301 Redwood Drive and Park Road
Rivard Drive                 No parking on either side between Kennedy Road
                              and Dixie Highway
Rosa Avenue             North Within 30' of West Henry Clay Avenue marking
Saint Agnes Circle      West  In the curve between 260 - 270 Saint Agnes Circle
Saint Agnes Circle      West  In the curve in front of 282 Saint Agnes Circle
St. Anthony Circle      East  Between Kyles Lane and 1627 St. Anthony Circle
Upland Avenue           East  In the curve between East Henry Clay Avenue and
                              1272 Upland Avenue
Valley Plaza Parkway         No parking on either side of the road
Viewpoint Drive              No parking on either side of the road
West Crittenden Avenue  East  Between 38 - 36 West Crittenden Avenue
West Henry Clay Avenue  West  Between Kyles Lane and 5 West Henry Clay Avenue
Wright’s Summit Parkwa     Either side of road
 
   (C)   The penalty for violation of division (A) of this schedule shall be as
set forth in §
72.99.
(Ord. 9-00, passed 8-9-00; Am. Ord. 01-2022, passed 2-2-22; Am. Ord. 01-2023,
passed 2-1-23; Am. Ord. 12-2024, passed 11-6-24)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
92.   NUISANCES
      
93.   FIREWORKS; FIRE PREVENTION
      
94.   LITTERING
      
95.   TREES
      
96.   EMERGENCY MEDICAL AND TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
      
97.   PARKS AND RECREATION
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Animals running at large
   
90.03   Cruelty to animals in the second degree
   
90.04   Dyeing or selling dyed chicks or rabbits
   
90.05   Abandoning domestic animals prohibited
   
90.06   Destruction of abandoned and suffering animal
   
90.07   Keeping of livestock prohibited
Dogs and Cats
   
90.15   Definitions
   
90.16   License and registration provisions; regulations and anit-rabic
provisions
   
90.17   Dogs and cats running at large prohibited
   
90.18   Noise disturbance; public nuisance prohibited
   
90.19   Police to take possession; entry on private property
   
90.20   Impoundment
   
90.21   Interference with police officers and other empowered officials
   
90.22   Powers or authority granted by state law
Wild or Vicious Animals
   
90.30   Definitions
   
90.31   Agreements, Enforcement
   
90.32   Applicability of state laws
   
90.33   Keeping and maintaining animals; vicious animals, large wild animals
prohibited
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “ABANDON.” Any animal left more than 48 hours without a person checking on
the condition of the animal(s) and/or providing food and water. Any animal left
on private property without the owner's consent or deserted or dumped on public
property or roadways.
   “ANIMAL.” Any live vertebrate creature.
   “ANIMAL CONTROL.” The Kenton County Dog Authority which is an authority made
up of cities in Kenton County to control animals within city boundaries.
   “ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY CHAIRMAN.” The person elected by the Kenton County
Dog Authority to oversee its daily operation.
   “ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.” Any person designated by the Kenton County Dog
Authority who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws and Ordinances
of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and the designated city. An Animal Control
Officer shall be a law enforcement officer for the purposes of this chapter
only.
   “ANIMAL SHELTER.” Any premises operated or approved for operation by the
Kenton County Fiscal Court for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals
held under the authority of this chapter.
   “CAT.” Any member of the feline family, six months of age or over, male or
female.
   “COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT.” Any pet shop, boarding or breeding
kennel, grooming facility, auction, petting zoo, zoological park, circus,
performing animal exhibit, or any person engaged in the business of breeding,
buying, or selling at retail or wholesale, any species of animal for profit.
   “DAY.” For the purpose of this chapter, a 24-hour period shall constitute a
day.
   “DOG.” Any member of the canine family, six months of age or over, male or
female.
   “DOMESTIC ANIMAL.” Such animals as are habituated to live in or about the
habitations of human beings, and which are kept, cared for, sheltered, fed, or
harbored for use as a pet or as a source of food, raw materials or income.
   “EXOTIC ANIMAL.” Any animal not indigenous to the United States.
   “HUMANE SOCIETY.” Any person or organization operating from a fixed site and
taking in or accepting stray or unwanted animals.
   “IMPOUNDED.” Having been received into the custody of the Kenton County Dog
Authority or any authorized representative thereof.
   “LIVESTOCK.” Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses or any other animals of the
bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine, or equine species.
   “OWNER.” Any person(s), corporation or other entity owning, keeping,
harboring or sheltering one or more animals.
   “PERSON.” Includes all natural persons, corporations, partnerships, firms,
associations, governmental bodies, agencies, and other entities.
   “PET.” Domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
   “PUBLIC NUISANCE.” Any animal(s) which:
      (1)   Molests passers-by or passing vehicles;
      (2)   Attacks people or other animals;
      (3)   Damages public or private property;
      (4)   Is repeatedly at large;
      (5)   Makes noise in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion;
      (6)   Repeatedly urinates or defecates on property not belonging to the
animal's owner or creates unsanitary conditions;
      (7)   Disturbs, the peace, comfort or health of persons in any other
manner.
   “RESTRAINED.”   Enclosed is an area by a form of fencing (including
invisible fencing) designed to control the movement of the animal or secured by
a leash or chain. An animal shall be deemed to be restrained if it remains on
the premises of its owner or if it is accompanied by a responsible person and
is under that person's control.
   “RUNNING AT LARGE.” Any animal that is off the property of the owner,
custodian, possessor or harborer and is not restrained. Except that a hound or
other hunting dog which has been released from restraint for hunting purposes
shall be deemed to be under reasonable control of its owner or handler while
engaged in or returning from hunting, and, if such hunting dog becomes
temporarily lost from a pack or wanders from actual control or sight of its
owner or handler it shall not be deemed to be a violation.
   “STRAY.” Any animal running at large.
   “VETERINARIAN.” One licensed and qualified to treat diseases and injuries of
animals.
   “VETERINARY HOSPITAL.” Any establishment maintained and operated by a
licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of diseases and
injuries of animals.
(Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)
§ 90.02 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   No person who is the owner of any animal shall permit it to run at
large in any public road, highway, street, lane, or alley, or upon unenclosed
land, or permit it to go on any private yard, lot, or enclosure without the
consent of the owner of the yard, lot, or enclosure.
   (B)   The owner of an animal who permits it to run at large in violation of
this section is liable for all damages caused by such animal upon the premises
of another.
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.03 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS IN THE SECOND DEGREE.
   (A)   A person is guilty of cruelty to animals in the second degree when
except as authorized by law he intentionally or wantonly:
      (1)   Subjects any animal to or causes cruel or injurious mistreatment
through abandonment, participates other than as provided in § 90.03 in causing
it to fight for pleasure or profit, (including, but not limited to being a
spectator or vendor at an event where a four legged animal is caused to fight
for pleasure or profit) mutilation, beating, torturing any animal other than a
dog or cat, tormenting, failing to provide adequate food, drink, space, or
health care, or by any other means;
      (2)     Subjects any animal in his custody to cruel neglect; or
      (3)    Kills any animal other than a domestic animal killed by poisoning.
This section shall not apply to intentional poisoning of a dog or cat.
Intentional poisoning of a dog or cat shall constitute a violation of this
section.
   (B)     Nothing in this section shall apply to the killing of animals:
      (1)   Pursuant to a license to hunt, fish, or trap;
      (2)     Incident to the processing as food or for other commercial
purposes;
      (3)     For humane purposes;
      (4)   For veterinary, agricultural, spaying or neutering, or cosmetic
purposes;
      (5)   For purposes relating to sporting activities, including but not
limited to horse racing at organized races and training for organized races,
organized horse shows, or other animal shows;
      (6)   For bona fide animal research activities of institutions of higher
education; or a business entity registered with U.S. Department of Agriculture
under the Animal Welfare Act or subject to other federal laws governing animal
research;
      (7)   In defense of self or another person against an aggressive or
diseased animal;
      (8)   In defense of a domestic animal against an aggressive or diseased
animal;
      (9)   For animal or pest control; or
      (10)   For any other purpose authorized by law.
(KRS 525.130)
Penalty, see § 90.99
Statutory reference:
   Cruelty to animals in the first degree, a class D felony, see KRS 525.125
§ 90.04 DYEING OR SELLING DYED CHICKS OR RABBITS.
   No person shall sell, exchange, offer to sell or exchange, display or
possess living baby chicks, ducklings, or other fowl or rabbits which have been
dyed or colored; nor dye or color any baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl or
rabbits; nor sell, exchange, offer to sell or exchange or to give away baby
chicks, ducklings or other fowl or rabbits, under two months of age in any
quantity less than six, except that any rabbit weighing three pounds or more
may be sold at an age of six weeks.
(KRS 436.600)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.05 ABANDONING DOMESTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No owner of a domestic animal shall abandon the animal.
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.06 DESTRUCTION OF ABANDONED AND SUFFERING ANIMAL.
   (A)   Any peace officer, animal control officer, or any officer of the
accredited Human Society or Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
may destroy or kill or cause to be destroyed or killed, any animal found
abandoned and suffering and not properly cared for, or appearing to be injured,
diseased, or suffering past recovery for any useful purpose.
   (B)   Before destroying the animal the officer shall obtain the judgment to
that effect of a veterinarian, or of two reputable citizens called by him to
view the animal in his presence, or shall obtain consent to the destruction
from the owner of the animal.
   (C)   (1) Any animal placed in the custody of a licensed veterinarian for
treatment, boarding, or other care, which shall be unclaimed by its owner or
his agent for a period of more than ten days after written notice by registered
or certified mail, return receipt requested, is given the owner or his agent at
his last known address, shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be turned over
to the nearest humane society, or animal shelter or disposed of as the
custodian may deem proper.
      (2) The giving of notice to the owner, or the agent of the owner of the
animal by the licensed veterinarian shall relieve the licensed veterinarian and
any custodian to whom the animal may be given of any further liability for
disposal.
(KRS 257.100)
§ 90.07 KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK PROHIBITED.
   The keeping of livestock is prohibited. No person shall keep any livestock
whether owned by him, or not, on his property within the city, except
grandfathered farms.
(Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)
Penalty, see § 90.99
DOGS AND CATS
§ 90.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “ANIMAL CONTROL.” The Kenton County Dog Authority which is an authority made
up of cities in Kenton County to control animals within city boundaries.
   “ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY CHAIRMAN.” The person elected by the Kenton County
Dog Authority to oversee its daily operation.
   “ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.” Any person designated by the Kenton County Dog
Authority who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws and Ordinances
of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and the designated city. An Animal Control
Officer shall be a law enforcement officer for the purposes of this chapter
only.
   "AT LARGE."On or off the premises of the owner and not under the immediate
effective control of the owner or custodian either by leash, cord, or chain, or
effectively confined within a fenced area on the owner's premises.
   “CAT.” Any member of the feline family, six months of age or over, male or
female.
   "CITY LICENSE."The license issued by the city or its designated agent by
appropriate municipal order, and required to be worn as hereinafter stated.
   "COLLAR." Any band, chain, harness, or suitable device worn around the neck
of a dog to which a license may be affixed.
   "DOG."Any member of the canine family, six months of age or over, male or
female. "DOG" shall be construed to mean also any cat or other pet, except for
the licensing provisions and any other provision which by its very nature can
have no application. Owners of all cats or other pets shall comply with all
applicable provisions of this subchapter as specified in this division. ('77
Code, §5-2)
   "DOG OWNER."Includes every person having a right of property in the dog and
every person who keeps or harbors the dog or has it in his care or permits it
to remain on or about premises owned or occupied by him. If a dog is owned by a
family, all adult members of the family, individually and jointly, shall be
deemed owners of the dog for the purposes of this subchapter.
   "STATE LICENSE."The license or tag required by KRS Chapter 258.
('77 Code, §5-16) (Ord. 280-l982, passed ll-22-82; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-
14-99)
§ 90.16 LICENSE AND REGISTRATION PROVISIONS; REGULATIONS AND ANTI-RABIC
PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Required; fee. All dogs kept, harbored, or maintained in the city
shall be licensed and registered with the Kenton County Animal Shelter.
   (B)   Collar. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a
collar to which the license tag must be affixed and shall see that the collar
and tag are constantly worn on the dog.
   (C)   Application of state and county requirements. The licensing and
registration herein required shall be in addition to all licenses,
registrations, and vaccination requirements of the State of Kentucky, or County
of Kenton by law or regulation.
   (D)   Burden of proof. Any dog not bearing a license tag as herein required
shall prima facie be deemed to be unlicensed and unregistered and, in any
proceeding under this subchapter, the burden of proof of the fact that a dog
has been licensed and registered shall be on the owner of the dog.
   (E)   Anti-rabic vaccine.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of every person who owns or harbors a dog or
cat in the city to have such dog or cat inoculated with an anti-rabic vaccine
by a veterinarian during the months of January through August of each year.
Failure to have such dog or cat so inoculated during the period shall subject
each person to the penalty hereinafter provided.
      (2)   Every owner or harborer of a dog or cat, upon obtaining the tag
from a veterinarian, shall immediately attach the same to the collar or harness
of said dog or cat to be worn by said dog or cat at all times. The certificate
obtained from the veterinarian shall be retained by the owner or harborer of
said dog or cat for inspection by officials of the Police Department or other
empowered officials of the city.
      (3)   The anti-rabic provisions shall not apply to dogs or cats kept by
regularly chartered medical colleges or other educational or scientific
institutions to be used for scientific purposes.
   (F)   Limitation on number of dogs and cats.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to keep at any one residence within the city
limits more than five dogs or cats, or any combination thereof with the
exception that the owner or person who has custody of a dog or cat may retain
the puppies or kittens, born of said dog or cat which exceed the permissible
numbers set forth in this division for a period of 12 weeks after the birth of
the animals. Any retention of dogs or cats in excess of the number specified in
this division after this 12-week period will constitute a violation of this
division.
      (2)   Any person having custody of dogs or cats in excess of the number
permitted by this division shall have 30 days from the effective date of this
chapter in which to reduce the number of dogs and cats in their custody to
comply with this division.
('77 Code, §5-17) (Ord. 280-l982, passed ll-22-82; Am. Ord. 431-1990, passed 6-
28-90; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.17 DOGS AND CATS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Every owner, harborer, or person having the custody, control, or
possession of any dog or cat, shall keep such dog or cat confined to the
premises and property of said owner, harborer, or custodian, except as
hereinafter provided.
   (B)   No owner, harborer, or person having the custody, control, or
possession of any dog or cat shall permit, allow, or suffer the dog or cat to:
      (l)   Run or be at large as defined in §
90.15;
      (2)   Go about or on the premises or property of any other person within
the city without the permission of the other person.
('77 Code, §5-18) (Ord. 280-l982, passed 11-22-82; Am. Ord. 431-1990, passed 6-
28-90; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.18 NOISE DISTURBANCE; PUBLIC NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   No owner, harborer or person having the custody, control or possession of
any dog or cat shall permit such dog or cat to disturb the peace and quiet of
the neighborhood by reason of their howling, barking and whining, the stench
they cause, unsanitary conditions in which they are kept, or their disturbing
of people in the reasonable use and enjoyment of property where any of these
factors cause annoyance, discomfort or injury to the health and welfare of
persons in the neighborhood.
(Ord. 431-1990, passed 6-28-90; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.19 POLICE TO TAKE POSSESSION; ENTRY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Any and all dogs or cats found at large within the city in violation
of this chapter, and all unlicensed dogs or cats shall be taken into custody by
the Police Department and/or Police Officers, Animal Control Officers or other
empowered officials of the city.
   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, police officers of the city, Animal
Control Officers or other empowered officials, shall have specific authority to
enter upon private property for the purpose of inspecting or checking dogs or
cats to determine if they are properly licensed or abandoned and for the
purpose of taking into custody any unlicensed dog or cat, any dog or cat found
at large within the city, abandoned dog or cat or any dog or cat found upon the
property of anyone other than the owner of said dog or cat.
   (C)   Police officers, Animal Control Officers or other empowered officials
may use any reasonable means and force necessary to take control and possession
of dogs or cats found in violation of this chapter, including but not limited
to, using tranquilizer guns or devices. Police, Animal Control Officers or
other empowered officials shall not be liable, civilly or criminally, for dogs
or cats that unintentionally are injured or killed in the process of taking
control or possession of said animals as provided herein.
('77 Code, §5-l9) (Ord. 280-1982, passed 11-22-82; Am. Ord. 431-1990, passed 6-
28-90; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.20 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   All dogs or cats taken into custody by police, Animal Control Officers
or other empowered officials as provided in § 90.19, shall be impounded at the
Kenton County Animal Shelter, except as provided in division(B).
   (B)   If the dog or cat or other animal is found on or off the premises of
its owner, but is unlicensed or at large, the police officers, Animal Control
Officers or other empowered officials may, in their discretion, not impound the
dog or cat, but in lieu thereof, issue a citation to the owner for owning an
unlicensed dog or cat or permitting the dog or cat to run at large. Citations
can be city or state.
   (C)   All dogs or cats impounded shall be handled and/or disposed of by the
Kenton County Animal Shelter as provided by the regulations of that agency, by
state law or by county regulations, except that no dog or cat impounded by the
Police, Animal Control Officers or other empowered officials of the city, shall
be released to its owner without written authority from the Police Department
or other empowered officials or agents of the city.
   (D)   On written complaint of any person that a dog or cat is rabid, or that
a dog or cat has bitten or attacked a person, the dog or cat shall be seized
and impounded forthwith. The District Court shall hold a hearing on said
written complaint and if the court shall determine in its sound discretion that
the aforementioned dog or cat is mad or has in fact attacked a person, then and
in that event, the Judge may order said dog or cat to be destroyed and examined
by a competent scientist or veterinarian or impounded for observation for a
designated period of time, or make any other reasonable order concerning said
dog or cat.
   (E)   Any and all expenses incurred by the city in keeping and housing of
any animal after being so seized and impounded shall be chargeable to the owner
or keeper of said animal.
('77 Code, §5-20) (Ord. 280-1982, passed 11-22-82; Am. Ord. 431-1990, passed 6-
28-90; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)
§ 90.21 INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE OFFICERS AND OTHER EMPOWERED OFFICIALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or
prevent police officers or other empowered officials of this city discharging
their duties as herein prescribed.
('77 Code, §5-21) (Ord. 280-1982, passed 11-22-82; Am. Ord. 431-1990, passed 6-
28-90; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.22 POWERS OR AUTHORITY GRANTED BY STATE LAW.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to conflict with any of the
powers or authority of police officers or dog wardens conferred by the
provisions of Kentucky Revised Statutes.
('77 Code, § 5-22) (Ord. 280-1982, passed 11-22-82; Am. Ord. 431-1990, passed
6-28-90)
WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS
§ 90.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   “ANIMAL.” Any live vertebrate creature.
   "AT LARGE." Off the premises of the owner and not under control of a human
being either by leash, cord, chain, or otherwise.
   "ENFORCEMENT AGENT." Any person designated by the city to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   "KEEP." Possessing, controlling, exercising, or allowing to run at large.
   “LARGE WILD ANIMAL.” Any normally undomesticated animal in excess of 50
pounds, not ordinarily tame and which is, by nature, an animal that lives apart
from human beings.
   "OWNER." Any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or other animal.
   "POUND." Any establishment authorized by the enforcement agent for
confinement, maintenance, safekeeping, and control of dogs that come into
custody of the enforcement agent in the performance of his official duties.
   "VACCINATION." An anti-rabies vaccination using a type of vaccine approved
by the state veterinarian.
   “VETERINARIAN.” One licensed and qualified to treat diseases and injuries of
animals.
   “VICIOUS ANIMAL.”
   (A)   The term includes:
      (1)   Any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or
domestic animals due to a known propensity to endanger life by an unprovoked
assault or bite which result in serious bodily harm;
      (2)   Any animal which when unprovoked, approaches in a terrorizing
manner, any person in an attitude of attack upon streets, sidewalks or any
public grounds or places, or private property;
      (3)   Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
unprovoked attacks which cause injury or endanger the safety of human beings or
domestic animals; or
      (4)   Any animal which bites multiple times or to the extent of causing
severe injury, and assaults or otherwise attacks human beings or domestic
animals; or
      (5)   Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose
of fighting with animals.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be prima facie evidence that an animal is vicious if
the animal bites a human being or domestic animal more than once in the same
attack.
      (2)   Any animal which has bitten human beings twice is prima facie
deemed vicious.
   (C)   Exceptions. An animal shall not be deemed vicious solely because:
      (1)   It bites, attacks or menaces:
         (a)   Any person assaulting its owner;
         (b)   Any person or animal who has tormented or abused it; or
      (2)   It is otherwise acting in defense of any attack from a person or
other animal upon itself, its owner or another person.
      (3)   Any police canine unit in the performance of their duties.
   "WILD." See "Vicious".
(Ord. 491-94, passed 5-4-94; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)
§ 90.31 AGREEMENTS: ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Council is empowered to authorize the entering into an approved
contract with other cities in the enforcement of this chapter or, in the
alternative, may enter into an employment contract with either an organization
or an individual to enforce the provisions of this chapter
(Ord. 491-94, passed 5-4-94; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)
§ 90.32 APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW.
   No person owning or having in his custody any animal shall violate any laws,
rules, or regulations of the state applicable thereto. These state laws, rules,
and regulations are included herein by reference. Where the provisions of the
state regulations are less restrictive than the provisions of this chapter, the
latter shall govern.
(Ord. 491-94, passed 5-4-94)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.33 KEEPING AND MAINTAINING ANIMALS; VICIOUS ANIMALS, LARGE WILD ANIMALS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Manner of keeping animals. No person shall keep or maintain any animal
in the city in such a manner as to become a public nuisance or to disturb the
peace, comfort, or health of any person residing in the city. The keeping of
all animals within the city shall be subject to all pertinent regulations of
the State Health Department.
   (B)   The keeping of vicious animals and/or large wild animals is
prohibited. No person shall keep any vicious animal and/or large wild animal,
whether owned by him, or not, on his property within the city.
   (C)   Keeping of reptiles and wild animals. No person shall keep or maintain
any poisonous reptile or wild animals.
   (D)   The foregoing divisions are a necessary control on the unrestrained
activities of vicious animals and/or large wild animals which threaten the
safety and pleasantness of streets, parks, sidewalks, yards and all areas of
the city. Lack of knowledge or lack of intent is not a defense to a violation
thereof.
(Ord. 491-94, passed 5-4-94; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $10 and not more than $500. Each day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall be a separate and distinct offense and punishable as such.
(Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)
   (B)   Any person who violates §
90.03 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500,
imprisoned for not more than 12 months, or both for each offense. (KRS 525.130)
   (C)   Any person who violates §
90.04 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $100
nor more than $500. (KRS 436.600)
CHAPTER 91: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Sidewalk Policy and Construction Maintenance Plan
   
91.02   Regulation of tree-lawn area
   
91.03   Definitions
Road and Bridge Projects
   
91.15   Public meeting required
   
91.16   Notice requirements
   
91.17   Public may testify; effect of testimony
   
91.18   Meeting to be held prior to construction
   
91.19   Separate meeting for each project not required
   
91.20   Exemptions from meeting requirement
Obstructions
   
91.30   Unloading on street or sidewalk
   
91.31   Street and sidewalk obstruction
   
91.32   Materials on street or sidewalk
   
91.33   [Reserved]
   
91.34   Peddlers not to obstruct streets
   
91.35 Pedestrians’ duties in traffic
Excavations and Construction
   
91.45   Application for permit to cut, excavate, or bore in the city right-of-
way from the city required
   
91.46   Reconstruction of street segment in certain cases; waivers, and
restoration to be completed promptly and expeditiously
   
91.47   Specifications for filling of cuts
   
91.48   Cash deposit or bond to cover cost of repair work
   
91.49   Emergency repairs
   
91.50   Liability insurance
   
91.51   Agreement in lieu of liability insurance
Installation on New and Extension Streets
   
91.60    Installation
   
91.61   Utility review
   
91.62   City review
   
91.63   Fees
   
91.64   Minimum standards
   
91.65   Completion
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 SIDEWALK POLICY AND CONSTRUCTION MAINTENANCE PLAN.
   (A)   Introduction.
      (1)   This Sidewalk Policy and Construction and Maintenance Plan
("Policy") shall cover the construction of new sidewalks and the repair of
existing sidewalks that are located in the public right-of-way and that have
been dedicated and accepted by the city for public use.
      (2)   It is the goal of the policy to address the following sidewalk
issues, listed in descending order of importance.
         First:      Repairing severely damaged (hazardous) sidewalks.
         Second:   Filling in missing short sections between sidewalks.
         Third:      Filling in large areas without sidewalks.
         Fourth:      Aesthetic considerations.
   (B)   Sidewalk fund. The City Council has approved a capital projects
program fund, which includes an annual budgeted line item earmarked for the
maintenance and construction of sidewalks located in the public right-of-way.
This fund ("the Sidewalk Fund") will be used to purchase materials, equipment,
labor, and professional services necessary to implement the policy.
   (C)   Sidewalk Committee. A Sidewalk Committee is established under this
policy to oversee the policy. The Sidewalk Committee is comprised of the
Council members appointed to the Community Preservation Committee, the City
Administrative Officer, and the Public Works Director. The Committee will meet
periodically, but at least annually, to review the work schedule and make
recommendations for changes and adjustments whenever necessary.
   (D)   Implementation plan. In order to provide for the efficient and orderly
implementation of the policy, the city is divided into six sidewalk districts
(see map attached to Ord. 3-2017).
   (E)   Sidewalk inventory and condition assessment.
      (1)   The Public Works Department shall periodically inventory as many
sidewalks as allowed by time and budget, for the purpose of creating a sidewalk
condition index (the "Index").
      (2)   When inventorying sidewalks, the Public Works Department shall use
the following rating system to compile data to form the Index:
         (a)   "Slight Cracking" denotes a crack that is superficial up to 1/8"
in width and/or vertical displacement less than 1/8". (1 point)
         (b)   "Moderate Cracking" denotes a crack that is between 1/8" and 1/
4" in width and/or slight vertical displacement up to 1/2". (2 points)
         (c)   "Severe Cracking" denotes a crack that is over 1/4" in width
and/or has a vertical displacement of 1/2" to 1". (3 points)
         (d)   "Vertical Separation" denotes a section of sidewalk in which the
vertical separation is greater than 1". (5 points)
   (F)   Prioritization Plan.
      (1)   Each district shall be ranked based upon the results of the
sidewalk inventory. Priority will be determined by the highest point total in
the most recent index.
      (2)   Once the Public Works Department has begun work in a district, it
will continue in that district until all sidewalks have been inspected and the
required repairs and replacements have been made.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the above sentence, the Sidewalk Committee may
consider other factors in determining whether an exception to the general
policy is warranted, on a case-by-case basis. These factors include, but are
not limited to: natural disasters, emergencies, or other extraordinary
circumstances, the volume of pedestrian traffic, proximity to public
transportation boarding and drop off points, and proximity to schools.
   (G)   Criteria for sidewalk repair and replacement. Upon inspection,
sidewalks in the prioritized district shall be repaired and/or replaced if the
following conditions exist:
      (1)   Vertical offset at joints larger than one inch.
      (2)   Intersecting cracks in one panel subject to displacement.
      (3)   Settlement in sidewalk larger than four inches in an eight-foot
span.
      (4)   Rough surface due to deterioration of concrete that is determined
hazardous.
   (H)   Sidewalk specifications.
      (1)   All sidewalk repairs, replacement, and construction shall comply
with the Kenton County Subdivision Regulations. This provision shall apply to
any developer who builds sidewalks in residential and commercial subdivisions.
      (2)   Any sidewalk construction or repair shall be subject to inspection
by the City Public Works Department for compliance with the abovementioned
standards or quality of material and workmanship.
   (I)   Trees and tree roots in the vicinity of sidewalks. In certain
locations trees have been planted in close proximity to sidewalks. Roots of
such trees may have caused severe damage to sidewalks, the repair of which may
require the cutting of these roots. In the event a sidewalk cannot be repaired
or rendered compliant without the removal of the tree, the tree shall be
removed. If such a tree is in the right-of-way, the sidewalk fund shall pay for
the removal. If the tree is on private property, the property owner shall be
responsible for the removal.
   (J)   Damage to sidewalks due to private construction activity or individual
acts. If a private construction activity or individual act causes damage to a
public sidewalk, the party causing the damage shall be responsible for
repairing and/or replacing the damaged sidewalk.
   (K)   Repair or replacement of sidewalks by others. If a resident or group
of residents choose to repair or replace a damaged sidewalk that meets the
replacement criteria of division (G) above, before the scheduled repair or
replacement, the sidewalk program may pay for the concrete used to complete
such work, provided yearly budgeted funds are available. A resident making such
a request shall employ a bonded contractor or provide surety to the city in the
amount of $1,000. The resident or contractor performing such work must obtain
all proper permits. Such work will be subject to inspection by the Public Works
Department.
   (L)   Utilities. Utility companies shall comply with the provisions of their
franchise agreement with the city.
   (M)   Construction of sidewalk by others. If a resident or a group of
residents or a private or public entity chooses to construct a sidewalk in the
right-of-way where none exists, the sidewalk program may pay for the concrete
used to complete such work provided yearly budgeted funds are available. A
resident making such a request shall employ a bonded contractor or provide
surety to the city in the amount of $1,000. The resident or contractor
performing such work must obtain all proper permits. Such work will be subject
to inspection by the Public Works Department.
   (N)   Sidewalk program management and construction.
      (1)   The policy shall be managed by the city Public Works Department.
The City Council, City Administrator, and Community Preservation Committee
shall provide guidance in the implementation of the policy.
      (2)   In order to obtain the most efficient use of the sidewalk fund, the
Public Works Department may perform the sidewalk repairs, replacement and
construction of sidewalks. If, due to heavy workload, the Public Works
Department cannot perform the work in a timely manner, then this work may be
bid and awarded to a private contractor.
   (O)   Repair or replacement of sidewalks as part of city road construction
projects. The City Council has approved a capital projects program fund, which
includes an annual budgeted line item earmarked for the maintenance, repair,
and replacement of city streets (the "Street Repair Program"). If a sidewalk is
repaired or replaced in conjunction with a project under the street repair
program, the sidewalk fund shall cover the costs associated with the repair or
replacement of sidewalk.
   (P)   Requests for exceptions and appeals. A Fort Wright resident may
request an exception to the policy. The resident's request must identify an
exception listed in division (F)(1) above. The Sidewalk Committee's decision
with respect to the resident's request shall be final.
(Ord. 3-2017, passed 3-1-17) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 REGULATION OF TREE-LAWN AREA.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to blacktop, concrete, macadamize,
cover up, or in any form obliterate that strip of land between the street and
the sidewalk commonly known as "tree lawn" within the confines of the city,
excepting the planting of grass or trees or as otherwise provided in this
section.
   (B)   The City Council may in its discretion and in conformity with the
general intent of this section, grant approval by written permission for
blacktopping, concreting, macadamizing, or other use of the strip of land
commonly referred to as the "tree lawn." This approval is to be granted by the
City Council after first consideration is given to maintaining the uniformity,
beauty, contour, and general appearance throughout the city as originally
planned.
('77 Code, § 12-4)
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.03 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
   “PARTICIPATE.” A utility company which assesses and repairs or replaces
underground lines, pipes, conduit, wires, cables or other objects, as part of
the city's Street Replacement and Repair Program, at the time when the street,
curb, or sidewalk, is excavated or opened by the city as part of the city's
Street Replacement and Repair Program.
   “PERSON IN CONTROL.” When referring to a utility company, shall include (i)
any persons who perform the work involving the disruption, excavation, boring
or cutting into the surface, sub-grade, or other portion of any city street,
curb or sidewalk; (ii), any person who has the right or ability to supervise,
control or direct any person described in paragraph (i), and (iii) shall
include any officers of the utility company involved in contracting for such
work to occur.
   “RECONSTRUCTION.” The full and complete construction, including complete
excavation and replacement of sub-grade, base, under-drains, drainage blankets,
surface, curbs, and other street components, consistent with the specifications
set forth in City of Fort Wright Typical Detail No 1, 2, 5 and 6 as applicable,
which details are attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
   “RESTORATION.” Returning a portion of street or street segment, to its
condition, as that condition existed prior to any work being performed
consistent with the specifications set forth in City of Fort Wright Typical
Detail No. 2, 3A, 3B, 4A, and 4B, as applicable, which details are attached
hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
   “STREET SEGMENT.” In the case of any reconstruction, means the area of the
street required to be reconstructed as depicted in City of Fort Wright Typical
Detail No. 5 and 6, as applicable, which details are attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference.
   “STREET SEGMENT.” In the case of any restoration, means the area of the
street required to be restored as depicted in City of Fort Wright Typical
Detail No. 7 and 8, as applicable, which details are attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference.
   “UTILITY COMPANY.” An entity which provides an essential commodity or
service, including, without limitation, water, sewage, electricity, gas or
natural gas, transportation, cable, data or communication, to the public, as
well as any contractor performing work on behalf of, or under contract with,
such company. The term utility company shall include, but not be limited to,
Cincinnati Bell, Time Warner Cable, Duke Energy, Sanitation District #1 of
Northern Kentucky, and the Northern Kentucky Water District.
(Ord. 08-14, passed 7-16-14)
ROAD AND BRIDGE PROJECTS
§ 91.15 PUBLIC MEETING REQUIRED.
   Before the city expends state-derived tax revenues on a municipal highway,
road, street, or bridge, it shall provide an opportunity to the public to
provide input in a public meeting for which notice has been given under KRS
61.823(2) to (4) with regard to the project and to priorities for use of tax
moneys for road and bridge purposes.
(KRS 174.100)
§ 91.16 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   Prior to the contemplated date of expenditure of state-derived tax revenues
on a road or bridge by the city, the city shall include the topic as a specific
item on the public meeting agenda.
(KRS 174.100 (l))
§ 91.17 PUBLIC MAY TESTIFY; EFFECT OF TESTIMONY.
   (A)   At the meeting, the city shall allow any person to speak with regard
to any proposed project, any project which he or she feels should be built or
done which has not been proposed, priorities for completion of projects, and
any other matter related to road or bridge projects.
   (B)   The city shall not be bound by the comments and input provided at the
meeting but shall give due consideration to them.
(KRS 174.100 (1), (2))
§ 91.18 MEETING TO BE HELD PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION.
   The city shall not begin construction on a road or bridge project wherein
state-derived tax revenues are involved until the meeting as provided in this
subchapter has been held.
(KRS 174.100 (3))
§ 91.19 SEPARATE MEETING FOR EACH PROJECT NOT REQUIRED.
   This subchapter shall not be construed to require a separate meeting for
each project. A single meeting encompassing the entire road and bridge program,
provided all projects subsequently undertaken have been identified at the
meeting, shall meet the requirements of this subchapter.
(KRS 174.100 (4))
§ 91.20 EXEMPTIONS FROM MEETING REQUIREMENT.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to emergency repair or
replacement of roads or bridges necessitated by natural or man-caused disasters
nor to street cleaning or snow removal operations.
(KRS 174.100 (5))
OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 91.30 UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the city by
throwing or letting the material fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public way, without first placing some sufficient protection
over the pavement.
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.31 STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.
   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way
within the city by erecting thereon any fence or building, or permitting any
fence or building to remain thereon. Each day that any fence or building is
permitted to remain upon the public way shall constitute a separate offense.
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.32 MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk. No owner, occupant, or
person having the care of any building or lot of land, bordering on any street
or sidewalk, shall permit it to be encumbered with barrels, boxes, cans,
articles, or substances of any kind, so as to interfere with the free and
unobstructed use thereof.
Penalty, see § 91.99
Cross-reference:
   Littering on streets or sidewalks, see
Ch. 94
§ 91.33 [RESERVED].
§ 91.34 PEDDLERS NOT TO OBSTRUCT STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed as a peddler or not,
to demonstrate, sell, or offer for sale any items from any vehicle upon any
street or alley of this city in such a manner as to obstruct the streets and
endanger the life and limb of persons and property.
('77 Code, § 12-2)
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.35 PEDESTRIANS’ DUTIES IN TRAFFIC.
   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to block any road or street in the
city, or to do any act designated to stop, slow or impede the movement of
traffic, or to approach stopped motorists in a line of traffic.
(Ord. 4-2017, passed 3-1-17)
EXCAVATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION
§ 91.45 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO CUT, EXCAVATE OR BORE IN THE CITY RIGHT-OF-
WAY FROM THE CITY REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person or utility company desiring to open or otherwise disrupt
the surface of any public street, sidewalk, or any area within publicly
dedicated right-of-way under the ownership and/or maintenance of the city shall
obtain an application for permit to cut, excavate, or bore in the city right-
of-way from the city ("permit") prior to commencing work. The permit
application, on a form provided by the city, shall be completed and submitted
to the Public Works Director prior to the commencement of any work. The Public
Works Director, or a designee, shall promptly review the submitted application
for permit and upon determination that all requisite information has been
submitted, approve and issue the permit without undue delay. The provisions set
forth in §§
91.45 through
91.49 shall apply to the permit holder and his or her employees, agents, and
subcontractors.
   (B)   The issuance of a permit by the city shall obligate the permit holder
to perform all work in accordance with the submitted permit application. The
permit holder, during the course of street opening operations, shall be
responsible for properly securing, maintaining, and marking the work area
sufficiently to warn the public and avoid any safety hazard to vehicles and
pedestrians. The permit holder shall be responsible for the defense of any
claim from any individual regarding personal injury and/or damage to public or
private property resulting from the work area covered by the permit.
   (C)    All reconstruction and restoration work shall be inspected and
approved by the Public Works Director. Reconstruction and restoration work must
be completed in a manner consistent with good engineering practice to be
determined in the sole discretion of the Director of Public Works, who may rely
on an opinion issued by a licensed Kentucky engineer.
(Ord. 08-14, passed 7-16-14)
§ 91.46 RECONSTRUCTION OF STREET SEGMENT IN CERTAIN CASES; WAIVERS, AND
RESTORATION TO BE COMPLETED PROMPTLY AND EXPEDITIOUSLY.
   (A)   Any utility company, or their contractor, which disrupts, excavates,
bores or cuts into the surface, sub-grade, or other portion of any city street
or curb which has been replaced or repaired under the Street Replacement and
Repair Program within the 15 years immediately preceding the date the utility
company applies for its permit under §
91.45, shall conduct a complete Reconstruction, as that term is defined in §
91.03(C), of the street segment, as that term is defined in §
91.03(E), and any permit granted under this section shall require such
Reconstruction of the Street Segment, unless a waiver is granted as provided in
division (C) of this section. Such Reconstruction shall occur and be completed
within 365 days of the disruption, excavation, boring or cutting into the
surface. Not withstanding the foregoing, this paragraph shall not apply if (i)
the utility company participated, as that term is defined in §
91.03(A), in the repair or replacement of the portion of the street which is
proposed to be disrupted, excavated, bored or cut by the utility company, or
their contractor, when the city reconstructed or repaired that portion of the
street, and (ii) the disruption, excavation, boring or cutting into the
surface, sub-grade, or other portion of any city street or curb is necessitated
by good engineering practice, as determined in sole discretion of the Director
of Public Works, who may rely on an opinion issued by a licensed Kentucky
engineer.
   (B)   Waivers to division (A) or any of its requirements, or waivers with
conditions, may be granted by the City Administration officer, or, in the
absence of the City Administrative Officer, the Public Works Director, upon the
recommendation and advice of a city engineer, who shall consider the following
in determining whether to grant such waiver; (i) the amount of time that will
lapse prior to the next repair or replacement of the Street Segment in question
by the city under the Street Replacement and Repair Program; (ii) whether the
city engineer believes or has issued an opinion regarding whether the waiver
will not the shortening of the lifespan of the street segment in question or
otherwise cause harm to the city; (iii) whether unique topography or
engineering factors justify the granting of the waiver; (iv) the furtherance of
the goals of this chapter are met through the granting of a waiver, including
whether the repair or replacement of the street was foreseeable by the utility
company during the last road reconstruction or repair by the city under the
street replacement and Repair Program; and (v) the hardship to the applicant in
light of the goals of this chapter. No waivers may be granted until the city
engineer is consulted and renders an opinion. Requests for waivers shall be in
writing and delivered to the City Clerk and shall be submitted, except in cases
of emergency, prior to the disruption, excavation, or cutting into the surface,
sub-grade, or other portion of any city street, curb or sidewalk. Any appeals
to waiver determinations shall be made to the calendar days of the original
determination; the Mayor shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty days
of the city's receipt of the appeal and issue a decision thereon with seven
days of the hearing. Further appeal may be had to the Circuit Court, by filing
a notice of appeal and complaint within fourteen days after the Mayor's
determination, which shall be limited to a review of the record before the
Mayor and a determination as to whether the Mayor abused his discretion and
acted arbitrary and capricious.
   (C)   If the Director of Public Works, after consulting with the city
engineer, determines that any sidewalk or driveway located in a street Segment
being Reconstructed or Restored by a utility company requires repair as part of
the utility company's project, then the utility company shall perform such work
consistent with the specifications set forth in City of Fort Wright Typical
Detail No. 10, Typical Detail No. 11,12,13,14 and 15, as applicable, which
Details are attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
   (D)   All restoration work related to the permit shall be completed in a
prompt and expeditious manner to minimize the amount of time any portion of the
public right-of-way area is disturbed. If permanent restoration, in accordance
with specifications as defined herein, does not occur immediately upon
completion of work, the permit holder shall be required to complete temporary
restoration of all disturbed area in accordance with city specifications. All
permanent restoration work shall be completed within 30 days from the date of
the permit's issuance, or promptly upon completion of the work, whichever is
later, during the time period of April 1 through November 30. During the time
period of December 1 through March 31, permanent restoration shall be completed
in a timely manner, subject to appropriate weather conditions. A final
inspection of all [TEXT MISSING]
   (E)   Upon the completion of permanent of permanent restoration or
reconstruction of a street opening, the Public Works Director or a designee
shall inspect all finished work to ensure conformance with applicable city
specifications. If restoration or reconstruction work is accepted by the city,
the performance guaranty shall be promptly released and returned to the permit
holder. If the restoration or reconstruction work is determined to be
noncompliant with city specifications, the Public Works Director or a designee
shall notify the permit holder, in writing, of the specific deficiency in
restoration work. A second inspection shall be performed in 30 days by a city
representative to determine if the reported deficiency has been corrected. If a
deficiency still exists, the Public Works Director or a designee shall issue a
final written notice to the permit holder advising that if restoration or
reconstruction work is not completed within ten days, the city shall order the
work completed at the cost of the permit holder through application of the
performance guaranty, and the permit holder shall forfeit any and all rights to
the performance guaranty or portion of the performance guaranty if an annual
guaranty has been posted. Any dispute or disagreement regarding compliance with
the terms and provisions of §§
91.45 through
91.49 may be submitted to the City Administrator, in writing, for review and
consideration.
(Ord. 08-14, passed 7-16-14)
§ 91.47 SPECIFICATIONS FOR FILLING OF CUTS.
   Any person desiring to break pavement in any street, sidewalk, or public way
for the purpose of installing gas, sewer, water, or for any other purpose shall
backfill under new concrete with gravel bankrun only. Suitable earth fill is
permissible if compacted with power-driven hand tampers to a 90% density as
determined by the "Proctor test."
('77 Code, § 12-19) (Ord. 210(LH), passed 6-18-65)
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.48 CASH DEPOSIT OR BOND TO COVER COST OF REPAIR WORK.
   Before a permit shall be issued to any person to make openings or
excavations under this subchapter, there shall be delivered to the City
Treasurer a cash deposit to cover the cost of replacing, backfilling, or
reconstructing the openings so made. The applicant may, at his option, execute
and deliver to the city a bond, with corporate surety to be approved by the
City Treasurer and filed with the City Council, such bond to be in an amount
fixed by the Building Inspector to cover the cost of replacing, backfilling, or
reconstructing the openings made in streets, sidewalks, grassplots, alleys, or
other public ways and restore the same to their former condition or in a manner
to be approved by the Public Works Department. Under such bond, the person
securing the permit and his surety shall bind themselves that they will, after
they have notified the Building Inspector that such reconstruction work has
been completed, pay to the city, on demand, such amount in damages as will be
necessary to restore such streets, sidewalks, grassplots, or other public ways
either to their former condition and in a manner satisfactory to the Building
Inspector, the amount of such damage to be determined by the Building
Inspector.
('77 Code, § 12-21)
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.49 EMERGENCY REPAIRS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of §§
91.45 through
91.49, emergency street openings by utility companies and other persons shall
be permitted when emergency repair of a utility system is warranted due to
breakages, service disruption, and/or safety considerations. Any person
performing an emergency street opening shall notify the city and complete and
submit a permit application along with the required fee and performance
guaranty no later than the next business day that the city offices are open for
business. All other provisions of §§
91.45 through
91.49 shall apply to emergency street opening work and restoration or
reconstruction requirements.
(Ord. 08-14, passed 7-16-14)
§ 91.50 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   Any person obtaining a permit to open or excavate in any street, sidewalk,
grassplot, alley, or other public way, whether the work is to be done by that
person or the city, shall obtain and file with the City Council, and continue
to keep in force until the excavation and reconstruction work has been
completed, a liability insurance policy conditioned for the benefit of persons
suffering injury, loss, or damage to their person or property resulting from
any negligence in connection with the excavation and reconstruction work, or as
a result of the negligence of the person or of the city, their agents,
servants, or employees, and which policy shall also protect the city against
any liability which may be imposed by law upon it by reason of such excavation
and reconstruction work. The liability policy shall be in a sum of not less
than $10,000 for the injury or death of any person, and not less than $20,000
for the death or injury of all persons affected by any one accident, and not
less than $1,000 for the benefit of persons who may suffer property damage in
any one accident resulting from the negligent excavation and reconstruction
work. Such policy shall, as to the form thereof and the solvency of the
insurance company, be subject to the approval of the City Treasurer.
('77 Code, § 12-23)
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.51 AGREEMENT IN LIEU OF LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   Any person doing his own excavation and reconstruction work pursuant to this
subchapter and having property within the city assessed for taxes at a sum in
excess of $100,000 may, at his option, in lieu of obtaining liability insurance
pursuant to § 91.50 covering accidental injuries and damages arising out of his
own excavation and reconstruction work, enter into an agreement with the City
Council, satisfactory in form to Council, agreeing to indemnify and save
harmless the city from any loss, damage, or expense to the person or property
of anyone, including the city, its agents, servants, or employees, occasioned
by or growing out of any excavation or reconstruction work performed by and as
a result of the negligence of such person, under the terms of this subchapter;
to defend any and all actions instituted against the city on account of
accidental injuries to persons or damage to their property arising out of such
excavation and reconstruction work; and to pay all court costs, attorney fees,
and other litigation expense which the city may be required to incur in such
suit or suits. Whenever the city undertakes the performance of the replacement
or reconstruction work for any person who has entered into such an agreement,
the city shall obtain and keep in force, until such reconstruction work has
been completed, a liability policy in the amount specified in § 91.50,
indemnifying it against any loss or liability arising from or which may be
imposed by law upon it by reason of the excavation and reconstruction work, and
the premium for such policy shall be deemed to be a part of the costs of the
work and paid to the city by such person.
('77 Code, § 12-24)
   INSTALLATION ON NEW AND EXTENSION STREETS
§ 91.60 INSTALLATION.
   Where any new subdivision, or other new development, includes the
construction, extension, or improvement of a street to be dedicated and
accepted by the city, such developer shall construct and install street
lighting and street signs and sign poles within said street or streets as a
part of the construction, extension, or improvement thereof.
(Ord. 1-03, passed 1-8-03)
§ 91.61 UTILITY REVIEW.
   (A)   Plans for the construction, extension, or improvement of a street
shall be submitted to the utility company, or other entity, which will install,
maintain or otherwise operate the lights.
   (B)   That utility, or other entity, shall either:
      (1)   Prepare plans and details for the lighting system based upon the
minimum standards contained herein; or
      (2)   Shall approve any such plans as already prepared in detail.
(Ord. 1-03, passed 1-8-03)
§ 91.62 CITY REVIEW.
   (A)   No less than five sets of said plans for streetlights and street signs
and sign poles shall then be submitted to the city for review and approval.
Plans submitted to the city shall contain and depict, at a minimum, the
location of each lighting fixture and sign and sign pole; details of the
lighting pole and fixtures which shall include the manufacturer’s name, pole
and fixture style, pole and fixture model, type of light produced, and output
of the fixture; and the location of each power source including any power
supply crossings. Plans submitted to the city for review and approval of street
signs and sign poles shall include location of each sign and sign pole; and
details of the sign and sign pole designed to the specifications attached
hereto.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the City Building Inspector, and /or
the City Engineer, to review the submitted plans for compliance with this
subchapter.
(Ord. 1-03, passed 1-8-03)
§ 91.63 FEES.
   There shall be a fee of $50, payable to the city, to cover the cost of the
review.
(Ord. 1-03, passed 1-8-03)
§ 91.64 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (A)   The minimum standards for street lighting shall be as follows:
      (1)   Spacing between lighting fixtures shall be a maximum of 300 feet as
measured along the centerline of the street.
      (2)   Lighting fixtures shall be no less than 14 feet nor more than 20
feet in height, measured from the ground line at the fixture base to the top of
any fixture.
      (3)   Lighting shall be located so as to illuminate each and every
intersection proposed or created. If any two intersections are less than 600
feet apart, but more than 300 feet apart, there shall be a lighting fixture
placed midway between the intersections.
      (4)   Each lighting fixture proposed in a residential area shall be
capable of producing light measurable in lumens, with an average output of at
least 7,000 lumens.
      (5)   In residential areas, the lighting fixtures shall produce a white
light. No high-pressure sodium or other yellow type light shall be permitted in
a residential area.
      (6)   Each lighting fixture shall be shielded, be equipped with diffuser
devices, or some other method, to prevent direct light from entering the living
quarters of adjacent houses.
      (7)   Where street constructions is an extension of an existing street or
subdivision, the proposed lighting system shall match, as closely as possible,
the lighting components of the existing system.
      (8)   The power source of a lighting system herein shall be extended to
the end of any proposed development so as to be readily available for future
development without significant disruption to city right-of-ways.
      (9)   Lighting fixtures shall be constructed on both sides of the right-
of-way alternating from side to side. Lighting fixtures shall be constructed in
the island area of any divided street or boulevard.
      (10)   Lighting fixtures shall be constructed within the right- of-ways,
the preferred location between the sidewalk and curb.
      (11)   Lighting fixtures located at intersections with arterial streets
shall have break-away bases.
   (B)   The minimum standards for street signs and sign poles shall be as
follows:
      (1)   The street signs and sign poles shall be designed to the
specifications attached hereto.
      (2)   That street signs and sign poles shall be constructed within the
right-of-ways at locations approved by the City Building Inspector and/or City
Engineer, the preferred location between the sidewalk and curb.
      (3)   There shall be a minimum of one street sign and sign pole per
street or street extension.
(Ord. 1-03, passed 1-8-03)
§ 91.65 COMPLETION.
   Lighting systems and street signs and sign poles shall be constructed, in
place, and operational upon completion of the construction of the street or
streets or street extension. Building permits will not be issued until the
lighting system and street signs and sign poles are completed as herein
provided.
(Ord. 1-03, passed 1-8-03)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500.
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Statutory authority
   
92.02   Definitions
   
92.03   Nuisances described and prohibited
   
92.04   Hearing Board
   
92.05    Responsibility for enforcement
   
92.06    [Reserved]
   
92.07    [Reserved]
   
92.08    [Reserved]
   
92.09    Violations
   
92.10    Owners liability and lien of the city
Chronic Nuisance Properties
   
92.20   Definitions
   
92.21   Prohibition
   
92.22   [Reserved]
   
92.23   Enforcement
   
92.24   Summary closure
   
92.25   Penalty upon failure to comply
   
92.26   Relief from order
   
92.27   Lien
 
   
92.99   Penalty
State reference:
   Private nuisances, see KRS 411.500 - 411.570
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a nuisance ordinance under KRS
65.8840(1).
(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "ABATEMENT COSTS." Has the meaning provided in KRS 65.8840(1).
   "ANYBODY." Any human being, or any organization or combination thereof, in
the form of a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, joint
venture, unincorporated association or otherwise.
   "BUILDING." Any relatively permanent enclosure consisting of no less than
three connected walls covered by a roof.
   "CITY." The City of Fort Wright.
   "CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER." Has the same meaning provided in KRS 65.8840(1),
and shall include the Public Works Director; the City Administrative Officer;
police officers; and as defined in KRS 65.8801 et seq., any employee of
Planning and Development Services of Kenton County charged with the enforcement
of this chapter as a Code Enforcement/Citation Officer, exclusive of clerical
and administrative staff.
   "COMMERCIAL SIGN." Any sign which includes any information, message
identification which is, in any way, related to the promotion of any business
or commerce.
   "CONTROL." To exercise restraint or direction over.
   "DELIVER." Includes any manner of delivery that conforms to the federal and
state constitutional requirements for procedural due process.
   “EVERYBODY." Every human being, and every organization or combination
thereof, in the form of a corporation, partnership, limited liability company,
joint venture, unincorporated association or otherwise.
   "FRONT YARD." That portion of a lot or parcel of real estate that extends
from the street upon which the principle building on that lot or parcel fronts,
for the full width of that lot or parcel, back to every part of the front (as
distinguished from the sides and back) of that principle building.
   "GRAFFITI." Any display of words, letters, numbers, design or symbols
scrawled, by hand or otherwise, in any ink, paint, chalk, dye or any other
medium on any building or structure, without the consent or authority of the
owner thereof, and which is within view from any public property or right-of-
way.
   "IMMINENTLY DANGEROUS." A condition which could cause serious or life-
threatening injury or death.
   "INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE." A motor vehicle that is:
      (1)   Wrecked or otherwise in a state of disrepair or disassembly;
      (2)   Mechanically inoperable; or
      (3)   Legally inoperable on public streets and highways.
   "LIVESTOCK." Animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine, equine,
camelide and cervid species, including, without limitation, horses, cattle,
sheep, swine and goats.
   "MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE." Has the same meaning provided in KRS 224.1.010(30)
(a).
   "MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE CONTAINER." A clean, covered, rigid metal or plastic
container with a capacity of no less than 30 gallons and no more than 96
gallons.
   “NOBODY." No human being, or any organization or combination thereof, in the
form of a corporation, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated association
or otherwise.
   "OUTSIDE." An area of a lot or parcel of real estate that is not enclosed
within a building.
   "RECREATIONAL VEHICLE." Has the same meaning provided in KRS 227.550(11).
   "RUBBISH." Worthless, discarded material.
   "UNLEASHED ANIMAL." Any animal that is not secured and controlled by the
owner or custodian of that animal by means of a leash.
   "UNSOLICITED WRITTEN MATERIAL." Any written material that is distributed to
any lot or parcel of real estate in the city without the affirmative express
invitation or permission of an owner or occupant of that lot or parcel of real
estate.
(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed -–; Am. Ord. 07-2022,
passed 10-5-22)
§ 92.03 NUISANCES DESCRIBED AND PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The following actions, omissions, behavior, conditions and occurrences
upon any lot or parcel of real estate within the city are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and violations of this chapter; and nobody, including, without
limitation, landlords and tenants, shall, by either act or omission, conspire,
cause, permit, encourage, aid, assist, allow or engage in any of them, or fail
to exercise any authority to prevent the occurrence thereof, including, without
limitation, the eviction of tenants who cause, permit, encourage, aid assist,
allow or engage in any of them.
   (B)   Public nuisances include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Any condition or use of any lot or parcel of real estate in the
city or any structure thereon that is detrimental to the value, use or
enjoyment of the property of others in the vicinity of that lot or parcel of
real estate, including, without limitation;
         (a)   Those in violation of the provisions of the International
Property Maintenance Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc. as
amended from time to time and enacted by city ordinance;
         (b)   Those structures that are designed and intended for human
habitation occupancy or use that become unfit and unsafe for human habitation,
occupancy or use or have conditions in them that are dangerous or injurious to
the health or safety of the occupants of the structure, the occupants of
neighboring structures or other residents of the city;
         (c)   Those in violation of the standards of safety promulgated
pursuant to KRS 227.300. which are hereby adopted by the city pursuant to the
requirements of KRS 227.320; and
         (d)   Those in violation of the provisions of the NFPA1 Uniform Fire
Code published by the National Fire Protection Association, as amended from
time to time.
   (C)   The accumulation of any rubbish on any portion of any lot or parcel of
real estate outside of any building.
   (D)   Use of any portion of a residential lot or parcel of real estate
outside of a building for the location of any broken, inoperable or otherwise
non-functional vehicles, equipment, machinery or furniture or any parts
thereof, or the location of any scrap or salvage material, or the location of
any other tangible personal property.
   (E)   The location of one or more mobile or manufactured homes as defined in
KRS 227.550 that are junked, wrecked, or non-operative and which are not
inhabited.
   (F)   The growth of weeds or grass in excess of ten inches above the surface
of the ground on any lot or parcel of real estate that is less than four acres
in area and developed with the public utilities of water, electricity and
sewers.
   (G)   The parking of any recreational vehicle, boat or trailer anywhere in
any residential area except for only one of any such vehicles:
      (1)   In the rear yard of any lot or parcel of real estate that is paved
with blacktop or concrete, provided that no part of such vehicle is within one
foot of any point in the nearest boundary line;
      (2)   In any area of a side yard that is continuously paved with blacktop
or concrete, provided that no part of such vehicle is within one foot of any
point in the nearest boundary line; or
      (3)   In any driveway during the period after May 1 and before October 15
in any calendar year, provided that:
         (a)   There is no more than one of any such vehicles parked, stored or
otherwise located in any portion of any driveway on any one lot or parcel of
real estate at any one time; and
         (b)   No part of any such vehicle is within one foot of any point in
the nearest boundary line.
      (4)   Under no circumstance may any recreational vehicle, boat, or
trailer be permitted to remain in a residential area more than five consecutive
days and no more than a total of 25 days per year.
      (5)   However, a recreational vehicle, boat or trailer less than twenty
feet in length from tongue to bumper may remain indefinitely provided it rests
on a paved surface behind the front-most portion of the home. The paved surface
may also be in the rear of the house.
   (H)   No inoperable motor vehicle or any motor vehicle parts shall be stored
in excess of 72 hours in any residential zone, unless it is in a completely
enclosed building. No inoperable motor vehicle shall be parked in the right-of-
way of any city street for more than 72 hours.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to live in any boat,
automobile, camper, recreational vehicle, or truck, within the jurisdiction of
the legislative body.
   (J)   It shall be unlawful to park or to keep any truck or commercial
vehicle with a gross vehicle weight in excess of 10,000 pounds, at any place on
property located in a residential district zone, except in a completely
enclosed garage.
   (K)   No person shall allow a recreational vehicle to be parked or otherwise
located on a public street.
   (L)   Portable storage containers (i.e., PODS). A “PORTABLE STORAGE
CONTAINER” is a temporary structure designed for storage, less than 169 square
feet in size and eight feet in height, that may be delivered onsite by a
commercial enterprise, then picked up and removed to a commercial storage
facility or the customer’s destination. Portable storage containers are
permitted as a non-permanent accessory use to provide temporary storage for
moving and similar short-term purposes. One portable storage container may be
located at any residence or business for two non-sequential periods, not
exceeding 16 days for each period, per calendar year. The portable storage
container shall be situated on an improved surface; shall not block any
sidewalk, shared-use path or lane; and may not be placed on any public right-
of-way, street or road. A portable storage container is not permitted as a
permanent accessory storage structure, regardless of the proposed location of
the unit on a parcel.
   (M)   Dumpsters. A “DUMPSTER” is a temporary large trash receptacle designed
for disposing of trash in a non-commercial setting that may be delivered onsite
by a commercial enterprise, then picked up and removed to haul to a solid waste
facility. Dumpsters are permitted as a non-permanent accessory use to provide
temporary trash collection. One dumpster may be located at any residence for 30
days per calendar year. The dumpster shall be situated on an improved surface;
shall not block any sidewalk, shared-use path or lane; and may not be placed on
any public right-of-way, street or road.
   (N)   The accumulation of any municipal solid waste anywhere unless it is
enclosed within a covered municipal solid waste container, except for city-
provided recycling bins.
   (O)   The location of any municipal solid waste container in the front yard
of any lot or parcel of real estate in the city at any time other than that
period of time that begins at 6:00 p.m. on the day before the day that
municipal solid waste is scheduled by the city for collection from that real
estate and ends at 6:00 a.m. on the following day.
   (P)   Being the owner of an animal, to permit or to allow his or her animal
to do any of the following:
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to keep at any one residence within the city
limits more than five dogs or cats, or any combination thereof, with the
exception that the owner or person who has custody of a dog or cat may retain
the puppies or kittens, born of said dog or cat, which exceed the permissible
numbers set forth in this division for a period of 12 weeks after the birth of
the animals. Any retention of dogs or cats in excess of the number specified in
this division after this 12-week period will constitute a violation of this
division.
      (2)   The keeping of poisonous reptiles, vicious animals and/or wild
animals on property within the city is prohibited, whether owned by the
resident or not.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to keep at any one residence within the city
limits more than five chickens, with the exception that the owner or person who
has custody of a chicken may retain the chicks, born of said chicken, which
exceed the permissible numbers set forth in this division for a period of 12
weeks after the birth of the animals. Any retention of chicks in excess of the
number specified in this division after this 12-week period will constitute a
nuisance.
   (Q)   The location of any rubbish on any public sidewalk or right-of-way,
and the failure of those with any ownership or possessory interest in any lot
or parcel of real estate abutting thereon to remove it within a reasonable
period of time after such rubbish has been deposited thereon.
   (R)   Any commercial sign that isn't in a condition of good repair, and in a
clean, neat and safe and functional condition in compliance with all applicable
laws, including, without limitation, all building and property maintenance
codes.
   (S)   The occurrence, existence or continuation of any graffiti.
   (T)   The outside storage or other location of any equipment in any front or
side yard where it may be seen from a public street, while that equipment is in
a position or condition in which the design and purpose of that equipment may
not be accomplished.
   (U)   Any outdoor swimming pool in which:
      (1)   The water in the pool is contaminated with dangerous, disease-
causing pathogens, including bacteria;
      (2)   However, water may be retained and impounded in the pool to a depth
of 18 inches or more at any one point so long as the pool area is surrounded by
a fence that is at least four feet in height. The fence must limit access to
the pool, except that it may have one or more gates. Each gate must have an
automatic self-closing mechanism.
      (3)   No swimming pool or associated equipment shall be permitted within
any required yards, nor within any public utility right-of-way easement.
      (4)   Glare from lights used to illuminate the swimming pool area shall
be directed away from adjacent properties.
      (5)   No mechanical device for the reproduction or amplification of
sounds used in connection with swimming pools shall create a nuisance to
adjacent residential properties.
   (V)   Any livestock within 500 feet of any residence.
   (W)   Roosters are entirely prohibited.
   (X)   Reserved.
   (Y)   The use of any lot or parcel of real estate, or any portion thereof,
including, without limitation, any building or any portion thereof located on
that lot or parcel of real estate, for any criminal activity to such an extent
that there have been documented responses to any of them by peace officers or
other personnel of the city on five or more separate occasions within any one
period of 12 consecutive calendar months; provided that an owner of that lot or
parcel of real estate has been notified at least once during that period of 12
consecutive calendar months of the occurrence of any such criminal activity;
and provided further that the eviction of any tenants of that lot or parcel of
real estate who were involved in such criminal activity shall be a defense to
any civil or criminal prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (Z)   The location of any apparatus for the athletic or other recreational
use of any area within the right-of-way of any street within the city.
   (AA)   Any tree, shrub, or bush located on private property, which endangers
any public street or highway, any vehicle or person, any public sidewalk or any
public property.
   (BB)   The location of any motor vehicle in any manner that any portion of
it is on or above any portion of any sidewalk in the city, potentially blocking
the pedestrian use thereof.
(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --; Am. Ord. 07-2022,
passed 10-5-22; Am. Ord. 03-2023, passed 5-3-23)
§ 92.04 HEARING BOARD.
   The Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall act as the Hearing
Board for the enforcement of this chapter. Authorized personnel of Planning and
Development Services of Kenton County, city police, fire officials, the City
Administrative Officer and the Public Works Director shall act as the
enforcement authority for the provisions of this chapter.
   All provisions and processes contained in the interlocal agreement for the
Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board, as may be amended from time to
time, and all requirements of KRS 65.8801 to 65.8840, are incorporated herein,
and shall be applicable to all proceedings pursuant to this chapter, including
provisions relating to enforcement proceedings, hearings, appeals, fines and
liens.
   Pursuant to KRS 65.8801 to 65,8839(1), the powers and duties of the Kenton
County Code Enforcement Board, or any person that may be designated by the city
to enforce the provisions of this chapter, shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
   (A)   To conduct surveys and make inspections in any area of the city to
determine compliance with this chapter or other ordinances they are empowered
to enforce;
   (B)   To investigate all complaints made about buildings, structures, vacant
lots or other premises within the city, whether they be verbal, written, or in
the form of a petition, alleging or charging that a violation of this chapter
exists or that a dwelling, structure or building is unfit or unsafe for human
habitation or other occupancy;
   (C)   In support of the police or fire authority to inspect, survey or
investigate any building, structure, dwelling or premises between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., or at any time if an emergency exists or if requested
by the owner or occupant. A Code Enforcement Officer may enter a building,
structure, dwelling or premises to inspect, survey or investigate with the
consent of the owner or occupant, in emergency situations, or when an
inspection, survey or investigation is required before a permit is issued or
funding is provided by the county, or is part of a licensing scheme adopted by
the county. If an owner or occupant refuses to consent to entry or inspection
of a building, structure, dwelling or premises, a Code Enforcement Officer may
obtain a search warrant for this purpose from a court of appropriate
jurisdiction. In addition, a Code Enforcement Officer may obtain a search
warrant to inspect several buildings or structures in a particular area as part
of an area inspection policy promulgated by the city. Probable cause to issue a
search warrant may be based upon the passage of time, the nature of the
building (e.g,, a multi-family apartment house), the condition of the entire
area, or other reasonable legislative or administrative standards adopted by
the county. Probable cause does not need to depend upon specific knowledge of a
condition existing in a particular dwelling. A Code Enforcement Officer
conducting an inspection pursuant to this chapter shall provide identification
and a statement of purpose before entering any building, structure, dwelling or
premises, and the person in possession or in charge of the building, structure,
dwelling or premises shall give the Joint Code Enforcement Board, and its
assistants, staff or employees, free access to such property for the purposes
set forth herein;
   (D)   To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to
receive evidence;
   (E)   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees
as they deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter;
   (F)   To delegate any of its functions and powers under this chapter and
other ordinances to such officers, agents and employees as they designate;
   (G)   To seek through the appropriate judicial officer or office, such
warrants that are necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and in
pursuit of said warrants, to make such oath or affirmation necessary in support
thereof;
   (H)   To keep records of all complaints received, inspection reports, orders
and of other actions taken. The records shall be made available for public
inspection upon request within a reasonable amount of time. The Joint Code
Enforcement Board shall prepare an annual report, including statistics based on
the records kept.
(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --; Am. Ord. 07-2022,
passed 10-5-22)
§ 92.05 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   The responsibility for the enforcement of the nuisance code hereby
established is hereby delegated to any Code Enforcement Officer as defined
herein.
(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --; Am. Ord. 07-2022,
passed 10-5-22)
§ 92.06 [RESERVED].
§ 92.07 [RESERVED].
§ 92.08 [RESERVED].
§ 92.09 VIOLATIONS.
   A violation of this chapter occurs whenever anybody, by either act or
omission, conspires causes, permits, encourages, aids, assists, allows or
engages in any of the acts, actions, behavior, conditions and occurrences
prohibited by this chapter; and each and every separate non-continuing
occurrence thereof, and each and every day of each continuing occurrence
thereof is a separate violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16)
§ 92.10 OWNERS LIABILITY AND LIEN OF THE CITY.
   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 65.8840(10), the owner(s) of the property at the time
of the occurrence of violations of this chapter on that property shall be
liable for all civil fines, penalties, charges, abatement costs and fees
assessed for those violations.
   (B)   Pursuant to KRS 65.8840(8), the city shall possess a lien on all
charges and fees incurred by the city in connection with the enforcement of
this chapter, including abatement costs. The lien shall also include attorneys’
fees incurred as an additional penalty. The affidavit of the Code Enforcement
Officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the amount of the lien and the
regularity of the proceedings, and shall be recorded in the office of the
County Clerk. The lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its
recording and shall bear interest thereafter until paid. The lien created shall
take precedence provided in KRS 65.8840(9). The city shall possess the lien for
ten years following the date of the final, non-appealable order of the Board or
final judgment of the court. The lien may be enforced by judicial proceeding.
(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES
§ 92.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following words or phrases shall have
the meaning prescribed below.
   “ABATE.” To repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy a condition
that constitutes a violation of this subchapter by such means and in such a
manner and to such an extent as the applicable city department director or
designee(s) determines is necessary in the interest of the general health,
safety and welfare of the community.
   “CONTROL.” The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern
property, or conduct that occurs on a property.
   “CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY.” Any real property on which any combination of
three or more nuisance activities occur or exist during any 90-day period.
   “DRUG-RELATED ACTIVITY.” Any unlawful activity at a property that consists
of the manufacture, delivery, sale, storage, possession or giving away of any
controlled substance as defined under KRS Chapters 217 and 218A, legend drug as
defined in KRS chapter 217, or imitation controlled substance as defined in KRS
Chapters 217 and 218A.
   “NUISANCE ACTIVITY.”
   (A)   Means and includes:
      (1)   Any nuisance as defined by state law or local ordinance occurring
on, around or near a property, including but not limited to, violations of the
following laws and regulations:
         (a)   Abandoned and junk vehicles;
         (b)   Fire prevention;
         (c)   Health and sanitation;
         (d)   International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by the city
in §
150.02;
         (e)   Noise control;
         (f)   Animals;
         (g)   Nuisances;
         (h)   Building regulations;
         (i)   Violations of §
92.03.
      (2)   Any criminal conduct as defined by state law or local ordinance
occurring on, around or near a property, including but not limited to, the
following activities or behaviors:
         (a)   Stalking;
         (b)   Harassment;
         (c)   Failure to disperse;
         (d)   Disorderly conduct;
         (e)   Assault;
         (f)   Reckless endangerment;
         (g)   Prostitution;
         (h)   Patronizing a prostitute;
         (i)   Public disturbance noises;
         (j)   Any firearms or dangerous weapons violations;
         (k)   Drug-related loitering;
         (l)   Any dangerous animal violations; and
         (m)   Any drug-related activity.
      (3)   Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter:
         (a)   Contact made to police or other emergency services, if:
            i.   The contact was made with the intent to prevent or respond to
domestic violence, sexual violence, or any non-criminal emergency situation;
            ii.   The intervention of emergency assistance was needed to
respond to or prevent domestic violence, sexual violence, or a non-criminal
emergency situation; or
            iii.   The contact was made by, on behalf of, or concerns an
individual with a disability and the purpose of the contact was related to that
individual's disability.
         (b)   An incident or incidents of actual or threatened domestic
violence or sexual violence against a tenant, household member, or guest
occurring in the dwelling unit on the premises.
   (B)   For purposes of this subchapter, “NUISANCE ACTIVITY” shall not include
conduct where the person responsible is the victim of a crime and had no
control over the criminal act.
   “PERSON.” A natural person, joint venture, partnership, association, club,
company, corporation, business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee,
agent, officer or employee of any of them.
   “PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR PROPERTY” or “PERSON RESPONSIBLE.” Unless otherwise
defined, any person who has titled ownership of the property or structure
subject to this subchapter, an occupant in control of the property or structure
subject to this subchapter, a developer, builder, business operator or owner
who is developing, building or operating a business on the property or in a
structure subject to this subchapter, and/or any person who has control over
the property and allows a violation of this subchapter to continue.
   “PREMISES AND PROPERTY.” May be used interchangeably, mean any public or
private building, lot, parcel, dwelling, rental unit, real estate or land, or
portion thereof, including property used as residential property.
   “RENTAL UNIT.” Any structure or that part of a structure, including but not
limited to, a single-family home, room or apartment rented to another and used
as a home, residence or sleeping place by one or more persons
(Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)
§ 92.21 PROHIBITION.
   (A) Any property within the city that is a chronic nuisance property is
declared a public nuisance, in violation of this subchapter and subject to the
remedies provided herein; and
   (B)   Any person responsible for property who permits property to be a
chronic nuisance property shall be in violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11)
§ 92.22 [RESERVED].
§ 92.23 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall act as the
Hearing Board for the enforcement of this chapter. Authorized personnel of
Planning and Development Services of Kenton County, city police and fire
officials, the City Administrative Officer and the Public Works Director shall
act as the enforcement authority for the provisions of this chapter.
   All provisions and processes contained in the interlocal agreement for the
Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board, as may be amended from time to
time, and all requirements of KRS 65.8801 to 65.8840, are incorporated herein,
and shall be applicable to all proceedings pursuant to this chapter, including
provisions relating to enforcement proceedings, hearings, appeals, fines and
liens.
   Pursuant to KRS 65.8801 to 65.8839(1), the powers and duties of the Kenton
County Code Enforcement Board, or any person that may be designated by the city
to enforce the provisions of this chapter, shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
   (A)   To conduct surveys and make inspections in any area of the city to
determine compliance with this chapter or other ordinances they are empowered
to enforce;
   (B)   To investigate all complaints made about buildings, structures, vacant
lots or other premises within the city, whether they be verbal, written, or in
the form of a petition, alleging or charging that a violation of this chapter
exists or that a dwelling, structure or building is unfit or unsafe for human
habitation or other occupancy;
   (C)   In support of police or fire authority to inspect, survey or
investigate any building, structure, dwelling or premises between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 5;00 p.m., or at any time if an emergency exists or if requested
by the owner or occupant. A Code Enforcement Officer may enter a building,
structure, dwelling or premises to inspect, survey or investigate with the
consent of the owner or occupant, in emergency situations, or when an
inspection, survey or investigation is required before a permit is issued or
funding is provided by the county, or is part of a licensing scheme adopted by
the county. If an owner or occupant refuses to consent to entry or inspection
of a building, structure, dwelling or premises, a Code Enforcement Officer may
obtain a search warrant for this purpose from a court of appropriate
jurisdiction. In addition, a Code Enforcement Officer may obtain a search
warrant to inspect several buildings or structures in a particular area as part
of an area inspection policy promulgated by the city. Probable cause to issue a
search warrant may be based upon the passage of time, the nature of the
building (e.g., a multi-family apartment house), the condition of the entire
area, or other reasonable legislative or administrative standards adopted by
the county. Probable cause does not need to depend upon specific knowledge of a
condition existing in a particular dwelling. A Code Enforcement Officer
conducting an inspection pursuant to this chapter shall provide identification
and statement of purpose before entering any building, structure, dwelling or
premises, and the person in possession or in charge of the building, structure,
dwelling or premises shall give the Joint Code Enforcement Board, and its
assistants, staff or employees, free access to such property for the purposes
set forth herein;
   (D)   To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to
receive evidence;
   (E)   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees
as they deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter;
   (F)   To delegate any of its functions and powers under this chapter and
other ordinances to such officers, agents and employees as they designate;
   (G)   To seek through the appropriate judicial officer or office, such
warrants that are necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and in
pursuit of said warrants, to make such oath or affirmation necessary in support
thereof;
   (H)   To keep records of all complaints received, inspection reports, orders
and of other actions taken. The records shall be made available for public
inspection upon request within a reasonable amount of time. The Joint Code
Enforcement Board shall prepare an annual report, including statistics based on
the records kept.
(Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11; Am. Ord. 06-14, passed 6-4-14; Am. Ord. 13-2016,
passed --; Am. Ord. 07-2022, passed 10-5-22) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.24 SUMMARY CLOSURE.
   Nothing in this subchapter prohibits the city from taking any emergency
action for the summary closure of such property when it is necessary to avoid
an immediate threat to public welfare and safety.
(Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11)
§ 92.25 PENALTY UPON FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   Upon the failure of the property owner to comply with an order to close and
vacate, the Code Enforcement Department may prohibit the furnishing of utility
service, including but not limited to, gas, electric, water and heating oil, to
the premises by any public utility holding a franchise to use the streets and
public ways of the city; revoke the certificate of occupancy of the premises;
or use any other legal remedy available under the laws of the state.
(Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11)
§ 92.26 RELIEF FROM ORDER.
   The Code Official may vacate or suspend the provisions of an order to close
and vacate upon a showing, by clear and convincing evidence, that the nuisance
activity has been abated and will not be maintained or permitted on the
property or a unit thereof.
(Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11)
§ 92.27 LIEN.
   Pursuant to KRS 65.8840(8), the city shall possess a lien on all charges and
fees incurred by the city in connection with the enforcement of this chapter,
including abatement costs. The lien shall also include attorneys' fees incurred
as an additional penalty. The affidavit of the Code Enforcement Officer shall
constitute prima facie evidence of the amount of the lien and the regularity of
the proceedings, and shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk. The
lien shall be notice to all person from the time of its recording and shall
bear interest thereafter until paid. The lien created shall take precedence
over all other liens, except state, county, school board, and city taxes,
except as provided in KRS 65.8840(9). The city shall possess the lien for ten
years following the date of the final, non-appealable order of the Board or
final judgment of the court. The lien may be enforced by judicial proceeding.
(Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Civil offense. Each separate violation of this chapter is hereby
classified as a civil offense; and the penalties to be imposed upon persons
determined to have violated this chapter are hereby established as follows:
      (1)   The maximum civil fine that may be imposed for each separate
violation of this chapter is hereby established at $500 for a first violation,
$750 for a second occurrence of the same violation, and $1,000 for the third
and each subsequent occurrence of the same violation plus the costs of
collection, including, without limitation, court costs and attorney fees; and
      (2)   The specific civil fine that shall be imposed for each separate
violation of this chapter in the event that a citation for that violation is
not contested is hereby established at $100 for a first violation, $250 for a
second occurrence of the same violation, and $500 for the third and each
subsequent occurrence of the same violation, plus the costs of collection,
including, without limitation, court costs and attorney fees.
   (B)   Criminal offense. Each violation of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor for which everybody convicted thereof in a court of competent
jurisdiction shall be sentenced to pay a criminal fine not to exceed the
maximum amount of $500 as set forth in KRS 534.050(2)(a) or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed the maximum period of 12 months as set forth in KRS
532.090(1), or both.
   (C)   In an addition to an order condemning and vacating the property, a
maximum civil penalty shall be imposed for any violation of §§
92.20 et seq. However, if the responsible party does not appeal the citation to
the Fort Wright Nuisance Hearing Board, then the civil penalty may be reduced.
(Ord. 454-1992, passed 2-5-92; Am. Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11; Am. Ord. 06-14,
passed 6-4-14; Am. Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)
CHAPTER 93: FIREWORKS; FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Fireworks
   
93.01   Definitions; legality of items
   
93.02   Sale or use prohibited; exception for public display
   
93.03   Consumer fireworks; restrictions on sale
   
93.04   Bond or liability insurance requirement
   
93.05   Exempted sales and uses
   
93.06   Destruction of fireworks
Fire Prevention
   
93.20   Blasting permit
   
93.21   Storage of flammables and other matter
   
93.22   Open burning of trash
   
93.23   Obstruction of hydrants or gas cut-off valves
Smoke Detectors
   
93.30   Definitions
   
93.31   Smoke detectors required
   
93.32   Type and placement
   
93.33   Installation and maintenance
   
93.34   Supplemental standards
   
93.35   Enforcement
   
93.36   Certification of compliance
 
   
93.99   Penalty
FIREWORKS
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS; LEGALITY OF ITEMS.
   (A)   As used in KRS 227.700 to 227.750, “FIREWORKS” means any composition
or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by
combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and which meets the definition of
“consumer fireworks”as defined in division (B) or “display” fireworks as
defined in division (D) and as set forth in the U.S. Department of
Transportation's (DOT) hazardous materials regulations.
      (1)   Exception number 1: Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other
devices in which paper or plastic caps manufactured in accordance with DOT
regulations, and packed and shipped according to said regulations, are not
considered to be fireworks and shall be allowed to be used and sold at all
times.
      (2)   Exception number 2: Model rockets and model rocket motors designed,
sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models are not
considered to be fireworks.
      (3)   Exception number 3: Propelling or expelling charges consisting of a
mixture of sulfur, charcoal, and saltpeter are not considered as being designed
for producing audible effects.
(KRS 227.700)
   (B)   As used in KRS 227.700 through 227.750, “CONSUMER FIREWORKS” means
fireworks that are suitable for use by the public, designed primarily to
produce visible effects by combustion, and comply with the construction,
chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S. Consumer Product
Safety Commission. The types, sizes, and amount of pyrotechnic contents of
these devices are limited as enumerated in this chapter. Some small devices
designed to produce audible effects are included, such as whistling devices,
ground devices containing 50 milligrams or less of explosive composition, and
aerial devices containing 130 milligrams or less of explosive composition.
“CONSUMER FIREWORKS” are further defined by the Consumer Product Safety
Commission in CPSC, 16 CPSC, 16 C.F.R. Pts 1500 and 1507, are classified as
division 1.4 explosives by the U.S. Department of Transportation and include
the following:
      (1)   Ground and hand-held sparkling devices.
         (a)   Dipped stick-sparkler or wire sparkler. These devices consist a
metal wire or wood dowel that has been coated with pyrotechnic composition.
Upon ignition of the tip of the device, a shower of sparks is produced.
Sparklers may contain up to 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition per item.
Those devices containing any perchlorate or chlorate salts may not exceed five
grams of pyrotechnic composition per item. Wire sparklers which contain no
magnesium and which contain less than 100 grams of composition per item are not
included in this category, in accordance with DOT regulations.
         (b)   Cylindrical fountain. Cylindrical tube containing not more than
75 grams of pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition, a shower of colored sparks,
and sometimes a whistling effect or smoke, is produced. This device may be
provided with a spike for insertion into the ground (spike fountain), a wood or
plastic base for placing on the ground (base fountain), or a wood or cardboard
handle, if intended to be hand-held (handle fountain). When more than one tube
is mounted on a common base, total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 200
grams, or 500 grams if the tubes are separated from each other on the base by a
distance of at least 1/2 inch.
         (c)   Cone fountain. Cardboard or heavy paper cone containing up to 50
grams of pyrotechnic composition. The effect is the same as that of a
cylindrical fountain. When more than one cone is mounted on a common base, the
total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 200 grams, or 500 grams of the
tubes are separated from each other on the base by a distance of at least 1/
2 inch.
         (d)   Illuminating torch. Cylindrical tube containing up to 100 grams
of pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition, colored fire is produced. May be
spike, base, or hand- held. When more than one tube is mounted on a common
base, the total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 200 grams, or 500 grams
if the tubes are separated from each other on the base by a distance of at
least 1/2 inch.
         (e)   Wheel. A device attached to a post or tree by means of a nail or
string. A wheel may have one or more drivers, each of which may contain not
more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic composition. No wheel contain more than 200
grams total pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition, the wheel revolves,
producing a shower of color and sparks and, sometimes, a whistling effect.
         (f)   Ground spinner. Small device containing not more than 20 grams
of pyrotechnic composition, similar in operation to a wheel but intended to be
placed on the ground and ignited. A shower of sparks and color is produced by
the rapidly spinning device.
         (g)   Flitter sparkler. Narrow paper tube attached to a stick or wire
and filled with not more than 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition that
produces color and sparks upon ignition. The paper at one end of the tube is
ignited to make the device function.
         (h)   Toy smoke device. Small plastic or paper item containing not
more than 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition that, upon ignition, produces
white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
      (2)   Aerial devices.
         (a)   Sky rockets and bottle rockets. Cylindrical tube containing not
more than 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition. Sky rockets contain a wooden
stick for guidance and stability and rise into the air upon ignition. A burst
of color or noise or both is produced at the height of flight.
         (b)   Missile-type rocket. A device similar to a sky rocket in size,
composition, and effect that uses fins rather than a stick for guidance and
stability.
         (c)   Helicopter, aerial spinner. A tube containing up to 20 grams of
pyrotechnic composition. A propeller or blade is attached, which, upon
ignition, lifts the rapidly spinning device into the air. A visible or audible
effect is produced at the height of flight.
         (d)   Roman candles. Heavy paper or cardboard tube containing up to 20
grams of pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition, up to ten stars (pellets of
pressed pyrotechnic composition that burn with bright color) are individually
expelled at several second intervals.
         (e)   Mine, shell. Heavy cardboard or paper tube usually attached to a
wood or plastic base and containing up to 60 grams of total chemical
composition (lift charge, burst charge, and visible or audible effect
composition). Upon ignition, “stars,” components producing reports containing
up to 130 milligrams of explosive composition per report, or other devices are
propelled into the air. The term “mine” refers to a device with no internal
components containing a bursting charge, and the term “shell” refers to a
device that propels a component that subsequently bursts open in the air. A
mine or shell device may contain more than one tube provided the tubes fire in
sequence upon ignition of one external fuse. The term “cake” refers to a dense-
packed collection of mine or shell tubes. Total chemical composition including
lift charges of any multiple tube devices may not exceed 200 grams. The maximum
quantity of lift charge in any one tube of a mine or shell device shall not
exceed 20 grams, and the maximum quality of break or bursting charge in any
component shall not exceed 25% of the total weight of chemical composition in
the component.
         (f)   Aerial shell kit, reloadable tube. A package kit containing a
cardboard, high-density polyethylene (HDPE, or equivalent launching tube with
multiple-shot aerial shells. Each aerial shell is limited to a maximum of 60
grams of total chemical composition (lift charge, bust charge, and visible or
audible effect composition), and the maximum diameter of each shell shall not
exceed 1 3/4 inches. In addition, the maximum quantity of lift charge in any
shell shall not exceed 20 grams, and the maximum quantity of break or bursting
charge in any shell shall not exceed 25% of the total weight of chemical
composition in the shell. The total chemical composition of all the shells in
the kit, including lift charge, shall not exceed 400 grams. The user lower a
shell into the launching tube, at the time of firing, with the fusing extending
out of the top of the tube. After the firing, the tube is then reloaded with
another shell for the next firing. All launching tubes shall be capable of
firing twice the number of shells in the kit without failure of the tube. Each
package of multiple-shot aerial shells must comply with all warning label
requirements of the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
      (3)   Audible ground devices.
         (a)   Firecrackers, salutes. Small paper-wrapped or cardboard tube
containing not more than 50 milligrams of pyrotechnic composition. Those used
in aerial devices may contain not more than 130 milligrams of explosive
composition per report. Upon ignition, noise and a flash of light is produced.
         (b)   Chaser. Small paper or cardboard tube that travels along the
ground upon ignition. A whistling effect, or other noise, is often produced.
The explosive composition used to create the noise may not exceed 50
milligrams.
(KRS 227.702)
   (C)   Items listed below are classified as “NOVELTIES” and “TRICK
NOISEMAKERS” and are not classified as consumer fireworks by the U.S.
Department of Transportation and their transportation, storage, retail sale,
possession, sale, and use shall be allowed throughout the state at all times.
      (1)   Snake, glow worm. Pressed pellet of pyrotechnic composition that
produces a large, snake-like ash upon burning. The ash expands in length as the
pellet burns. These devices may not contain mercuric thiocyanate.
      (2)   Smoke device. Tube or sphere containing pyrotechnic composition
that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
      (3)   Wire sparkler. Wire coated with pyrotechnic composition that
produces a shower of sparks upon ignition. These items may not contain
magnesium and must not exceed 100 grams of composition per item. Devices
containing any chlorate or perchlorate salts may not exceed five grams of
composition per item.
      (4)   Trick noisemaker. Item that produces a small report intended to
surprise the user. These devices include:
         (a)   Party popper. Small plastic or paper item containing not more
than 16 milligrams of explosive composition that is friction sensitive. A
string protruding from the device is pulled to ignite it, expelling paper
streamers and producing a small report.
         (b)   Booby trap. Small tube with string protruding from both ends,
similar to a party popper in design. The ends of the string are pulled to
ignite the friction sensitive composition, producing a small report.
         (c)   Snapper. Small, paper-wrapped item containing a minute quantity
of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand. When dropped, the device
explodes producing a small report.
         (d)   Trick match. Kitchen or book match that has been coated with a
small quantity of explosive or pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition of the
match a small report or a shower of sparks is produced.
         (e)   Cigarette load. Small wooden peg that has been coated with a
small quantity of explosive composition. Upon ignition of a cigarette
containing one of the pegs, a small report is produced.
         (f)   Auto burglar alarm. Tube which contains pyrotechnic composition
that produces a loud whistle or smoke, or both, when ignited. A small quantity
of explosive, not exceeding 50 milligrams may also be used to produce a small
report. A squib is used to ignite the device.
(KRS 227.704)
   (D)   As used in KRS 227.700 through 227.750, “DISPLAY FIREWORKS” means
pyrotechnic devices or large fireworks designed primarily to produce visible or
audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation. This term includes,
but is not limited to, firecrackers containing more than two grains (130
milligrams) of explosive composition, aerial shells containing more than 40
grams of pyrotechnic composition, and other display pieces which exceed the
limits for classification as consumer fireworks. Display fireworks are defined
by the Consumer Product Safety Commission in CPSC, 16 C.F.R. Pts. 1500 and
1507, and are classified as class B explosives by the U.S. Department of
Transportation.
(KRS 227.706)
   (E)   Legality of items.
      (1)    Items described in division (B)(1) above are legal for retail sale
provided all applicable federal and state requirements with respect thereto are
met.
      (2)   Items described in divisions (B)(2), (B)(3), and (D) are not legal
for retail sale but are legal under permits granted pursuant to this chapter
for the purposes specified in this chapter for public displays and may be sold
at wholesale as provided in this chapter.
      (3)   Items described in division (C) are legal for retail sale provided
all applicable federal and state requirements with respect thereto are met.
(KRS 227.708)
   (F)   Age requirement. No person or business shall give, offer for sale, or
sell any consumer fireworks listed in KRS 227.702 to any person under eighteen
(18) years of age.
(KRS 227.715)
§ 93.02 SALE OR USE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY.
   No person, firm, co-partnership or corporation shall offer for sale, expose
for sale, sell at retail, keep with intent to sell, possess, use, or explode,
any display fireworks, except as follows:
   (A)   (1)   The Chief of the Fire Department or other authorized city
official may grant permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by the
city, fair associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or groups of
individuals.
      (2)   Every display shall be handled by a competent display operator to
be approved by the public official by whom the permit is granted, and shall be
of such character, and so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the
official, after proper inspection, to not be hazardous to property or endanger
any person.
      (3)   “COMPETENT DISPLAY OPERATOR” shall be defined as the person with
overall responsibility for the operation and safety of a fireworks display. The
competent display operator shall have a Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms,
and Explosives (ATF) License and have participated as an assistant in firing at
least five public displays. A “competent display operator” is also an employee
possessor. A permit under division (1) shall be issued only to a competent
display operator holding an ATF license.
      (4)   At least one competent display operator shall be on site during
display set- up and firing. This complement display operator shall maintain a
copy of the permit application, as signed by the local authority having
jurisdiction as identified in this section, on site and at all times the
display is in place, and shall be presented on demand of the State Fire Marshal
or local Fire Chief. All public displays that require issuance of a permit
shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of National Fire
Protection Association (NEPA) 1123 Code for Fireworks Display (adopted
edition).
      (5)   Permits shall be filed with the office of the State Fire Marshal at
least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the display. After this
privilege shall have been granted, sales, possession, use and distribution of
fireworks for the display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit
granted under this subsection shall be transferable. For the purpose of this
section, “public display of fireworks” shall include the use of pyrotechnic
devices or pyrotechnic materials before a proximate audience, whether indoors
or outdoors.
      (6)   Any person remaining within the display area shall be identified as
licensed by the ATF, or an employee thereof, or be an assistant in training to
become a competent display operator. All persons remaining within the display
area shall be at least 18 years of age.
      (7)   The Commissioner of the Department of Housing, Buildings and
Construction with recommendation from the State Fire Marshal shall promulgate
administrative regulations in accordance with KRS Chapter 13A to administer the
provisions of this division. The regulations shall address the process by which
permits are issued and any other procedures that are reasonably necessary to
effectuate this division.
   (B)   The sale, at wholesale, of any display fireworks for permitted
displays by any resident manufacturer, wholesaler, dealer, or jobber, in
accordance with regulations of the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms, and Explosives if the sale is to a person holding a display permit as
outlined in subsection (A) of this section. The permit holder shall present the
permit along with other verifiable identification at the time of sale.
   (C)   The sale of display fireworks in accordance with a license issued by
the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
   (D)   The sale, and use in emergency situations, of pyrotechnic signaling
devices and distress signals for marine, aviation, and highway use.
   (E)   The use of fuses and railway torpedoes by railroads.
   (F)   The sale and use of blank cartridges for use in a show or theater or
for signal or ceremonial purpose in athletics or sports.
   (G)   The use of any pyrotechnic device by military organizations.
   (H)   The use of fireworks for agricultural purposes under the direct
supervision of the U.S. Department of the Interior or any equivalent or local
agency.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person, firm, co-partnership,
non-profit, or corporation from offering for sale, exposing for sale, selling
at retail, keeping with intent to sell, possessing or using consumer fireworks
as defined in KRS 227.702 as permitted pursuant to KRS 227.715.
(KRS 227.710)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.03 CONSUMER FIREWORKS; RESTRICTIONS ON SALE.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
93.02, the consumer fireworks described in KRS 227.702 may be offered for sale,
sold at retail, or kept with the intent to sell, only if the requirements of
this section are met.
   (B)   Any person firm, co-partnership, non-profit, or business intending to
sell consumer fireworks described in KRS 227.702(1) shall register annually
with the State Fire Marshal's office in accordance with KRS 227.715, and
display its registration certificate in a conspicuous location at the site.
   (C)   Each site at which fireworks are offered for sale shall comply with
all applicable provisions of the International Building Code, with Kentucky
Amendments (adopted edition), and NFPA 1124 (National Fire Protection
Association) Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail
Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles (adopted addition);
   (D)   No person or business shall give, offer for sale, or sell any consumer
fireworks listed in §
93.01(B) to any person under 18 years of age.
   (E)   No person under 18 years of age may be employed by a fireworks
distribution facility, or manufacturing facility. No person under 18 years of
age shall sell consumer fireworks at a consumer fireworks retail sales facility
registered under KRS 227.715 unless the individual is supervised by a parent or
guardian.
(KRS 227.715 (7) through (9))
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.04 BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.
   No permit shall be issued under § 93.02 unless the applicant shall give bond
or evidence of liability insurance deemed adequate by the official to whom
application for the permit is made, in a sum not less than $1,000,000. However,
the appropriate city official or the State Fire Marshal may require a larger
amount if in their judgment the situation requires it, conditioned for the
payment of all damages which may be caused thereby either to a person or to
property by reason of the permitted display, and arising from any acts of the
licensee, his agents, employees or subcontractors.
(KRS 227.720)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.05 EXEMPTED SALES AND USES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the retail sale and use of explosives
or signaling flares used in the course of ordinary business or industry, or
gold star producing sparklers, which contain no magnesium or chlorate, toy
snakes which contain no mercury, smoke novelties and party novelties, which
contain less than twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive mixture, or
shells or cartridges, used as ammunition in firearms, or blank cartridges for a
show or theatre, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports,
or for use by military organizations, or the sale of any kind of fireworks
provided the same are to be shipped by the seller directly out of the state.
(KRS 227.730)
§ 93.06 DESTRUCTION OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   The State Fire Marshal, or any fire department having jurisdiction
which has been deputized to act on behalf of the state fire marshal, shall
cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks which
are stored and held in violation of this chapter. After a period of 60 days,
the seized fireworks may be offered for sale by closed bid to a properly
certified fireworks wholesaler.
   (B)   After a period of 60 days, the seized fireworks may be offered for
sale by closed bid to a properly certified manufacturer, distributor, or
wholesaler. All seized fireworks or explosives with a Class 1.3G or "Display"
designation shall require the notification of the United States Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. The state fire marshal shall provide
the owner or possessor a receipt containing the complete inventory of any
fireworks seized within five business days of the seizure.
   (C)   Before any seized fireworks may be disposed of:
      (1)   If the owner of the seized fireworks is known to the state fire
marshal, the state fire marshal shall give notice by registered mail or
personal service to the owner of the state fire marshal's intention to dispose
of the fireworks. The notice shall inform the owner of the state fire marshal's
intent. The state fire marshal shall conduct an administrative hearing in
accordance with KRS Chapter 13B concerning the disposal of fireworks; or
      (2)   If the identity of the owner of any seized fireworks is not known
to the state fire marshal, the state fire marshal shall cause to be published,
in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the seizure was
made, notice of the seizure, and of the State Fire Marshal's intention to
dispose of the fireworks. The notice shall be published once each week for
three consecutive weeks. If no person claims ownership of the fireworks within
ten days of the date of the last publication, the state fire marshal may
proceed with disposal of the fireworks. If the owner does claim the fireworks
within ten (10) days of the date of the last publication, a hearing as set out
in division (A) shall be held.
   (D)   Nothing in KRS 227.700 to 227.750 shall restrict a local government
from enacting ordinances that affect the sale or use of fireworks within its
jurisdiction.
(KRS 227.750)
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 93.20 BLASTING PERMIT.
   No person shall cause a blast to occur within the city without making
application in writing beforehand, setting forth the exact nature of the
intended operation, and receiving a permit to blast from the authorized city
official. The authorized city official, before granting such permit may require
the applicant to provide a bond to indemnify the city and all other persons
against injury or damages which might result from the proposed blasting.
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.21 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLES AND OTHER MATTER.
   (A)   All flammable or combustible materials shall be arranged and stored in
a manner which affords reasonable safety against the danger of fire.
   (B)   Waste paper, ashes, oil rags, waste rags, excelsior, or any material
of a similar hazardous nature shall not be accumulated in any cellar or any
other portion of any building of any kind. Proper fireproof receptacles shall
be provided for such hazardous materials.
   (C)   No matter shall be stored or arranged in a manner which impedes or
prevents access to or exit from any premises in case of fire.
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.22 OPEN BURNING OF TRASH.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer the open burning or
cause to be burned, in or upon property or land within the confines of the
city, trash, foliage, or other debris, except as herein provided.
   (B)   The Fire Chief or his designee shall issue Burning Permits in
accordance with Section C and D of this section. The Fire Chief shall revoke
permits in accordance with Section E.
   (C)   The following regulations controlling open burning are in accordance
with local, state, and federal laws, and accepted safety practices of safety
organizations such as the National Fire Protection Association:
      (1)   Fire in non-combustible containers shall be a minimum of 15 feet
from any structure.
      (2)   All other open fires must be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any
structures, and provisions must be made to assure that the fire will not spread
to within fifty (50) feet of any structure.
      (3)   All open burning shall be attended at all times by a responsible
adult until the fire is extinguished.
      (4)   All fires must be extinguished by 5:00 p.m.
      (5)   Appropriate fir extinguishing equipment (i.e. garden hose, fire
extinguishers, etc.) must be available for immediate use at all open fires.
This requirement may be waived if, in the judgment of the issuing person, it is
not practical and the fire is far enough away from any other combustibles to
allow it to spread.
      (6)   Open burning shall not be used for waste disposal purposes, except
for felled trees and brush. There is excepted from this provision fires for the
disposal of hazardous or toxic materials when the E.P.A. determines that there
is not practical alternative method of disposal.
      (7)   Burning permits for large-scale clearing: When large piles will be
burned, the permittee must use a mechanical blower of the type to accelerate
clean burning. This blower must be approved by an official from the Fort Wright
Fire Department prior to starting the fire. EPA regulations state that the
emissions from such fires shall have at least forty (40%) percent opacity.
There shall also be at least one piece of earth moving equipment, with an
operator, on the site until the fire is completely extinguished. This piece of
equipment shall be capable of covering the burn site quickly in case an
emergency arises. The 5:00 p.m. extinguishes time may be waived if thee will be
someone in attendance at all times until the fire is completely out.
      (8)   Permitted bonfires shall use only seasoned dry firewood as fuel and
shall not exceed five feet by five feet by five feet in size. A small quantity
of paper may be used to start the bonfire. The size may be increased if it is
necessary for longer duration and proper fire safety requirements are met.
      (9)   Permits are not needed for the following: outdoor cooking fires,
outdoor fireplaces, hand-warming fires in non-combustible containers, smudge
pots and similar occupational needs.
      (10)   Burning shall not be permitted on Sundays and holidays.
Penalty, see § 93.99(D)
   (D)   Procedures for obtaining/issuing permits.
      (1)   Permit applications must be filled out and returned to the Fire
Department at least three (3) working days prior to the intended burn date. The
application shall contain the name/legal entity requesting the right to burn,
their address, social security number or tax identification number, date of
birth, title/occupation of individual acting for a legal entity, the date,
location, time, materials and reason for burning. The person requesting the
permit will be required to acknowledge the procedures regarding open burning.
      (2)   The individual executing the permit for any legal entity shall
acknowledge individual acceptance for citation violations and criminal
violations of this section, and acknowledge that the agents or employees
present and/or in control of the burning site will be cited for violations. The
issuing officer must inspect the site of the burn prior to issuing the permit
and return the applicant's portion of the permit at least one (1) day prior to
the burn date. If the burn date would need to be changed after the permit is
issued due to extenuating circumstances, it may be done by telephone or
verbally if necessary. Extended permits may be given for things such as
construction sites where burning will be conducted several days. The Fire
department's portion of the permit will be kept on file at least sixty (60)
days after the actual burn date. The following agencies must be notified: Fort
Wright Police, Fort Wright City Office Staff, Kenton County Emergency Dispatch
Center, any neighboring departments that may be affected.
      (3)   Individuals or entities who have been cited in violation of this
section, or who have had permits revoked for failure to comply with the
provisions of this section on one (1) or more occasion, may be denied future
permits.
      (4)   A bond to assure compliance with the burning regulations may be
required prior to the issuance of a permit at the discretion of the Fire Chief
or his designee in an amount no to exceed one-thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      (5)   The Fire Department shall keep a permanent file of all revoked
permits and citations of this section for future reference.
   (E)   Procedures for suspension and/or revocation of permits:
      (1)   The Fire Chief or his designee shall have the authority to revoke
or suspend a permit for failure to comply with these rules and regulations. If
neither the Fire Chief nor an appropriate designee are available, a police
officer shall have this authority.
      (2)   A permit may be suspended to allow time to correct unsafe
conditions. A permit may also be suspended for unsafe conditions in the area,
such as drought, high winds, o other emergencies.
      (3)   A permit may be revoked for not complying with the regulations set
forth in this section, or refusal to comply with orders to correct unsafe
conditions. When permit is revoked, the fire shall be immediately extinguished.
      (4)   Notification of suspension or revocation shall be done immediately
by verbal means, and followed by written notification as quickly as possible.
Reasons for such actions shall be given, and recorded on the permit.
      (5)   When extinguishment of a fire is required by this section, it shall
be the responsibility of the permittee. if they are not available or capable,
or if they refuse, the fire department shall extinguish the fire and the
permittee shall be responsible for the cost as set forth in a schedule on file
at the fire department.
      (6)   All revoked permits shall be kept in a separate permanent file for
future reference when issuing permits.
   (F)   Enforcement. The requirements of this section shall be enforced
through the city police department and/or the chief of the fire department by
citation.
('77 Code, § 7-3) (Ord. 255-1981, passed 10-28-81; Am. Ord. 471-1993, passed 4-
7-93)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.23 OBSTRUCTION OF HYDRANTS OR GAS CUT-OFF VALVES.
   It shall be unlawful for any occupant or owner of real estate within the
city to permit fire protection water hydrants and gas cut-off valves located on
or in front of their property to become covered with earth, foliage, or other
matter or to become hidden or partially hidden from public view.
('77 Code, § 7-2) (Ord. 194(LH), passed 5-11-64)
Penalty, see § 93.99
SMOKE DETECTORS
§ 93.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "DWELLING UNIT." Any group of rooms located within a building, including
mobile homes, and forming a single housekeeping unit with facilities which are
used or designed to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating.
   "DWELLING." Any building which contains one or more dwelling units or any
rooming unit, rooms, or area designated or used for sleeping purposes, either
as a primary use or use on casual occasions.
"DWELLING" shall include a rooming house, motels, tourist homes, school
dormitories, apartment buildings, and condominiums but not the exclusion of
other dwelling units.
   "OWNER." Any person or legal entity who alone, jointly, or severally with
others:
      (1)   Shall have all or part of the legal title to any dwelling or
dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or shall
have all or part of the beneficial ownership of any dwelling or dwelling unit
and a right to present use and enjoyment thereof, including a mortgage in
possession; or
      (2) Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit
as owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee, guardian of the estate, or
duly authorized agent of the owner. Any such person thus representing the
actual owner shall be bound to comply with the owner's obligations under this
section.
   "ROOMING UNIT." Any room which is designed or used for sleeping purposes. A
rooming unit may include a room in a rooming house, a hotel, a motel, a tourist
home, a school dormitory, or an apartment building which may or may not have
some additional facilities for eating or cooking contained therein.
(Ord. -1985, passed - -85)
§ 93.31 SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Subject to such exceptions and conditions for compliance as stated
herein, six months after the effective date of this subchapter, smoke detectors
shall be required in all dwellings privately owned or rented for occupancy. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner of each new or existing occupied
dwelling unit to install smoke detectors in each dwelling unit as hereinafter
provided. The smoke detectors shall be capable of sensing visible or invisible
particles of combustion and providing a suitable audible (or visual for the
deaf or hearing-impaired) alarm.
   (B)   This subchapter shall apply to any and all dwellings or dwelling
units, new or existing, which do not fall under the jurisdiction of the
currently adopted Kentucky Building Code or the currently adopted Life Safety
Code (LSC 101).
(Ord. -1985, passed - -85)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.32 TYPE AND PLACEMENT.
   (A)   In order to comply with this subchapter, only ionization or
photoelectric type detectors approved by a nationally-recognized testing
laboratory shall be installed. As an alternative to self-contained smoke
detectors, under certain limited conditions (i.e., battery-powered smoke
detectors), an approved fire detection system or a combination thereof may be
installed. The City Fire Inspector may subjectively, and on a case-by-case
basis, approve each and every alternative system in written form.
   (B)   Smoke detectors in new residential dwellings shall be wired directly
(hard wired) to the building's power supply. In existing buildings, it is
preferred that smoke detectors be wired directly to the power supply; however,
the detectors may be powered by self-monitored battery or operated by an
electrical plug-in outlet which is fitted with a plug restrainer device,
provided that the outlet is not controlled by any switch other than the main
power supply.
   (C)   Smoke detectors shall be placed in accordance with applicable N.F.P.A.
Standards (see § 93.34). Detectors may be ceiling or wall mounted, provided
that if wall mounted they shall be within 12 inches, but not closer than six
inches, of the ceiling.
   (D)   At least one smoke detector shall be installed to protect each
sleeping area. A sleeping area is defined as the area or areas of the dwelling
unit in which the bedrooms (or sleeping rooms) are located. Where bedrooms or
rooms ordinarily used for sleeping are separated by other used areas (such as
kitchens or living rooms, but not bathrooms or closets), they shall be
considered as separate sleeping areas for the purposes of this section. In a
dwelling unit which contains a well-defined sleeping room separated from the
other activity areas of the same unit, the detector shall be located in the
corridor within the unit or interior area giving direct access to the rooms
used for sleeping purposes. Where sleeping areas are separated or where a
single smoke detector will not adequately service all sleeping areas, there
shall be smoke detectors installed adjacent to each sleeping area.
   (E)   In a rooming unit, the detector shall be centrally located on the
ceiling.
   (F)   In a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units or any rooming
unit, in addition to the requirements for individual smoke detectors in each
dwelling unit or rooming unit, detectors shall be placed in centrally located
common areas, so that smoke detectors will adequately service all sleeping
areas.
(Ord. -1985, passed - -85)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.33 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The owner of the dwelling shall be responsible for supplying and
installing in an operable condition the required detectors and for providing
maintenance and testing in an owner- occupied residence; or for providing the
manufacturer's maintenance and testing instructions to a tenant in the case of
rental property.
   (B)   The owner of a dwelling shall be responsible for maintenance and
testing of detectors, in accordance with manufacturer's instructions, which are
located in common areas or detectors in rooming units where the tenant usually
has short periods of occupancy (hotels, motels, rooming or tourist homes).
   (C)   The tenant shall be responsible for maintaining and testing the
detector, in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, which are within
his exclusive control during the life of the tenancy. The tenant shall be
responsible for notifying, in writing, the owner when a detector becomes
inoperable, whereafter the owner has ten days in which to repair or replace in
operable condition the detector. In the battery-operated type of detector,
battery replacement shall be the responsibility of the tenant.
   (D)   At every change of tenancy, it shall be the duty of the owner to test
and ascertain that those detectors contained in the unit are in operable
condition, and if not, the owner shall be responsible for placing them in
operable condition prior to re-renting the unit.
   (E)   At every change of occupancy of every dwelling unit occasioned by or
incidental to a sale, lease or sub-lease of the unit, it shall be the duty of
the grantor thereof (i.e., the seller, lessor or sub-lessor, as the case may
be) to provide, before occupancy, to the new occupant that all smoke detectors
as required by this section (or other applicable laws) are installed and in
proper working condition. Failure to comply with this division shall be
punishable as set forth herein; provided, however, that this division shall not
be construed to violate or render void any contract, lease, or sub-lease
subject hereto.
   (F)   No smoke detector or alternative system shall be directly connected
(permanently wired) to the electrical system of a structure without the proper
electrical certification.
(Ord. -1985, passed - -85)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.34 SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS.
   This subchapter is intended to be used with, and supplemented by, the
applicable provisions of the National Fire Protection Standards Nos. 72-E and
74 (current edition) which are hereby incorporated herein; however, if there
shall be any conflict between this subchapter and the supplemental standards,
this subchapter and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall
prevail. All amendments to or changes in N.F.P.A. Nos. 72-E and 74 shall be
adopted and made part thereof without further reference.
(Ord. -1985, passed - -85)
§ 93.35 ENFORCEMENT.
   The requirements of this subchapter shall be enforced through the officers,
employees, and volunteers of the Fire Department of the city; and all other
officers, employees, and the city all information relevant thereto acquired by
them in the course and scope of their employment or association with the city.
No licenses, permits, or certificates of any kind or nature shall be issued on
behalf of the city in regard to the condition of or any activity within any
dwelling unit unless smoke detectors have been installed and located therein
according to the requirements and specifications hereof.
(Ord. -1985, passed - -85)
§ 93.36 CERTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   All owners of dwellings, dwelling units, or rooming units shall,
within six months of the effective date of this subchapter, certify in writing
on a form to be provided by the Fire Department, to the Chief of the Fire
Department, compliance with this subchapter. The failure of any owner to so
certify compliance shall give rise to a presumption of noncompliance and shall
be grounds for citing the owner under the penalty section hereof.
   (B)   The presumption of noncompliance may be rebutted by evidence
established during an inspection as provided in § 93.99.
(Ord. -1985, passed - -85)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is otherwise provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined not more than $250.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
93.02 or
93.03, the regulations issued thereunder or any order issued thereunder, or who
knowingly induces another, directly or indirectly, to violate the provisions of
those sections, shall be fined not more than $1,000, or imprisoned for not more
than 30 days, or both. (KRS 227.990(4))
   (C)   The minimum penalty for noncompliance with §§
93.30 through
93.36 is $250. The penalty for noncompliance is automatically waived if the
dwelling unit is brought into compliance with §§
93.30 through
93.36 within 30 days of the original violation. The property owner must request
an inspection from the Fire Department to verify compliance and have the waiver
provision applied. Continued failure to comply may result in a maximum penalty
of $500 or six months in jail. (Ord. -1985, passed - -85)
   (D)   The penalties for violation of §
93.22 are established as follows:
      (1)   Large scale burning, as defined in §
93.22(C)(7), First Offense Class A Misdemeanor, shall carry a fine not to
exceed $500.00 and a jail sentence not to exceed one year.
(KRS 83A.065; 534.040(2); 532.090)
      (2)   All other burnings.
         (a)   First offense - a citation of the violation will be issued and a
fine of $100.00 imposed.
         (b)   Second offense - a citation of the violation will be issued and
a fine of $200.00 imposed.
         (c)   Third offense - a citation of the violation will be issued and a
fine of $250.00 imposed.
         (d)   Offenses after the third offense are classified as Class A
Misdemeanors which shall carry a fine not to exceed $500.00, and a jail
sentence not to exceed one year.
(KRS 83A.065; 534.040(2); 532.090)
      (3)   Each cited burning shall be considered a separate offense, and each
day of the offense shall be cited as a a separate offense.
      (4)   Appeals and enforcement of the administrative citations shall be
through the civil division of the Kenton District Court.
('77 Code, § 7-3) (Ord. 255-1981, passed 10-28-81; Am. Ord. 471-1993, passed 4-
7-93)
CHAPTER 94: LITTERING
Section
   
94.01   Throwing litter from vehicle
   
94.02   Tracking foreign matter on streets and public places
   
94.03   Sweeping litter into gutters
   
94.04   Litter on private property
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 THROWING LITTER FROM VEHICLE.
   No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the city or upon private
property.
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.02 TRACKING FOREIGN MATTER ON STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
city unless such vehicle is so constructed and loaded as to prevent any load,
contents, or litter from being thrown or deposited upon any street, alley, or
other public place. No person, being the owner, driver, or other person in
charge of a vehicle hauling excavated material, coal, coke, construction or
building materials, or other materials within the city shall permit any part of
such material to fall or drop or be blown therefrom on a city street, alley, or
other public place. When a vehicle carries trash, sawdust, ashes, cinders,
sand, earth, lime, manure, or other substance liable to be blown away, the
owner, driver, or other person in charge thereof shall, before driving or
operating it on any street, alley, or other public place, cause such substance
or substances to be completely covered with a canvas, duck, or other
substantial covering in such manner that the same cannot fall or be blown from
such vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall operate on any street, alley, or other public place a
vehicle with mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter on its
wheels or other parts, if such operation results in the depositing or tracking
of mud, dirt, substances, litter, or foreign matter on any street, alley, or
other public place. No person being the owner of real property or a prime
contractor in charge of a construction site shall maintain such property or
construction site so that vehicles upon the property or construction site pick
up mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter on the wheels or
other parts and deposit or track the mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or
foreign matter onto any street, alley, or other public place.
   (C)   Whenever construction, demolition, excavation, trenching, or grading
by any person creates a condition where mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter,
or foreign matter may be washed upon any street, alley, or other public place,
or tracked upon same by vehicles, the person shall take the precautionary
measures necessary to prevent the mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or
foreign matter from being washed or tracked upon the street, alley, or other
public place.
   (D)   Where mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter has been
washed upon or tracked or deposited on any street, alley, or other public place
in violation of this section, it shall be removed, and the street, alley, or
other public place shall be cleaned and cleared so that same is restored to its
original condition by the person or persons responsible. If the street is not
restored within 12 hours, the City Administrator is authorized to cause such
mud, dirt, substances, litter, or foreign matter to be cleaned from such street
and to charge the cost thereof to the person or persons responsible. The cost
of cleaning shall be collected by civil suit. The term "responsible person" as
used in this section shall mean the driver of the vehicle which deposited or
tracked the mud, dirt, substances, litter, or foreign matter on the street, or
the driver's employer, or the owner of the real property or prime contractor in
charge of a construction site from where the deposited or tracked mud, dirt,
substances, litter, or foreign matter on the street, alley, or other public
place originated.
   (E)   The city shall have a lien upon the entire property from which the
mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter originated and to which
the offending vehicle was proceeding to secure the costs of removing same and
cleaning the street, alley, or other public place pursuant to this section, and
further to secure the expenses incurred by the city in the collection of the
aforesaid costs. Such lien may be enforced by an action for the foreclosure
thereof.
   (F)   Any material violation of this section is declared to be an unsafe and
dangerous practice, for which the Building Inspector may issue a stop-work
order. This action by the Building Inspector shall be in addition to any other
remedies which may be available.
(Ord. 362-1986, passed 8-6-86)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.03 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS.
   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public
place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.04 LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private
property within the city, whether owned by that person or not, except that the
owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon streets, sidewalks, or other
public places, or upon any private property.
   (B)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the city whether owned by that person or not.
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter for which no
other penalty is otherwise provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be fined not more than $500. Each day the violation is committed or permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
94.02 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $500. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 362-1986, passed 8-6-86)
CHAPTER 95: TREES
Section
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Notice of removal
   
95.03   Maintenance of trees
   
95.04   Permission required for certain actions
   
95.05   Private tree planting on public property
   
95.06   Tree inventory
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “CITY.” City of Fort Wright, Kentucky (including any of its officers,
employees, or designated representatives).
   “CITY TREE.” A tree located on property owned by the city or located on
public right-of-way, which was planted by the city.
   “TREE.” Any living, self supporting woody or fibrous plant, usually having a
single woody trunk, and having a diameter of not less than two inches measured
at a point four feet above the ground.
(Ord. 464-1992, passed 10-7-92; Am. Ord. 563-98, passed 2-4-98; Am. Ord. 03-
2018, passed 3-7-18)
§ 95.02 NOTICE OF REMOVAL.
   Any public utility serving the city with overhead services shall have the
right to remove city trees, without prior approval of the city, only when an
emergency exists and when obtaining the prior approval of the city is not
practical. All public utilities with overhead services shall coordinate all
non-emergency tree trimming activities with the city staff that are reasonably
required for the purpose of providing the appropriate utility service or to
avoid danger to the public or overhead utility personnel or equipment pursuant
to the requirements contained in the franchise agreements as authorized by the
City Council. Any other person or firm, except the public utility with overhead
lines having line clearing operations (tree trimming) done by them or for them
by any person or firm shall first obtain written approval from the city.
(Ord. 464-1992, passed 10-7-92; Am. Ord. 03-2018, passed 3-7-18)
§ 95.03 MAINTENANCE OF TREES.
   The responsibility of tree maintenance is outlined as follows:
   (A)   All city trees located on property owned by the city on public right-
of-way planted by the city shall be maintained by the city.
   (B)   Trees present prior to this chapter in the public right-of- way of the
city shall continue to be the responsibility of the abutting property owner.
   (C)   New trees privately planted in the public right-of-way shall be
maintained by the property owner abutting the public right- of-way.
(Ord. 464-1992, passed 10-7-92; Am. Ord. 563-98, passed 2-4-98; Am. Ord. 03-
2018, passed 3-7-18) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN ACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to commit any of the following acts with respect
to city trees without the prior written permission of the city.
      (1)   Cut, prune, break, injure, alter, or remove any tree; or cut,
unduly disturb, or interfere in any way with any root of a tree or trees unless
permitted to do so by the city.
      (2)   Fasten any object, rope, wire, sign, insulator, or other device to
a tree or trees.
      (3)   Install, remove, or injure any guard or device placed to protect
trees.
      (4)   Close or obstruct any open spaces provided about the base of a tree
or trees to permit the access of air, water, and fertilizer to the roots of
such tree or trees.
      (5)   Cut any roots within ten feet of any trunk or any roots four inches
or more in diameter except in accordance with the city Sidewalk Improvement
Plan.
   (B)   The city may grant such written permission if the activity for which
such permission is requested, is in the public interest and is not likely to
injure any city tree. Any person or persons who may cause damage to any city
tree shall be held liable for damages to said tree.
   (C)   No person shall operate, place, or maintain, within the drip line of
any city tree, any machinery, equipment, heavy object, stone, rocks, cement,
earth, soil or other substance which may harmfully affect such city tree by
preventing the access of water or air to the roots of such tree or excavate
around to remove earth from or cause any water to flow upon the roots of any
tree. The city may waive in writing, in whole or in part such provisions, but
only to the extent absolutely necessary to alleviate undue hardship in the
provision of necessary public utilities and the appropriate use and enjoyment
of property.
(Ord. 464-1992, passed 10-7-92; Am. Ord. 03-2018, passed 3-7-18) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.05 PRIVATE TREE PLANTING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Private planting on public right-of-way does not need approval of the
city, however, the following guidelines are recommended.
   (B)   Spacing. The spacing shall generally conform with the designated
small, medium and large categories. The spacing guidelines are as follows:
      (1)   Small trees, 30 feet;
      (2)   Medium trees, 40 feet; and
      (3)   Large trees, 50 feet, except in special plantings designated or
approved by a landscape architect.
   (C)   Distance from curb and sidewalk. The distance trees may be planted
from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the city
zoning code. The guidelines for distance based on three species size class are
as follows:
      (1)   Small trees, two feet;
      (2)   Medium trees, three feet; and
      (3)   Large trees, four feet.
   (D)   Distance from street corners and fireplugs. No tree shall be planted
closer than required by the zoning code. Twenty feet from any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines is the
suggested placement. No tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any
fireplug.
   (E)   Tree planting privately on property owned by the city on public right-
of-way shall be maintained by the abutting property owner in conformity with
this chapter.
(Ord. 464-1992, passed 10-7-92; Am. Ord. 03-2018, passed 3-7-18) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.06 TREE INVENTORY.
   (A)   The Public Works Department shall periodically inventory as many city
trees as allowed by time and budget, for the purpose of creating a list of city
trees to be removed based on priority (the “Tree Inventory”). The tree
inventory shall identify the problem(s) associated with the city tree(s) as
follows:
 
Tree Problem Key
1 Dead or Dying
2 Cavity or Decay
3 Pest Problem
4 Poor Structure
5 Exotic Invasive Species
6 Other
 
   (B)   The Public Works Department shall provide an annual update to City
Council regarding the tree inventory. At the annual meeting, the City Council
shall vote on what city tree(s), if any must be removed during the following
year.
(Ord. 03-2018, passed 3-7-18)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be prosecuted and
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction or a plea of guilty,
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 464-1992, passed 10-7-92)
CHAPTER 96: EMERGENCY MEDICAL
AND TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
Section
   
96.01   Fee required
   
96.02   Schedule of fees
   
96.03   Fund established
Cross-reference:
   Right-of-way of emergency vehicles, see §
71.26
§ 96.01 FEE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Everybody who uses any emergency medical or transportation services
shall be and is hereby obligated to pay a reasonable fee therefor, according to
the schedule and incorporated herein by reference, plus any costs and expenses
incurred by the city for the collection thereof, including, without limitation,
court costs and reasonable attorney fees.
   (B)   Any Fort Wright resident or persons that pay license or payroll fees
to the city shall be exempt from paying any fees not covered by insurance.
(Ord. 505-95, passed 6-21-95)
§ 96.02 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   The schedule of fees shall be:
Non-emergency BLS     $650.00
Milage rate           $15.00
Emergency BLS         $650.00
Non-emergency ALS     $850.00
Emergency ALS         $850.00
ALS-2                 $1,000.00
Oxygen rate           $30.00
Defibrillation kit    $225.00
Use of bag-valve-mask $50.00
Extrication fee       $375.00
 
(Ord. 505-95, passed 6-21-95; Am. Ord. 525-96, passed 4-17-96; Am. Ord. 2-01,
passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord. 2-02, passed 3-27-02; Am. Ord. 5- 09, passed 3-4-09;
Am. Ord. 14-2018, passed 12-5-18; Am. Ord. 04-2023, passed 6-21-23)
§ 96.03 FUND ESTABLISHED.
   The executive authority of the city shall provide for the collection of the
fees hereby established through an independent contractor; and the fees hereby
established shall be used for the payment of the costs and expenses of the
collection thereof, with the balance thereof deposited in a special fund hereby
established, which shall hereafter be identified and referred to as the Fire
and EMS Long Term Equipment Acquisition Fund, and used only for the acquisition
of long term equipment for the use of the fire department and life squad of the
city.
(Ord. 505-95, passed 6-21-95)
CHAPTER 97: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
97.01   Use and Privilege; use by organized groups or clubs
   
97.02   Hours of operation
   
97.03   Animals in parks
   
97.04   Operation of motor vehicles restricted
   
97.05   Permit required for certain activities
   
97.06   Prohibited activities
Parks and Recreation Board
   
97.15   Established
   
97.16   Appointments
 
   
97.99   Penalty
   GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01 USE AND PRIVILEGE; USE BY ORGANIZED GROUPS OR CLUBS.
   (A)   City parks and recreational facilities are maintained and operated by
the city primarily for the use of individuals, families, and small groups of
recreation seekers and for picnickers who desire to avail themselves of the
facilities offered by the city. No person, firm, or corporation shall hold,
conduct, or attend any public meeting to be given by, under the auspices of,
under the name of, or for the benefit of any organized group or club, unless
there has first been obtained written permission from the Mayor or City
Administrative Officer to conductor hold the affair pursuant to established
guidelines for the issuance of such permits.
   (B)   The city assumes no responsibility for any use of any city park or
recreational facility except the maintenance, control, and operation of same as
a part of its park system and where other uses as herein are permitted, such
uses shall be deemed a strict privilege, and the city assumes no responsibility
whatsoever for loss, injury, or destruction to persons or property, whatever
the cause, because of the exercise thereof and such privileges shall be subject
to revocation at anytime without notice and without payment of compensation or
return of any fee.
   (C)   Any person or persons exercising any privilege in or upon any city
park or recreational facility in the city, when such privilege is permitted
and/or authorized together with all vehicles, and/or equipment used in
connection with the exercise of such privilege shall be subject to all the
regulations, limitations, restrictions, and penalties hereinafter contained or
hereafter imposed, all of which shall be subject to inspection.
(Ord. 5-04, passed 7-14-04)
§ 97.02 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   The city park and recreational system shall be open to the public
between dawn and dusk. The Mayor or City Administrative Officer may grant
written permission for use of any park or recreational facility outside of the
posted time pursuant to established guidelines for the issuance of such
permits.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in or on any city park or
recreational facility or property without permission after said park or
recreational facility or property has closed.
(Ord. 5-04, passed 7-14-04)
§ 97.03 ANIMALS IN PARKS.
   (A)   No animals shall be permitted within the improved picnic or play areas
of the parks or recreational facilities.
   (B)   No person shall take any dog or other animal on or within any park or
recreational facility or property unless it is held by a leash, chain, or cord
held by that person at all times. No person shall permit any animal of any kind
to run at large upon or within the parks or recreational facility or property,
nor shall any animal be tied to any tree, plant, or shrub in any park or
recreational facility or property by any person.
   (C)   Any animal that constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other
animals by its demeanor or actions shall be prohibited from being in a city
park or recreational facility or property.
   (D)   No animal that constitutes a nuisance by odor, noise, or other means
shall be permitted in any city park or recreational facility or property.
   (E)   No owner or custodian shall fail to clean up after his or her pet,
including, but not limited to, animal feces, in any city park or recreational
facility.
(Ord. 5-04, passed 7-14-04)
§ 97.04 OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle or any other
vehicle or conveyance upon any park or recreational facility or property,
except on the roadway provided for that purpose.
   (B)   No person shall operate any ATV's (all-terrain vehicles) in any park
or recreational facility or property at any time without written permission of
Mayor or City Administrative Officer.
   (C)   No person shall drive any vehicle within any park or recreational
facility or property at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to operate said motor vehicles beyond any gate,
cable, or any other obstruction, or proceed beyond any parking area or sign
prohibiting such travel, except for city owned and operated vehicles, unless
written permission is received from the Mayor or City Administrative Officer.
   (E)   Motorized vehicles shall be permitted in the park and recreational
system solely for the purpose of transportation to and from the parks, and not
for any other use.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for vehicles to be parked other than in the
designated parking areas. Existing regulations regarding handicapped parking
apply.
   (G)   No parking is permitted off the paved areas, or along driveways, or on
bicycle or walking or hiking trails, or outside the hours of operation of any
park or recreational facility, except for city owned and operated vehicles,
without the consent of the city. Vehicles in violation may be towed at the
owner's expense.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform vehicle repairs in any
city park or recreational facility or property.
(Ord. 5-04, passed 7-14-04)
§ 97.05 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   A city permit is required for exclusive use of a shelter house,
athletic field, court, or any other city park or recreational facility or
property pursuant to established guidelines for the issuance of such permits.
For events operated by non-city organizations charging an entry fee, the city
may assess a charge to the organization.
   (B)   Fishing.
      (1)   Fishing is permitted from the shore only.
      (2)   Frog-gigging is not permitted on any city-owned or maintained lake
or pond. Ice fishing is not permitted on any city-owned or maintained lake or
pond. All persons shall possess a Kentucky fishing license.
      (3)   All state fishing regulations shall be applicable.
(Ord. 5-04, passed 7-14-04)
§ 97.06 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Advertising. No person, firm, or corporation, or other entity shall
display, post, distribute, or place any sign, advertisement, circular notice,
statement, banner, emblem or design in any park or recreational facility or
property without written permission of the city.
   (B)   Alcoholic beverages. No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic
beverage in any park or recreational facility or property, except as a planned
event with the written permission of the city.
   (C)   Artifacts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or
other entity to remove or possess any artifacts or other items from any city
park or recreational facility or property.
   (D)   Boating. It shall be unlawful to use any boat or canoe or any other
watercraft device including inflatable devices in any city park or recreational
facility or property, except city employees on official business or other so
authorized agents of the city on official business, and except property owners
with an easement of record granting them the right to boat thereon.
   (E)   Camping. It shall be unlawful to camp overnight in any city park or
recreational facility or property, except as a planned event with permission of
the city. Any authorized camping shall be done only in areas designated by the
city.
   (F)   Cooking. No person shall make, set, cause, or use any fire within any
city park or recreational facility or property except in grills provided by the
city, and only for the purpose of cooking food, within the park property for
that purpose, unless they have first obtained written permission to do so from
the city.
   (G)   Destroying park or recreational facility or property. 
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to take, carry away, disturb,
molest, destroy, mar, deface, mutilate, mark, or damage any tree, shrubbery, or
any other property within the parks or recreational facilities.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any object, abuse,
deface, or alter the park system, including properties and equipment associated
with the park or recreational system.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut or remove any trees,
flowers, or vegetation within any city park or recreational facility (except
when required for reasons of public safety or maintenance and then only by the
city Public Works Department personnel, or agents/contractors of the city or
utility companies operating within their easements).
   (H)   Excavating. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or
other entity to excavate in any city park or recreational facility without
written permission of the city.
   (I)   Fireworks. It shall be unlawful to possess any fireworks anywhere in
any city park or recreational facility or property except as a planned event
with written permission of the city.
   (J)   Glass containers. It shall be unlawful to bring or use glass beverage
containers in any city park or recreational facility or property.
   (K)   Hunting. It shall be unlawful to hunt, trap, or in any way injure or
molest any wild animal found within any city park or recreational facility
(except when required for reasons of public safety or as authorized by the city
or a Conservation Officer with the Kentucky Department of Fish and Wildlife) or
property.
   (L)   Ice skating. It shall be unlawful to ice skate on any city owned or
maintained lake or pond in the City without written permission of the Mayor or
City Administrative Officer.
   (M)   Littering. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park or
recreational facility or property within the city except in trash receptacles
provided for that purpose and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the
park or upon any street or other public place. Where trash receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park or recreational
facility by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of.
   (N)   Metal detectors. It shall be unlawful to possess or operate any metal
detecting device in any city park or recreational facility or property without
written permission of the city.
   (O)   Selling. No person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall conduct
or engage in any form of trade, business, or other commercial activity or
perform any type of service for consideration within any park or recreational
facility or property without the written permission of the city.
   (P)   Smoking. It shall be unlawful to smoke or use tobacco in any city park
building or facility except for picnic shelters.
   (Q)   Swimming. It shall be unlawful to swim or otherwise enter any body of
water in any city park or recreational facility or property.
(Ord. 5-04, passed 7-14-04)
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
§ 97.15 ESTABLISHED.
   There is now established the Parks and Recreation Board. This Board shall
possess all powers and be subject to all the responsibilities of KRS 97.010 to
97.050.
(Ord. 9-03, passed 7-9-03)
§ 97.16 APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   The Board shall consist of five members who will be appointed by the
Mayor to serve for terms of four years and until their successors are
appointed.
   (B)   The initial Board members will be appointed as follows:
      (1)   One member for one year;
      (2)   One member for two years;
      (3)   One member for three years; and
      (4)   Two members for four years.
   (C)   Any vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointments for the unexpired term.
(Ord. 9-03, passed 7-9-03)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or persons violating any provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a Class B Misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be subject to a
fine of not less than $20 nor more than $250 or imprisonment of not more than
30 days or both for each offense. Violators may be cited with either a state
citation to District Court or city citation. The fine for the city citation
shall be $20.
   (B)   In addition the violator may be ordered to pay restitution to the city
for any damage caused.
   (C)   Any person convicted of a violation or this chapter may be prohibited
from being in or on any city park or recreational facility or property for a
period of 30 days up to permanent expulsion following such conviction at the
determination of the Mayor.
   (D)   All violations of the Kentucky fishing regulations shall be reported
to the Kentucky Division of Fish and Wildlife.
(Ord. 5-04, passed 7-14-04)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE FEE
      
111.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
      
112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
113.   AMUSEMENTS
      
114.   COMMERCIAL SOLICITATIONS
      
115.   GARAGE SALES
      
116.   INSURANCE COMPANIES
      
117.   PAWNBROKERS
      
118.   CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
      
119.   PRECIOUS STONES AND METALS DEALERS
      
120.   HOTELS, MOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES
      
121.   USED PERSONAL PROPERTY REGULATIONS
      
122.   JOB DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES
      
123.   REGULATION OF SHOPPING CARTS
      
124.   MEDICAL CANNABIS BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE FEE
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Purpose
Business Regulations
   
110.10   Requirements
   
110.11   Prohibitions
   
110.12   Form and content of annual business regulatory license and application
   
110.13   Application process
   
110.14   Appeals
   
110.15   Expiration date
   
110.16   County Fiscal Court
   
110.17   Administrative hold
Business Taxation
   
110.25   Levy and imposition
   
110.26   Rate
   
110.27   Appointment of gross receipts
   
110.28   Exceptions
   
110.29   Administrative provisions
   
110.30   Purpose of occupational license fee
   
110.31   Collection
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “ANYBODY.” Any human being, and any combination thereof, in the form of
partnership, corporation, joint venture, unincorporated association, or
otherwise.
   “APPLICABLE LAWS.” The constitutions, statutes, ordinances, rules,
regulations and other laws of the United States, Commonwealth of Kentucky,
County of Kenton and any other governmental entity or agency having
jurisdiction.
   “BUSINESS.” Any and all franchises, trades, occupations, professions or
other businesses within the meaning and context of KRS 92.280, KRS 92.281 and
Section 181 of the Kentucky Constitution.
   “BUSINESS REGULATORY LICENSE.” A license required by the city, pursuant to
the police power thereof, for the purpose of regulating business activities and
operations within the city.
   “BUSINESS REGULATORY LICENSE FEE.” A fee required by the city for each
business regulatory license, pursuant to KRS 82.082 and the police power
thereof,, to provide the funds necessary to pay the expenses of regulating
business activities and operations within the city, including, without
limitation, the expense of issuing business regulatory licenses.
   “CITY.” The City of Fort Wright, in Kenton County, Kentucky.
   “NOBODY.” Not anybody, or no human being, or any combination thereof, in the
form of a partnership, corporation, joint venture, unincorporated association,
or otherwise.
   “OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE FEE.” A tax for revenue, pursuant to the taxing
authority of the city, including, without limitation, the authority therefor
established by KRS 82.082, KRS 92.280, KRS 92.281 and Section 181 of the
Kentucky Constitution, wherein it is sometimes identified and referred to as a
power to impose and collect license fees on stock used for breeding purposes,
on franchises, trades, occupations and professions.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)
§ 110.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to both regulate and tax those engaged in
franchises, trades, occupations, professions and other businesses.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
§ 110.10 REQUIREMENTS.
   Everybody who is engaged in any franchise, trade, occupation, profession or
other business in the city, other than those who are only so engaged as
employees, shall obtain an annual business regulatory license for that
franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business; and pay to the city
a business regulatory license fee in the amount of either fifty dollars
($50.00) or that part of a multi-jurisdictional occupational permit fee,
collected by Kenton County and allocated to the city, pursuant to the
provisions of an inter-local agreement between the city and the county and some
other cities therein, for a single multi-jurisdictional annual occupational
permit fee of two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00), which the Mayor is
hereby authorized and directed to sign on behalf of the city.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 12-3-08)
§ 110.11 PROHIBITIONS.
   Nobody, other than those who are only engaged as employees in the city,
shall conspire, cause, permit, promote, allow, aid, assist, encourage or engage
in any franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business in the City
for which the annual business regulatory license required hereby has not been
issued.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)
§ 110.12 FORM AND CONTENT OF ANNUAL BUSINESS REGULATORY LICENSE AND
APPLICATION.
   The form and content of the annual business regulatory license required by
this chapter and the application for it shall be determined by the City
Administrative Officer; provided, however, that the application shall include:
   (A)   Sufficient information for the identification of the persons involved
in the franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business.
   (B)   The computation of the annual occupational license fee imposed by this
chapter.
   (C)   Sufficient information and inspection authorization for a
determination by the city of compliance by the licensee with all applicable
laws.
   (D)   The name in which the business will be conducted; the address of the
real estate upon which the business will be conducted, and the mailing address
of the business if different from the location; and the business telephone
number and the state tax identification numbers of the business.
   (E)   The name, address, date of birth and Social Security number of each
owner of the business and each partner, officer or director, if any.
   (F)   The name, residence address and telephone number of a duly authorized
representative of the business who is responsible for operating and managing,
the business in the city, and a night emergency number at which some
responsible representative of the business can be reached in case of an
emergency.
   (G)   A full description of the business operations to be conducted.
   (H)   The date on which the business began or will begin operations in the
city.
   (I)   The accounting period of the business.
   (J)   The number of employees working or expected to be working for the
business in the city during the license year.
   (K)   A statement describing the circumstances of each denial, suspension or
revocation of any business regulatory license for any person named or
identified in the application.
   (L)   A statement describing the circumstances of each conviction of any
person named or identified in the application of a felony, misdemeanor for
which imprisonment or other confinement was a possible penalty, any other crime
in which moral turpitude was involved, or any other crime directly related to a
business similar to that which is the subject of the application.
   (M)   A statement as to whether any license, permit, degree, certification
or similar document is required by any applicable law for the conduct or
employment in the business.
   (N)   A statement as to whether there are hazardous material kept at the
business premises and the location thereof, and whether there are pets, guard
dogs or other animals usually kept therein and any other information which the
applicant believes would be necessary or helpful to emergency personnel
responding to a call to said premises.
   (O)   The gross receipts and hereinafter described property factor, sales
factor, and payroll factor of the business for the previous calendar year.
   (P)   Such additional information that the City Administrative Officer
determines to be reasonably necessary.
   (Q)   A warning in the following or similar language:
      “WARNING: Statements in this application shall be made under oath, by
affirmation or any other legally authorized manner of attesting to the truth of
such statements, with the signatures notarized, according to law; and any false
statements made herein shall be punishable according to law; and may be cause
for denial of the application or the revocation of any Business Regulatory
License issued pursuant thereto.”
   (R)   Information incorporated by reference. All information from any
previous application for an annual business regulatory license required by this
chapter, which continues to be accurate, may be incorporated by reference into
subsequent annual applications for the same license by the same applicant.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)
§ 110.13 APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   Signature to application. Each application for an annual business
regulatory license required by this chapter shall be signed by the applicant or
an authorized representative of the applicant, who shall attest to the truth of
the statements therein, with knowledge that any false statements constitute
perjury, for which the signatory may be prosecuted and punished according to
law; and such signatures shall be notarized according to law.
   (B)   Each application for an annual business regulatory license required by
this chapter shall be presented to the City Clerk/Tax Collector, or any
designee thereof, along with both the business regulatory license fee and any
occupational license fee that is due from the applicant. No application for a
business regulatory license shall be accepted or received by the City Clerk
without payment of the business regulatory license fee and any occupational
license fee due from the applicant.
   (C)   Review of applications. Each application for an annual Business
Regulatory License required by this chapter that is received and accepted by
the City Clerk/Tax Collector shall be immediately referred to the City
Administrative Officer, who shall review it according to the following
standards within thirty (30) days after the receipt and acceptance thereof by
the City Clerk/Tax Collector.
      (1)   When the applicant, or employees of the applicant, are required to
have any license, permit, degree, certification or other similar document
pursuant to the provision of any applicable law for the conduct of or
employment in the business which is the subject of the application; the
license, permit, degree, certification or other similar document shall have
been duly issued to the applicant or employees of the applicant prior to the
issuance of the Business Regulatory License. Documentary evidence of the
issuance satisfactory to the City Administrative Officer shall be provided by
the applicant.
      (2)   The criminal record of the persons named or identified in the
application shall be considered to the extent such record includes conviction
of a felony, a misdemeanor for which imprisonment or other confinement was a
possible penalty, any other crime in which moral turpitude was involved; or any
other crime which was directly related to a business of the type which is the
subject of the application. In determining if a conviction was directly related
to a business, the City Administrative Officer shall consider:
         (a)    The nature and seriousness of the crime for which the person
was convicted.
         (b)    The relationship of the crime to the purpose of the regulation
of the business.
         (c)    The relationship of the crime to the ability, capacity and
fitness required to perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of
the operation of the business.
         (d)    The extent to which the person convicted has been successfully
rehabilitated.
      (3)   The City Administrative Officer shall consider whether the business
is of a type that the operation, unless closely supervised, has a probability
of generating or resulting in criminal activity or adversely affecting the
health, safety, morals and welfare of occupants or residents of adjoining
property, the citizens and residents of the city, or will constitute a
nuisance.
      (4)   The City Administrative Officer shall consider the business history
of the applicant including:
         (a)   Whether the persons named and identified in the application have
been denied or had suspended or revoked a similar license by the city or any
other city, county or state and the reasons therefor.
         (b)   Whether complaints have been received by the city about the
business practices or responsibility of the persons named and identified in the
application, and the disposition of those complaints.
      (5)   The City Administrative Officer shall consider whether the persons
named and identified in the application are indebted to the city for delinquent
taxes, assessments, fines or similar obligations.
      (6)   The City Administrative Officer shall consider whether the business
and the proposed location complies with all applicable laws, including, without
limitation, land subdivision and use, zoning, building construction and
maintenance, and fire prevention and life safety regulations.
      (7)   After review of the application in conformity with this chapter,
the City Administrative Officer shall notify the City Clerk/Tax Collector, or
any designee thereof, of either:
      (8)   The approval of the application.
      (9)   The approval of the application conditionally; but if the
application is approved conditionally, the City Administrative Officer shall
determine and require those conditions that are reasonably necessary to
accomplish the intent of this chapter, including, without limitation:
         (a)   A requirement that the applicant post bond with surety
acceptable to the City Administrative Officer in a reasonable amount determined
by the City Administrative Officer to ensure compliance.
         (b)   A requirement that a debt to the city be paid before a specified
date.
         (c)   A requirement that the applicant permit periodic inspection of
certain parts of the premises or of certain records.
         (d)   A requirement that certain alterations be made in the premises
before a specified date.
      (10)   The disapproval of the application.
   (D)   Notice to the applicant. Unless the City Clerk/Tax Collector receives
a written notice from the City Administrative Officer, within thirty (30) days
after an application for a Business Regulatory License required by this chapter
has been referred to the City Administrative Officer for review pursuant to
division (C), that the application was either conditionally approved or
disapproved, the City Clerk/ Tax Collector, or the designee thereof shall issue
the business regulatory license that is the subject of the application and mail
it to the applicant at the address indicated in the application; and,
thereafter, the applicant may engage in the franchise, trade, occupation,
profession or other business described in the application, but only at the
address thereof indicated in the application, until that business regulatory
license expires or is suspended or revoked according to the provisions of this
chapter.
   (E)   Conditional approval of application. In the event that the City Clerk/
Tax Collector receives a written notice from the City Administrative Officer,
within thirty (30) days after an application for a Business Regulatory License
required by this chapter has been referred to the City Administrative Officer
for review pursuant to division (C), that the application was conditionally
approved, the City Clerk/Tax Collector shall notify the applicant thereof and
the reasons therefore identified by the City Administrative Officer, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the applicant
indicated in the application, along with a notice that the license will be
issued by the City Clerk/Tax Collector only upon receipt by the City Clerk/Tax
Collector of a written signed acceptance by the applicant of the conditions to
be performed prior to the issuance of the license. The notice shall also state
that if the acceptance is not received by the City Clerk/Tax Collector within
such time, the application will thereby be disapproved.
   (F)   Disapproval of application. In the event that the City Clerk/Tax
Collector receives a written notice from the City Administrative Officer,
within thirty (30) days after an application for a business regulatory license
required by this chapter has been referred to the City Administrative Officer
for review pursuant to division (C), that the application was disapproved by
the City Administrative Officer, the City Clerk/Tax Collector shall notify the
applicant of that denial and the reasons therefore identified by the City
Administrative Officer, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
address of the applicant indicated in the application, with a refund of any
anticipated City Occupational License Fee paid with the application, and a
notice of the procedure established in this chapter for an appeal from the
denial of that application.
   (G)   Business regulatory license revocation or suspension.
      (1)   Any business regulatory license required by this chapter may be
revoked or suspended by the City Administrative Officer for any period of time
determined by the City Administrative Officer to be reasonable and appropriate
for any of the following reasons; but only after a due process evidentiary
hearing in regard thereto, for which a notice has been sent to the licensee at
the address indicated in the licensee's application, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
      (2)   Any false or intentionally misleading statement or information
provided in the license application.
      (3)   Any failure or refusal to perform or abide by any of the conditions
of a conditional license.
      (4)   The criminal conviction of any person named or identified in the
license application of a felony, a misdemeanor for which imprisonment or any
other confinement is a possible penalty, any other crime in which moral
turpitude is involved, or any other crime which directly relates to a business
of the type for which the license was issued. However, the consideration of
such a criminal conviction shall include:
         (a)   The nature and seriousness of the crime for which the person was
convicted.
         (b)   The relationship of the crime to the purposes of the regulation
of the business.
         (c)   The relationship of the crime to the ability, capacity and
fitness required to perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of
the operation of the business.
         (d)   The extent to which the person has been successfully
rehabilitated.
      (5)   The revocation, suspension or expiration without renewal of any
license, permit, degree, certification or similar document which is required by
any applicable law for the conduct of or employment in the business for which
the license was issued.
      (6)   The violation of any applicable law in the conduct of the business
by any person engaged therein.
      (7)   Violations of applicable laws by any person within the business
premises of the licensee, or under the control thereof.
      (8)   The revocation or suspension of a city business regulatory license
pursuant to Fort Wright ordinance shall be in addition to the imposition of any
other penalty prescribed by ordinance or any other applicable law.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)
§ 110.14 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any conditional approval or disapproval of an application for a
business regulatory license required by this chapter, or any suspension or
revocation of any such license may be appealed to the Mayor, by filing with the
City Clerk/Tax Collector, within thirty (30) days after the conditional
approval, disapproval, revocation or suspension.
   (B)   A written notice of the appeal.
   (C)   A copy of the conditional approval, disapproval, revocation or
suspension that is the subject of the appeal.
   (D)   A statement why there should be an approval without conditions, or no
disapproval, revocation or suspension.
   (E)   An appeal fee in the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00), to provide
for the expenses of conducting a due process hearing in regard thereto.
   (F)   In such an appeal, a de novo due process hearing in regard to the
suspension or revocation shall be conducted by the Mayor, or by a hearing
officer appointed by the Mayor, who shall file a record with the Mayor, with a
written recommendation regarding findings of fact, conclusions of law and a
decision based thereon. Within ninety (90) days after the date the appeal was
filed, the Mayor shall issue a written decision in regard thereto, including
findings of fact, conclusions of law and a decision based upon a record of the
due process hearing; and the appellant shall be notified thereof by certified
mail, return receipt requested, at the address thereof indicated in the
application for the license. Unless an appeal from the decision of the Mayor is
filed in the court having jurisdiction thereof within thirty (30) days after
the decision of the Mayor, the decision of the Mayor shall become final.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)
§ 110.15 EXPIRATION DATE.
   Unless an earlier expiration date is provided therein, all business
regulatory licenses required hereby shall expire at midnight on the fifteenth
day of the fourth month after the end of the fiscal year of the licensee.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)
§ 110.16 COUNTY FISCAL COURT.
   The executive authority of the city may contract with the Fiscal Court of
Kenton County, Kentucky, for the performance of the duties imposed by this
chapter on the City Clerk/Tax Collector.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)
§ 110.17 ADMINISTRATIVE HOLD.
   (A)   Any person, business or entity is administratively ineligible for the
issuance of any license, permit or other approval issued by the city or its
agencies, including City Administrator; Finance Department; City Clerk; City
Engineer; City ABC Administrator; City Treasurer; Planning and Development
Services of Kenton County as Zoning Administrator for the City of Fort Wright;
fire department or police department if the following exist:
      (1)   Own property in the city for which there exists:
         (a)   Unpaid city ad valorem taxes;
         (b)   Unpaid fines, including code enforcement fines, parking fines,
and abatement costs assessed by the city; or
         (c)   A final order finding a violation of any code or ordinance of
the city that has not been remedied.
      (2)   Are delinquent on payment or filing of any occupational license or
net profit taxes, insurance premium taxes, or any other taxes or payments owed
to the city or its agencies.
   (B)   An administrative hold resulting from the application of division (A)
shall run with the land and be binding on the person, business or entity’s
successors and heirs, provided that the successors and heirs have notice or
constructive notice of the delinquent obligation. The filing of a lien in the
County Clerk’s office shall be presumptively established constructive notice to
all persons.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-6-24)
BUSINESS TAXATION
§ 110.25 LEVY AND IMPOSITION.
   For the purpose of providing funds for the general operating expenses of the
city and the municipal services and functions provided thereby, and subject to
the provisions of KRS 67.750 through 67.795, and except as provided in §
110.28, an occupational license fee is hereby levied and imposed upon everybody
engaged in any franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other businesses in
the city, for the privilege of that engagement.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)
§ 110.26 RATE.
   The occupational license fee that is levied and imposed by this chapter is
at the rate of:
   (A)   Employees. Ninety-nine one-hundredths percent (0.99%) of all
compensation earned by an employee for labor, work or services provided in the
city.
   (B)   Those not employees. Seven and one-half one-hundredths percent
(0.075%) of the taxable gross receipts of everybody, other than employees,
engaged in any franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business in
the city.
   (C)   The occupational license fee enacted herein will apply only to taxable
compensation that is subject to Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA), 26
U.S.C. § 3101 et seq. This “FICA-Cap” means that wages above the FICA-Cap are
not subject to the provisions of this section.
   (D)   In the event that changes or amendments are made to federal statutes
governing the Federal Insurance Contributions Act, this section shall comply
with all such changes or amendments to the extent required by law; and any
taxable amounts affected by such changes or amendments will be collected
accordingly. If any provision of this section or its application to any person
or circumstance is held invalid because of changes or amendments to the Federal
Insurance Contributions Act, the invalidity does not affect other provisions
that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07; Am. Ord. 15-12, passed 10-3-12; Am. Ord. 04-2021,
passed 5-19-21)
§ 110.27 APPORTIONMENT OF GROSS RECEIPTS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority of KRS 67.753(4), it is hereby determined
that the apportionment provisions of KRS 67.753 do not fairly represent the
extent of the engagement in the city of those, other than employees, who are
engaged in any franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business both
within and outside of the city; and
   (B)   Accordingly, the following described property factor is hereby added
to the payroll factor and the sales factor provided in KRS 67.753 for the
apportionment of the gross receipts of those, other than employees, who are
engaged in any franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business both
within and outside of the city.
      (1)   The property factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the
average value of the taxpayers real and tangible personal property owned or
rented and used in the city during the computation period, and the denominator
of which is the average value of all of the taxpayer's real and tangible
personal property owned or rented and used anywhere during the computation
period. In the determination of the property factor:
         (a)   Property owned by the taxpayer is valued at its original cost.
Property rented by the taxpayer is valued at eight (8) times the net annual
rental rate which is the annual rental rate paid by the taxpayer less any
annual rental rate received by the taxpayer from sub-rentals.
         (b)   The average value of property shall be determined by averaging
the values at the beginning and ending of the computation period, but the City
Administrative Officer may require the averaging of monthly values during the
computation period if reasonably required to reflect properly the average value
of the taxpayer's property.
      (2)   The proportion of the total gross receipts everywhere of those,
other than employees, who are engaged in any franchise, trade, occupation,
profession or other business both within and outside of the city that are
subject to the occupational license fee established by this chapter, shall be
determined by multiplying the total gross receipts thereof everywhere by the
quotient of the total of the payroll factor and the sales factor described in
KRS 67.753(2) and (3), and the property factor described in division (1), that
the franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business had in the city
during the tax period, divided by the total number of those factors that the
franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business had in the city
during the tax period . The total number of those factors that the franchise,
trade, occupation, profession or other business had in the city during the tax
period will always be either 1, 2 or 3. For example, if the franchise, trade,
occupation, profession or other business:
         (a)   Had only the sales revenue factor in the city, during the tax
period, without either the property factor or the payroll factor in the city,
the total number of those factors that the franchise, trade, occupation,
profession or other business had in the city during the tax period would be 1;
or
         (b) Had both the sales revenue factor and the payroll factor in the
city, during the tax period, without the property factor in the city, the total
number of those factors that the franchise, trade, occupation, profession or
other business had in the city during the tax period would be 2; or
         (c)   Had the sales revenue factor, and the payroll factor, and the
property factor in the city, during the tax period, the total number of those
factors that the franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business had
in the city during the tax period would be 3.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)
§ 110.28 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following franchises, trades, occupations, professions and other
businesses are exempted from the occupational license fee levied and imposed in
§§
110.26 and
110.27:
   (A)   The employment of domestic servants in private homes.
   (B)   Organizations that have been determined to be exempt from federal
income taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, as amended.
   (C)   Owners of their principal and primary residence who let or lease no
more than one separate residential unit in that principal and primary
residence.
   (D)   No license shall be required of a minister of religion who has been
ordained in accordance with the ceremonial ritual or discipline of a recognized
church, religious sect, or religious organization, to teach and preach its
religious doctrines or to administer its rites in public worship, in the
performance of one or more of those duties. However, it is not intended to
exempt such ordained minister of religion from the necessity of paying a
license fee for work done or services performed in the city in activities not
connected with his regular duties as a minister of religion.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to mean the employees of
churches, religious congregations, or religious societies of all creeds (except
duly ordained ministers) shall be relieved from the payment of any occupational
license fee in compliance with all regulations established by the License
Inspector with respect to making returns and payment of the fees.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)
§ 110.29 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
City Administrative Officer, who is hereby authorized to promulgate any
additional regulations in regard thereto which are not inconsistent with any
state statute, or any ordinance of the city, or any executive order of the
Mayor.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)
§ 110.30 PURPOSE OF OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE FEE.
   The purpose of the business regulatory license fees and the occupational
license fees imposed and levied by this chapter is to fund the general
operating expenses of the city, including, without limitation, police, fire,
emergency medical, public works and administrative services.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)
§ 110.31 COLLECTION.
   The business regulatory license fees and occupational license fees imposed
and levied by this chapter shall be received and collected by the City Clerk/
Tax Collector or by the Fiscal Court of Kenton County, Kentucky, with which the
executive authority of the city is hereby authorized to contract for those
services.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Civil penalties. Each separate violation of this chapter is hereby
classified as a civil offense, for which:
      (1)   The maximum civil fine required by KRS 65.8808(2)(b) that may be
imposed for each separate violation of this chapter, is hereby established as
five hundred dollars ($500.00); and
      (2)   The specific civil fine required by KRS 65.8808(2)(c) that will be
imposed for each separate offense and violation of this chapter if the person
who has committed the violation and offense does not contest a citation
therefor, is hereby established as five hundred dollars ($500.00);
      (3)   An enforcement officer may, in lieu of immediately issuing a civil
citation, give notice that the violation of this chapter shall be remedied
within a specific period of time.
   (B)   Criminal penalties. Each violation of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor for which everybody convicted thereof in a court of competent
jurisdiction shall be sentenced to pay a criminal fine not to exceed the
maximum amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) as set forth in KRS 534.050(2)
(a) or a term of imprisonment not to exceed the maximum period of twelve (12)
months as set forth in KRS 532.090(1), or both.
(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)
CHAPTER 111: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Registration of owners, operators and employees
   
111.03   Certification requirement
   
111.04   Health and safety inspection
   
111.05   General prohibitions
   
111.06   Occupational license and zoning requirements
   
111.07   Insurance
   
111.08   Existing establishments to come into compliance
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “BOARD.” The Kentucky Board of Licensure for Massage Therapy.
   “BOARD-APPROVED MASSAGE PROGRAM.” A program that meets minimum standards for
training and curriculum as determined by the Board.
   “LICENSED HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL.” A licensed massage therapist,
physician, nurse, occupational therapist, physical therapist, podiatrist or
chiropractor.
   “LICENSED MASSAGE THERAPIST.” A person who is licensed by the Board to
administer massage or massage therapy to the public for compensation.
   “MASSAGE.” The application, by a massage therapist licensed by the Board, of
a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft
tissues of the human body with the intent to enhance or restore the health and
well-being of the client. The practice includes the external application of
water, heat, cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations; use
of electromechanical devices that mimic or enhance the actions of the hands;
and determination of whether massage therapy is appropriate or contraindicated,
or whether referral to another health care practitioner is appropriate.
   “MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.” An establishment providing massages, for hire, by
persons other than a licensed health care professional.
   “MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE.” An individual, other than a licensed health care
professional, engaged in the practice of giving or performing a massage.
   “PERSON.” An individual (male or female), firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, independent contractor, foreign or domestic corporation, trust,
estate, assignee, receiver or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
   “NUDITY” or “STATE OR NUDITY.” The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   “SEMI-NUDE” or “IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION.” The showing of the female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or
the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the
entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress,
blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other apparel, provided the areola is
not exposed in whole or in part.
(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)
§ 111.02 REGISTRATION OF OWNERS, OPERATORS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Any person owning, operating, employed, or working in any capacity in
any massage establishment is required to register with the Fort Wright Police
Department, and he or she is hereby required to be registered by the Police
Department prior to the date of commencing operation or employment with or in
such establishment. No person shall fail to register prior to commencing such
operation or employment.
   (B)   No owner or operator shall permit any person to be employed unless the
employee has registered within the time period prescribed above.
   (C)   Registration shall include, name, address, state identification
number, date of birth and telephone number.
(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)
§ 111.03 CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENT.
   Any owner, operator or person employed in any massage establishment and
performing massages therein, as either a masseuse or masseur, shall be required
to provide, at the time of application, proof that he or she has received
professional training and completed the national certification process and has
been certified by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and
Bodywork, the American Massage Therapy Association, or any equivalent
nationally recognized accreditation body, or has received a license from any
state that regulates massage therapy, to administer same.
(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)
§ 111.04 HEALTH AND SAFETY INSPECTION.
   Each establishment shall also be required to undergo periodic health and
safety inspections to determine continual compliance with applicable health and
safety codes and regulations.
(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)
§ 111.05 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Massage establishments shall not be permitted to open for business
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. each day.
   (B)   No owner or operator shall knowingly employ an uncertified masseur or
masseuse.
   (C)   No owner or operator shall refuse to allow appropriate state or local
authorities access to the establishment for any health or safety inspections.
   (D)   No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted as a patron of any
massage establishment during the hours the establishment is open for business,
unless accompanied by a parent or guardian and the parent or guardian has
provided written permission to the establishment allowing the minor to receive
massage services, or a physician has provided a written recommendation
indicating the minor's need for massage services.
   (E)   Any masseur or masseuse shall be prohibited from touching or massaging
the male anus, penis or scrotum or female anus, vulva or breasts of any patron,
unless required as part of any necessary medical treatment.
   (F)   No masseur or masseuse shall perform massage services nude or in a
semi-nude condition.
   (G)   The genitalia of all patrons must be properly draped when massage
services are being provided.
   (H)   A masseur or masseuse shall not provide massage services for immoral
purposes, or in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to, or gratify lust,
passions, or sexual desires.
(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)
§ 111.06 OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE AND ZONING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any person owning or operating a massage establishment shall be
required to hold a valid occupational license with the city and shall be
properly zoned for operation of the same.
   (B)   The city shall deny any application for an occupational license to
operate a massage establishment or may request revocation or suspension of any
previously issued occupational license for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Falsification of any of the information required for the
application or failure to fully complete the application or provide
documentation required by the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Failure to cooperate with any required health or safety inspection.
      (3)   If any person named on the application is under the age of 18.
      (4)   A violation of one or more of the general prohibitions set forth in
this chapter.
   (C)   These provisions are in addition to all other reasons for which an
occupational license may be revoked or suspended.
   (D)   An occupational license issued to a massage establishment shall be
conspicuously posted in the public reception or waiting area of the
establishment at all times.
(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)
§ 111.07 INSURANCE.
   Any person owning or operating a massage establishment must maintain
liability insurance, including coverage for personal injury, with a minimum
limit of liability in the amount of $100,000 per claim and shall submit a copy
of this policy to the city when the person applies for an occupational license
and when this license is paid on an annual basis.
(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)
§ 111.08 EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS TO COME INTO COMPLIANCE.
   All existing massage establishments are required to come into compliance
with all necessary provisions set forth herein within 60 days from the
effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine and/or jail time in
accordance with the penalties for a Class A misdemeanor provided for in the
Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   (B)   Any section or part of a section or any provision of this chapter,
which is declared by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, for any reason to be
invalid, shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of this chapter.
(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   State law adopted
   
112.03   Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator
Licenses
   
112.15   License required
   
112.16   Application; contents
   
112.17   Restrictions on licenses
   
112.18   Conditions for Class C licenses
   
112.19   Number of licenses
   
112.20   Term; renewal
   
112.21   Classifications; fees
   
112.22   Disposition of fees
   
112.23   Change of location
   
112.24   Replacement when lost or destroyed
   
112.25   License to be displayed
   
112.26   Consumption of alcoholic beverages by employees
Nude or Nearly Nude Activities
   
112.35   Definitions
   
112.36   Performing nude or nearly nude activities
   
112.37   Permitting nude or nearly nude activities
   
112.38   License revocation or suspension for violation
Restrictions on Sales
   
112.50   Hours of sale
   
112.51   Premises must close
   
112.52   Separate departments on premises
 
   
112.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.” Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid, containing
more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, that is fit for
beverage purposes.
   “DISTILLED SPIRITS” or “SPIRITS.” Any product capable of being consumed by a
human being which contains alcohol, obtained by distilling, mixed with water or
other substances in solution, except wine, hard cider and malt beverages. (KRS
241.010(28))
   “MALT BEVERAGE.” Any fermented undistilled alcoholic beverage of any name or
description, manufactured from malt wholly or in part, or from any substitute
for malt. (KRS 241.010(41))
   “RETAIL SALE.” Any sale of alcoholic beverages to a consumer, including
those transactions taking place in person, electronically, online, by mail, or
by telephone. (KRS 241.010(59))
   “WINE.” The product of the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juices of
fruit, with the usual processes of manufacture and normal additions, and
includes champagne and sparkling and fortified wine of an alcoholic content not
to exceed 24% by volume. It includes sake, cider, hard cider, and perry cider
and also includes preparations or mixtures vended in retail containers if these
preparations or mixtures contain not more than 15% of alcohol by volume. It
does not include weak cider. (KRS 241.010(81))
('77 Code, § 3-1) (Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 167-l978, passed 7-
14-78; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed 3-6-13; Am. Ord. 03-14, passed 3-5-14)
§ 112.02 STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   The provisions of the Kentucky Alcohol Beverage Control Act, KRS Chapters
241-244, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference as
fully as though copied herein; and no person or premises who or which may be
ineligible or disqualified from holding any permit or license pursuant to the
provisions thereof shall be eligible or qualified to receive or hold a license
under the provisions of this chapter.
('77 Code, § 3-2) (Ord. 19-1968, passed 3-4-68)
§ 112.03 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Administrative Officer shall perform the duties of the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Administrator as prescribed under state law.
('77 Code, § 3-3) (Ord. 123-1975, passed 8-8-75)
LICENSES
§ 112.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the city any
alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license, or to be in
violation of the terms of such license.
('77 Code, § 3-15) (Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed 3-6-
13) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.16 APPLICATION; CONTENTS.
   (A)   Application for a license under this chapter shall be made to the City
Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator, in writing, signed by the applicant,
if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or
corporation. The application shall be verified by oath or affidavit, and shall
contain the following statements and information:
      (1)   The name, age, and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the names and addresses of
the officers, directors, and any stockholder who owns 5% or more of the stock
of the corporation;
      (2)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
to be operated under the license;
      (3)   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter, laws of this state, or the ordinances of this city;
      (4)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or
by the federal government, has been revoked, and the reasons therefor.
('77 Code, § 3-16) (Ord. 125-l975, passed 10-10-75)
   (B)   Application for a temporary license shall be made at least seven days
in advance of the beginning of the sales period for which the license is
issued.
   (C)   With regards to Class “B,” “F” and “G” licenses under this chapter,
there shall be required a separate application and license for each stationary
bar or for each bar for which a license is required by the Commonwealth of
Kentucky.
('77 Code, § 3-17) (Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed 3-6-
13; Am. Ord. 03-14, passed 3-5-14)
§ 112.17 RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSES.
   No license shall be issued to:
   (A)   A person who has been convicted of a felony;
   (B)   A person whose license, under this chapter, has been revoked for
cause;
   (C)   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;
   (D)   A co-partnership, unless all of the members of the co-partnership
shall be qualified to obtain a license;
   (E)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason;
   (F)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor;
   (G)   Any person, firm, or corporation not eligible for a state retail
liquor dealer's license in accordance with KRS Chapters 243 and 244.
('77 Code, § 3-18) (Ord. 125-l975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed 3-6-
13)
§ 112.18 CONDITIONS FOR CLASS C LICENSES.
   All Class "C" licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be accepted by the applicant subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   That the premises so licensed shall be subject to the entry of police
or other duly authorized representatives of the city, at all reasonable hours
for the purpose of inspection and search and to the removal from such premises
of all things and articles contained upon such premises in violation of the
ordinances of the city and the laws of the state and consent to the
introduction of such articles or things in evidence in any prosecution that may
be brought involving their necessary use;
   (B)   That the licensee shall not sell any alcoholic beverages behind blinds
or screens, but such sales shall be conducted openly and without any attempt to
hide or screen the same from public view, in conformity with the provisions of
the laws of the state pertaining thereto;
   (C)   That the licensed premises shall at all times be conducted in an
orderly manner and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall be allowed
at any time on any licensed premises, nor shall violations of any law be
permitted thereon;
   (D)   That no alcoholic beverages shall be sold or dispensed to any minor;
   (E)   That licensees shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages on
Sunday except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 2:30 a.m. Monday.
('77 Code, § 3-19) (Ord. 81-1973, passed l-12-73; Am. Ord. 167-1978, passed 7-
14-78)
   (F)   That a temporary license may require the licensee to provide security
guards to maintain the peace during the period of sales. The requirement shall
be based on the following criteria:
      (1)   Purpose of the event;
      (2)   Number of anticipated participants;
      (3)   Amount of the entry fee; and
      (4)   Location of the event.
(Am. Ord. 11-2016, passed --)
§ 112.19 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   The number of all classes of alcoholic liquor licenses issued and in force
with the number of distilled spirits and wine licenses (alcoholic liquor)
permissible under the Kentucky Revised Statutes. With regards to Class “B,” “E”
and “F” licenses, there shall be required a separate application and license
for each stationary bar and/or for each bar for which a license is required by
the Commonwealth of Kentucky Administrator of Distilled Spirits. For the second
or additional licenses required for Classes “B,” “E” and “F”, the license fee
will be waived for the first year the license is required. Thereafter, a
license fee for each additional stationary bar and/or for each bar for which a
license is required by the Commonwealth of Kentucky Administrator of Distilled
Spirits will pay one-half of the fee applicable for the first bar.
('77 Code, § 3-20) (Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed 3-6-
13)
§ 112.20 TERM; RENEWAL.
   (A)   Each license issued hereunder shall be valid for a period of no more
than a year and shall be renewable upon the date established by the Kentucky
Department of Alcohol Beverage Control for the expiration of state licenses
issued for premises located in Kenton County. ('77 Code, § 3-21)
   (B)   Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration thereof,
provided that he or she is then qualified to receive a license, and the
premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such
purpose; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall
not be construed as a vested right. ('77 Code, 3-25)
(Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed 3-6-13; Am. Ord. 11-
2016, passed --)
§ 112.21 CLASSIFICATIONS; FEES.
   Licenses issued under this chapter shall be divided into the following
classes with the following fees:
   (A)   Class “A,” Quota Retail Package License. This license shall only
permit the retail sale of distilled spirits in sealed packages, but not for
consumption on the premises where sold. The annual fee for such license shall
be $1,000.
   (B)   Class “B,” Quota Retail Drink License. This license shall permit the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold
and not for resale in any form. The annual fee for such license shall be
$1,000.
   (C)   Class “C,” Special Sunday Retail Drink License. This license shall
permit the retail sale of distilled spirits and wine for consumption only on
the premises where sold during Sundays, and otherwise in accordance with the
Kentucky Revised Statutes and these city ordinances as to the hours during
which alcoholic beverages may be sold. The annual fee for such license shall be
$300.
   (D)   Class “D,” NQ-4 Retail Malt Beverage License. This license shall only
permit the retail sale of malt beverages for consumption on the premises where
sold, and not for resale in any form. The annual fee for such license shall be
$200. The purchase of a Class “A” or Class “B” license, issued pursuant to this
chapter, shall by the virtue thereof entitle the holders to have a Class “D”
NQ-4 Retail Malt Beverage Drink License, without charge.
   (E)   Class “E,” NQ Retail Malt Beverage License. This license shall only
permit the retail sale of malt beverages for consumption off the premises where
sold, and not for resale in any form. The annual fee for such license shall be
$200. The purchase of a Class “A” or Class “B” license, issued pursuant to this
chapter, shall by virtue thereof entitle the holders to have a Class “E” NQ
Retail Malt Beverage Package License, without charge.
   (F)   Class “F,” Special Temporary License. This license shall permit the
retail sale of malt beverages for consumption on the premises where sold, and
not for resale in any form. The license shall be limited for a term of 30 days
from its date of issuance, inclusive of that date, and shall not be extended
past the 30-day period. The fee for such license shall be $25.
   (G)   Class “G,” NQ-3 Retail Drink License. This license shall permit the
retail sale of distilled spirits and wine as well as malt beverages for
consumption only on the premises where sold. The license shall be issued to a
regularly organized club, with such sales to be made only to members of the
club, or to a duly authorized licensee of the club pursuant to the subject
club's bylaws. The license shall further be subject to all restrictions and
conditions or prohibitions outlined in the Kentucky Revised Statutes, as well
as the regulations of the Commonwealth of Kentucky Alcoholic Beverage Control
Board. No Class “G” license shall be issued until the City Alcoholic Beverage
Control Administrator is satisfied that the club applying for the license was
actually, and in fact, organized for some purpose or object other than the sale
or consumption of distilled spirits and wine or malt beverages. The annual fee
for such license shall be $300.
   (H)   The holder of a NQ Retail Malt Beverage Package License may obtain a
NQ-4 Retail Malt Beverage Drink License for a fee of $50. The holder of a NO-
4 Malt Beverage Drink License may obtain a NO Retail Malt Beverage Package
license for a fee of $50.
   (I)   The fee for each of the first five supplemental bar licenses shall be
the same as the fee for the primary drink license. There shall be no charge for
each supplemental license issued in excess of five to the same licensee at the
same premise.
('77 Code, § 3-22) (Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 167-1978, passed
7-14-78; Am. Ord. 168-1978, passed 7-14-78; Am. Ord. 191-1979, passed 6-8-79;
Am. Ord. 1-13, passed 3-6-13; Am. Ord. 03-14, passed 3-5-14; Am. Ord. 11-2016,
passed --)
§ 112.22 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   All such fees shall be paid to the City Clerk, at the time application is
made, and shall be forthwith turned over to the Treasurer. In the event the
license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant; if
the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the General Fund or
in such other fund as shall have been designated by the City Council by proper
action.
('77 Code, § 3-23) (Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed 3-6-
13)
§ 112.23 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   A license issued hereunder shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only on
the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be
changed only when and upon the written permit to make such change shall be
issued by the Mayor. No change of location shall be permitted unless the
proposed new location is in compliance with the provisions and regulations of
this chapter.
('77 Code, § 3-24) (Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed 3-6-
13) Penalty, see
112.99
§ 112.24 REPLACEMENT WHEN LOST OR DESTROYED.
   Whenever a license issued under this chapter shall become lost or destroyed
without fault upon the part of the holder, a duplicate of the original shall be
issued by the city upon the payment of a fee of $1 and an affidavit stating the
loss or destruction of the original license.
('77 Code, § 3-27) (Ord. 19-1968, passed 3-4-68)
§ 112.25 LICENSE TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall, while in
force, be posted in a conspicuous place where alcoholic beverages are kept for
sale.
('77 Code, § 3-26) (Ord. 19-1968, passed 3-4-68)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.26 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY EMPLOYEES.
   It shall be unlawful for any employee or independent contractor of an
establishment with a liquor-by-the-drink license, to solicit patrons of said
establishment to purchase any beverage for consumption by any employee or
independent contractor of the establishment with the liquor-by-the-drink
license.
(Ord. 456-1991, passed 4-1-92)
NUDE OR NEARLY NUDE ACTIVITIES
§ 112.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT." A business within the city where liquor, beer or
wine is sold for consumption on the premises pursuant to a retail drink liquor
license or retail cereal malt beverage liquor license that has been issued by
the city.
   "LICENSE." A retail drink liquor license or a retail cereal malt beverage
liquor license issued by the city.
   "LICENSEE." Any person to whom a retail drink liquor license or a retail
cereal malt beverage liquor license has been issued by the city including the
officers and agents of the licensee.
   "LIQUOR ADMINISTRATOR." The duly appointed Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator of the city.
   "OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE." The occupational license issued for the business
establishment pursuant to the city's Occupational License Ordinance. (See
Chapter 110.)
   “PERSON.” A human being, and, where appropriate, a public or private
corporation, an unincorporated association, a partnership, a government or a
governmental authority.
   "PREMISES." The land and building in and upon which any business
establishment regulated by alcoholic beverage statutes is carried on.
   "RETAIL LICENSEE." Any licensee including its officers and agents, who sells
at retail any alcoholic beverage for the sale of which an occupational license
is required.
(Ord. 353-1985, passed 1-8-86; Am. Ord. 456-1991, passed 4-1-92)
§ 112.36 PERFORMING NUDE OR NEARLY NUDE ACTIVITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for and a person is guilty of performing nude or nearly
nude activity when that person appears on a business establishment's premises
in such a manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the pubic area,
anus, vulva, or genitals, or any simulation thereof, or when any person appears
on a business establishment's premises in such a manner or attire as to expose
to view portions of the breast referred to as the areola, nipple, or simulation
thereof. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human
female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or
other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in while or in part.
(Ord. 353-1985, passed 1-8-86; Am. Ord. 526-1996, passed 5-1-96)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.37 PERMITTING NUDE OR NEARLY NUDE ACTIVITIES.
   A licensee or retail licensee is guilty of permitting nude or nearly nude
activity when having control of the business establishment's premises which it
knows or has reasonable cause to know, is being used by any person to appear on
the premises in such a manner or attire as to expose to view portions of the
pubic area, anus, vulva, or genitals, or any simulation thereof; or used by any
person to appear on the premises in such manner or attire as to expose to view
any portion of the breast referred to as the areola, nipple, or any simulation
thereof. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human
female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or
other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
It permits such activity or fails to make reasonable and timely effort to halt
or abate such activity or use.
(Ord. 353-1985, passed 1-8-86; Am. Ord. 526-1996, passed 5-1-96)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.38 LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION FOR VIOLATION.
   (A)   Performing nude or nearly nude activities as set forth in §
112.36 or permitting such activities as set forth in §
112.37, is a violation and punishment shall be fixed as set forth in the
Kentucky Revised Statutes. The second violation of §
112.36 or §
112.37 within a 12-month period shall constitute a Class B Misdemeanor with
punishment as set forth in the Kentucky Revised Statutes. Three or more
violations of §
112.36 or §
112.37 within a 12-month period shall constitute a Class A Misdemeanor with
punishment as set forth in the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   (B)   In the event that a violation of §
112.36 or §
112.37 of this chapter occurs, the City Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator shall forthwith conduct a hearing pursuant to KRS 243.520 (in
conjunction with 241.160 and 241.190), to determine whether the liquor
licensee, at whose business establishment the activity prohibited by this
chapter occurred, shall have his license suspended or revoked. In the event
three or more violations of §
112.36 or §
112.37 occur at a business establishment within a 12-month period, the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator, after a hearing, shall revoke the
retail drink license or retail cereal malt beverage liquor license or both.
   (C)   In the event that a violation of §
112.36 or §
112.37 occurs, the City Administrative Officer shall prefer charges against the
retail licensee pursuant to the Code of Ordinances, and after notice and a
hearing held by the City Council, the occupational license shall either be
revoked or suspended. In the event that three or more violations of §
112.36 or §
112.37 occur at a business establishment within a 12-month period, after notice
and hearing pursuant to the Code of Ordinances, the City Council shall revoke
the occupational license of the retail licensee.
   (D)   Any license or permit for a limited time may be revoked by the Mayor
at any time during the life of such license or permit for any violation by the
licensee or permittee of the ordinance provisions relating to the license or
permit, the subject matter of the license or permit, or to the premises
occupied; such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed.
(Ord. 353-1985, passed 1-8-86)
Penalty, see § 112.99
RESTRICTIONS ON SALES
§ 112.50 HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   Distilled spirits or wine by the drink shall not be sold between the
hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. Subject to the
exception in division (B), distilled spirits or wine by the drink shall not be
sold on Sunday.
   (B)   Those premises which have obtained a Special Sunday Retail Drink
License may sell alcohol according to their license between the hours of 6:00
a.m. Sunday and 2:30 a.m. Monday.
   (C)   Malt beverages by the drink or by the package shall not be sold
between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday. Pursuant to
KRS 244.480, Sunday sales under this division shall be treated as any other
day.
   (D)   Distilled spirits and wine by the package shall not be sold between
the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:30 a.m. Monday through Sunday. Pursuant to KRS
244.290, Sunday sales under this division shall be treated as any other day.
(Ord. 11-04, passed 12-13-04; Am. Ord. 9-05, passed 6-1-05; Am. Ord. 15-14,
passed 1-7-15; Am. Ord. 11-2016, passed --)
§ 112.51 PREMISES MUST CLOSE.
   During the restricted hours set forth in §
112.50, no person who has a valid city license for the sale of distilled
spirits or wine or malt beverages at retail shall cause, permit, or engage in
any of the actions, business, or transactions authorized and permitted thereby
unless otherwise provided herein. During such times, all persons who have such
city licenses shall cause the licensed premises to be closed and vacated by all
persons except the applicant and those persons identified on the application
for such city licenses or any supplements thereto as officers, agents, or
employees of the person to whom such license was issued. All other persons
shall vacate the licensed premises and remove themselves therefrom during such
times.
(Ord. 11-04, passed 12-13-04)
§ 112.52 SEPARATE DEPARTMENTS ON PREMISES.
   If a separate department of such licensed premises is maintained in a manner
previously approved in writing by the ABC Administrator as being capable of
being locked, closed off, and separated from the remainder of the licensed
premises and all distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages and all fixtures
and apparatus connected with the acts of business and transactions authorized
by the state licenses and city licenses for the retail sale of distilled
spirits, wine, and malt beverages from such premises are located within such
approved department, and such approved department is continuously kept locked,
closed off and separated from the remainder of the licensed premises during
such times, the remainder of the licensed premises may remain open and any
lawful activity may be conducted thereon during such times.
(Ord. 11-04, passed 12-13-04)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.
   (B)   Any license may be revoked or suspended by order of the City Alcoholic
Beverage Control Administrator for the causes authorized by KRS 243.500, as may
be amended from time to time, including but not limited to, for failure or
default of a licensee to pay an excise tax or any part of the tax or any
penalties imposed by or under the provisions of any statutes, ordinances, or
Acts of Congress relative to taxation, or for a violation of any related
administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of Revenue, including
any real estate taxes and occupational license or net profit taxes, insurance
premium taxes, or any other taxes or payments owed to the city or its agencies.
(Am. Ord. 02-2024, passed 3-6-24)
CHAPTER 113: AMUSEMENTS
Section
Businesses Charging Admission
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   License fee
   
113.03   Temporary amusements and entertainment
   
113.04   Exclusions
   
113.05   Rules and regulations
Carnivals and Exhibitions
   
113.15   Definitions
   
113.16   Prohibition; exceptions
Mechanical Amusement Devices
   
113.35   Definitions
   
113.36   Gambling devices not permitted
   
113.37   License required
   
113.38   Application and fee
   
113.39   Inspection
   
113.40   Display of license required
   
113.41   Prohibitions and restrictions
   
113.42   Revocation of license
   
113.43   Seizure and destruction of machine
 
   
113.99   Penalty
BUSINESSES CHARGING ADMISSION
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "ADMISSION CHARGE." Any charge for the right or privilege to any
entertainment or amusement and shall include, among others, the following: All
charges for seats, chairs, tables, benches, reserved or otherwise, and other
similar accommodations; all charges made for food and refreshment where any
free entertainment is provided other than by mechanical means; all charges made
for the use or rental of equipment or facilities for purposes of entertainment
and amusement, unless persons not using the equipment or facilities are
admitted free; and all automobile parking charges where the charge is
determined by the number of passengers in an automobile; and all charges made
for the privilege of walking through or standing in or around any display or
structure or device.
   "CITY COLLECTOR." The City Clerk.
   "ENTERTAINMENT" or "AMUSEMENT." Shall include, among others, the following:
circuses; motion picture shows; shows of all kinds including home and garden
shows, and home shows; all sporting contests and athletic events; exhibitions;
concerts; lectures; vaudeville; bowling; dancing; golf; swimming and bathing;
side shows; amusement parks and all forms of recreation therein; billiards;
pool; operatic performances; theatrical performances; and any other form of
diversion, sport, pastime, or recreation.
   "TAXPAYER." Any person who conducts or engages in the business of providing
entertainment or amusement.
('77 Code, § 4-51) (Ord. 246-1981, passed 8-26-81)
§ 113.02 LICENSE FEE.
   There is hereby imposed on every person conducting or engaging in the
business of providing temporary or transient entertainment or amusement to
which a charge is made for admission within the limits of the city, a license
fee of $50.
('77 Code, § 4-52) (Ord. 246-1981, passed 8-26-81)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.03 TEMPORARY AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT.
   Every person conducting or engaging in the business of providing temporary
or transitory amusement or entertainment and receiving admission charges for
the same shall be subject to the tax levied by this subchapter. Such person
shall obtain a permit from the City Collector at least 24 hours in advance of
conducting any operations within the city. Before a permit shall be issued
under this section, the applicant for the same shall advise the City
Administrative Officer as to the number of participants or persons anticipated
to take part in the event; if, within the sound discretion of the City
Administrative Officer, the number of anticipated participants or persons
warrants, there shall be required of the licensee that there be provided
independent police and security services for the control and supervision of the
participants or persons at the licensee's expense.
('77 Code, § 4-54) (Ord. 246-1981, passed 8-26-81)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.04 EXCLUSIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to any person conducting or engaging in the
business of providing entertainment or amusement where admission charges are to
be used exclusively for charitable, eleemosynary, educational, or religious
purposes.
('77 Code, § 4-53) (Ord. 246-1981, passed 8-26-81)
§ 113.05 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Subject to the approval of the Mayor and the City Council in accordance with
KRS 83A.130, the City Collector shall have power to adopt rules and regulations
not inconsistent with the terms of this subchapter for the purpose of carrying
out and enforcing the payment of the license fee herein levied; and a copy of
such rules and regulations shall be on file and available for public
examination in the City Collector's office. Failure or refusal to comply with
any rules and regulations promulgated under this section shall be deemed a
violation of this subchapter.
('77 Code, § 4-55) (Ord. 246-1981, passed 8-26-81)
Penalty, see § 113.99
CARNIVALS AND EXHIBITIONS
§ 113.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   "CARNIVAL." Amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, booths for the
conduct of games of skill, food-dispensing facilities, and sideshows.
   "EXHIBITIONS." Circuses, menageries, carnivals, sideshows, and other similar
amusement enterprises which are open to the public and for which a fee is
charged to enter or ride such amusement or view such events.
('77 Code, § 4-16) (Ord. 122-1975, passed 8-8-75)
§ 113.16 PROHIBITION; EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate within the city
any carnivals or exhibitions of inanimate objects which are open to the public
unless such carnival or exhibition is sponsored by a charitable, volunteer, or
church organization, whose principal offices are located within the city.
('77 Code, § 4-17) (Ord. 122-1975, passed 8-8-75)
Penalty, see § 113.99
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 113.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   "MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE." Any machine which, upon the insertion of a
coin, slug, token, plate, or disc, may be operated by the public generally for
use as a game, entertainment, or amusement, whether or not registering a score.
It shall include such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball,
mechanical grab machines, electronic or computer-assisted amusement devices,
and all games, operations, or transactions similar thereto under whatever name
they may be indicated.
   "PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION, OR ASSOCIATION." Shall include the following:
any person, firm, corporation, or association which owns any such machine; the
person, firm, corporation, or association in whose place of business any such
machine is placed for use by the public; and the person, firm, corporation, or
association having control over such machine; provided, however, that the
payment of such fee by any person, firm, corporation, or association enumerated
herein shall be deemed a compliance with this section of this subchapter.
('77 Code, § 4-31) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)
§ 113.36 GAMBLING DEVICES NOT PERMITTED.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall in any way be construed to authorize,
license, or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has
been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to
law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the State of Kentucky.
('77 Code, § 4-32) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)
§ 113.37 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person, firm, corporation, or association displaying for public
patronage or keeping for operation any mechanical amusement device as herein
defined by § 113.35 shall be required to obtain a license from the city, upon
payment of a license fee. Application for such license shall be made to the
City Administrative Officer upon a form to be supplied by the city for that
purpose.
('77 Code, § 4-33) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.38 APPLICATION AND FEE.
   (A)   Application.
      (1) The application for a license shall contain the following
information:
         (a) The name and address of the applicant, age, date, and place of
birth;
         (b) Prior felony convictions of applicant, if any;
         (c) The place where the machine or device is to be displayed or
operated and the business conducted at that place;
         (d) A description of the machine to be covered by the license,
mechanical features, name of manufacturer, serial number.
      (2) No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he shall be over
18 years of age and a citizen of the United States.
('77 Code, § 4-34)
   (B)   License fees.
      (1) Every applicant, before being granted a license, shall pay an annual
license fee in the amount of $10 per machine for the privilege of operating or
maintaining for operation each mechanical amusement device as defined in §
113.35.
      (2) Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance.
('77 Code, § 4-36)
(Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)
§ 113.39 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Application for a license shall be made out in duplicate, one copy
being referred to the Chief of Police and the other copy to the City Building
Inspector.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the location wherein it is
proposed to operate such machine, ascertain if the applicant is a person of
good moral character, and either approve or disapprove the application.
   (C)   The Building Inspector shall inspect all wiring, the connections to
the machines, determine if the same complies with the electrical code of the
city, and shall either approve or disapprove the application.
   (D)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless approved by the
Chief of Police and the Building Inspector.
('77 Code, § 4-35) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)
§ 113.40 DISPLAY OF LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted
permanently and conspicuously on the body of the machine in the premises
wherein the device is to be operated or maintained to be operated.
   (B)   Such license may be transferred from one machine or device to another
similar machine upon application to the City Administrative Officer to such
effect and the giving of a description and the serial number of the new machine
or device. Not more than one machine shall be operated under one license and
the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and
every machine displayed or operated by him.
   (C)   If the licensee shall move his place of business to another location
within the city, the license may be transferred to such new location upon
application to the City Administrative Officer, giving the street and number of
the new location. The new location shall be approved by the Chief of Police and
the City Building Inspector in the same manner as provided in §
113.39.
('77 Code, § 4-37) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.41 PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No more than five licenses shall be issued under this subchapter for
any one person, nor for any single business or establishment which holds an
occupational license under
Chapter 110.
   (B)   No person, firm, corporation, or association shall permit the playing
of mechanical amusement devices within 600 feet of any church, public or
parochial school, or public or civic playground.
   (C)   No license shall be granted for any location within the city except
HC, PO-2, and LHS zones, as defined by the city zoning ordinance. No license
shall be issued within 600 feet of another licensee under this subchapter,
except for sit-down restaurants with taverns. Licenses in the HC, PO-2, and LHS
zones shall be issued only for:
      (1) Sit-down restaurants with taverns with no drive-through or drive-in
facilities, and
      (2) Night clubs.
('77 Code, § 4-38) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81; Am. Ord. 318-1984, passed 4-
4-84)
§ 113.42 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Every license issued under this subchapter is subject to revocation should
the licensee, directly or indirectly, permit the operation of any mechanical
amusement device contrary to the provisions of this subchapter, the ordinances
of the city, or the laws of the State of Kentucky. The license may be revoked
by the City Council after written notice to the licensee, which notice shall
specify the ordinance or law violations with which the licensee is charged, if
after a hearing the licensee is found to be guilty of such violations. Ten
days' notice of the hearing shall be given the licensee. At the hearing the
licensee and his attorney may be present and submit evidence of witnesses in
his defense.
('77 Code, § 4-39) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)
§ 113.43 SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF MACHINE.
   If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any mechanical amusement
device is used as a gambling device, the machine may be seized by the police
and impounded. If upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing the device to be
used as a gambling device the exhibitor is found guilty, such machine shall be
destroyed in accordance with the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
('77 Code, § 4-40) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.
CHAPTER 114: COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Permit required
   
114.03   Application for permit
   
114.04   Standards for investigation; insurance
   
114.05   Fees
   
114.06   Display of permit required
   
114.07   Appeal procedure
   
114.08   Revocation standards and procedures
   
114.09   Requirements for bona fide nonprofit organization
   
114.10   Penalty
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the content clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "BUSINESS." The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler, or solicitor in this section.
   "GOODS." Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   "ITINERANT MERCHANT." Any person, whether as owner, agent, or consignee, who
engages in a business of selling goods within the city, temporarily, and who,
in the furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure, vehicle, or
any place within the city.
   "PEDDLER." Any person who travels from place to place by any means carrying
goods for sale, or making sales, or making deliveries; or any person who,
without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for sale from any
public place within the city.
   "SOLICITOR." Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a solicitor is not
a peddler.
(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)
§ 114.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor wishing
to engage in such activity, within the corporate limits of the city shall first
obtain a permit from the city. No permit issued under the terms and conditions
of this chapter shall be transferable. Permits issued under this chapter shall
be valid for the time period specified thereon. Under no circumstances shall
the permit be valid after December 31 of the year of its issuance. Re-
application shall be required upon expiration of said permit if the applicant
wishes to continue such activity.
   (B)   Solicitation within the city shall be permitted from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Daylight Savings Time and from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. when there is not
Daylight Savings Time.
(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)
§ 114.03 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person, sole proprietorship, partnership, or corporation desiring to act
as an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor and any individual desiring to
act as an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor on behalf of a sole
proprietorship, partnership, or corporation, shall submit a completed
application form to the Chief of Police. Said application forms can be obtained
at the Police Department. The application form shall be signed by the applicant
if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by the President if a
corporation. The completed application form shall include at least the
following information:
   (A)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
   (B)   The name of the individual having management or supervisory authority
of the applicant's business during the time it is to occur in the city:
      (1)   The local address and telephone number of such individual;
      (2)   The permanent address and telephone number of such individual;
      (3)   The capacity in which such individual will act.
   (C)   The name, address and telephone number of the person, if any, for
whose purpose the business will be carried on, and if a corporation, the state
of corporation;
   (D)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on the
applicant's business;
   (E)   The nature and quality of the goods or services to be offered for sale
or delivered;
      (1)   If goods, their invoice value and where and by whom such goods are
manufactured or grown;
   (F)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business and
samples of same when applicable;
   (G)   Whether the individuals identified in §
114.02 or divisions (A), (B), or (C) of this section have ever been convicted
of any crime and, if so, the nature of each offense and the penalty assessed
for each offense;
   (H)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its license number.
(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)
§ 114.04 STANDARDS FOR INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE.
   (A)    Upon receipt of the application, the Chief of Police shall cause a
set of the applicant's fingerprints and a picture taken of the applicant to be
attached to the application. Additionally, the Chief of Police shall also cause
an investigation of the applicant's business reputation and moral character to
be made. If the investigation discloses tangible evidence that the conduct of
the applicant or the applicant's business would pose a threat to the public
health, safety, morals, or general welfare, then the application may be denied.
For the purposes of this section, tangible evidence shall be defined as:
      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude; or
      (2)   The applicant has made willful misstatements on the application; or
      (3)   The applicant has committed prior violations of ordinances
pertaining to itinerant merchants, peddlers and solicitors; or
      (4)   The applicant has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
      (5)   The applicant has a record of continual breaches of solicited
contracts; or
      (6)   The applicant has unsatisfactory moral character.
   (B)    The Chief of Police shall approve the application if the
investigation does not uncover tangible evidence of a threat to the public
health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the public. Said investigation
shall be completed no later than the conclusion of the third business day after
filing the application. The Chief of Police shall then notify the applicant by
certified mail as to whether the application is approved or denied. If denied,
the letter shall indicate the reasons for the denial.
(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)
§ 114.05 FEES.
   Any person acting as an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall,
upon approval of their application, be required to obtain an occupational
license from the City Licensing Agent and pay a fee of $25 per day, per
employee, or $150 per year, per employee.
(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)
§ 114.06 DISPLAY OF PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any permit issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall be
conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more than one
location within the city is used to conduct business, separate licenses must be
obtained for each location.
   (B)    The Chief of Police shall issue a permit to each peddler or solicitor
licensed under this chapter. The permit shall contain the-words "Licensed
Peddler" or "Licensed Solicitor", the expiration date of the license, and the
number of the license. The permit shall be maintained on the licensee during
such time as the individual is engaged in the business activity so licensed.
(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)
§ 114.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision made pursuant to the requirements herein
contained shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Council. The appeal
shall be filed with the legislative body within 14 days after receipt of the
decision of the Chief of Police. The Board of Council shall conduct the hearing
of appeal within 14 days after receipt of notification of appeal.
(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)
§ 114.08 REVOCATION STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES.
   Any permit granted under this chapter may be immediately revoked by the
Chief of Police pursuant to the standards set forth in this section. The Chief
of Police may cause the revocation of a permit granted under this chapter for
any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the permit application; or
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the permit; or
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter; or
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or any misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, or general welfare
of the public.
(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)
§ 114.09 REQUIREMENTS FOR BONA FIDE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Bona fide nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from the
requirements set forth in this chapter. When any bona fide nonprofit
organization desires to engage in solicitation of funds, donations or gifts, or
the selling or giving away of any evidences, certificates or tickets for any
prizes, drawings or other interests in any awards whatsoever, written
application shall be made to the Chief of Police. Said written application
shall set forth the kind and type of solicitation to be made, the purpose or
purposes for which the proceeds will be used, the date, time and place said
solicitation is intended to be made, and same shall be signed by a duly
authorized representative of the bona fide nonprofit organization.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the written request to engage in solicitation, the
Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made concerning the
nonprofit organization and the purpose for which the funds are to be used. The
investigation shall be completed no later than the conclusion of the third
business day after filing the application. The Chief of Police shall then
notify the applicant by certified mail as to whether the request is approved or
denied. No fee shall be required for a bona fide nonprofit organization to
engage in such activity.
   (C)   No more than two nonprofit organizations shall be permitted to
simultaneously engage in solicitation of any kind in the same geographic area
as defined by the City Plat Record Index Sheet.
(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction
be fined not less than $50 nor more than $250. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)
CHAPTER 115: GARAGE SALES
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Permit required; restrictions on sales
   
115.03   Registration
   
115.04   Signs
   
115.05   Parking regulations
   
115.06   Compliance with other regulations required
   
115.07   Exceptions
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "BUSINESS BUILDING." A building separated on all sides from the adjacent
open space, or from other buildings or structures, by a permanent roof and by
exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance or
exit doors.
   "GARAGE SALE." A sale from a residence or residential property of tangible
personal property which has been owned or used previously by the individual or
resident residing on the premises where the sale is conducted. A yard, patio,
attic, or driveway sale is included within the definition of "GARAGE SALE."
   "GOODS." Any goods, warehouse merchandise, or other tangible personal
property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
   "OUTDOOR SALE." Any sale of tangible personal property not otherwise
regulated in the city advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or
can be made aware of such sale, and shall include "sidewalk sales." Stocking of
merchandise for storage or sale outside the premises of a building shall be
considered an outdoor sale.
(Ord. 352-1985, passed l-8-86)
§ 115.02 PERMIT REQUIRED; RESTRICTIONS ON SALES.
   (A)   The conduct of general retail sales or commercial activities in
residential areas is, except as otherwise expressly authorized under the Code,
prohibited. Garage sales and outdoor sales, as defined in §
115.01, are permitted only insofar as they are conducted consistent with the
limitations set forth herein.
   (B)   No garage sale or outdoor sale of goods may be conducted within the
city without first registering the sale with the City Clerk. The City Clerk
shall maintain a register book in the city office for purposes of verifying
permitted sales.
   (C)   No more than two such registrations shall be permitted to one
residence or household during any calendar year. Such permit shall be limited
in time to no more than the daylight hours of two consecutive days. No more
than three permits may be issued to an established licensed business in a
business zone during any calendar year. Such permit shall be limited in time to
the normal business hours of the applicant for three consecutive days.
(Ord. 352-1985, passed l-8-86)
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.03 REGISTRATION.
   Prior to the garage sale or outdoor sale, the person conducting such sale
shall file a written statement with the City Clerk setting forth the following
information:
   (A)   The person's interest in the residential property (ownership, current
lessee, or such other control as the person may have), or the person's interest
in the commercial property (ownership, current lessee, or such other control as
the person may have).
   (B)   The ownership of the personal property goods to be sold.
   (C)   The purposes to which the personal property goods to be sold have
previously been used.
   (D)   In the event the request is by a business, an affirmative statement
that the property to be sold or work being done must be consistent and
compatible with the primary business occupation and occupational license
regularly issued to that business.
(Ord. 352-1985, passed l-8-86)
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.04 SIGNS.
   One temporary sign of not more than four square feet shall be permitted to
be displayed on the property of the residence where a garage sale is being
conducted. The sign shall be displayed only during the times of the sale as
delineated on the permit. In no case shall the sign be placed on property other
than the property of the residence to which the permit has been issued, nor
shall any sign be located closer than five feet from the property line.
(Ord. 352-1985, passed l-8-86; Am. Ord. 12-02, passed 8-28-02)
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.05 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   All parking of vehicles shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable
laws and ordinances. The Police Department may enforce such temporary controls
which may alleviate any special hazards or congestion created by any garage
sale.
(Ord. 352-1985, passed l-8-86)
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.06 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS REQUIRED.
   A garage sale shall be conducted in compliance with all laws, ordinances,
rules, and regulations not in conflict herewith; however, no occupational
license shall be required therefor.
(Ord. 352-1985, passed 1-8-86)
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.07 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply or affect the following
persons or sales:
   (A)   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
   (C)   Any sale regulated under provision of other ordinances of the city.
   (D)   Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by the zoning regulations of the city or under the protection of the
presently nonconforming section thereof, or any other sale conducted by a
manufacturer, dealer, or vendor and which sale would be conducted from properly
zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited in the ordinances of the city.
   (E)   Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural, or
governmental institution or organization, provided, however, that the burden of
establishing the exemption under this division shall be on the organization or
institution claiming such exemption.
(Ord. 352-1985, passed l-8-86)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, group, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $100 nor more than $500.
(Ord. 352-1985, passed 1-8-86)
CHAPTER 116: INSURANCE COMPANIES
Section
   
116.01   Definition
   
116.02   License fee imposed
   
116.03   Fee for life insurance companies
   
116.04   Fee for companies issuing policies other than life insurance
   
116.05   Due date
   
116.06   Written breakdown of collections
§ 116.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "HEALTH INSURANCE." Insurance of human beings against medical expenses
resulting from bodily injury, disablement, or sickness, excluding health
coverage provided under automobile, fire and allied perils, inland marine, and
life policies.
('77 Code, § 14-35(b)) (Ord. 328-1984, passed 9-5-84; Am. Ord. 335-1984, passed
10-18-84)
§ 116.02 LICENSE FEE IMPOSED.
   There is hereby imposed on each insurance company, a license fee for the
privilege of engaging in the business of insurance within the corporate limits
of the city on a calendar-year basis.
('77 Code, § 14-35(a)) (Ord. 328-1984, passed 9-5-84; Am. Ord. 335-1984, passed
10-18-84)
§ 116.03 FEE FOR LIFE INSURANCE COMPANIES.
   The license fee imposed upon a life insurance company, which issues life
insurance policies upon the lives of persons residing within the corporate
limits of the city, shall be 8% of the first year's premiums actually collected
within each calendar quarter by reason of the issuance of such policies. The
provisions of this section shall not include premiums received for single
premium annuities.
('77 Code, § 14-35(c)) (Ord. 328-l984, passed 9-5-84; Am. Ord. 335-l984, passed
10-18-84; Am. Ord. 16-12, passed 10-3-12)
§ 116.04 FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING POLICIES OTHER THAN LIFE INSURANCE.
   (A)   The license fee imposed upon each insurance company which issues any
insurance policy which is not a life insurance policy shall be 8% of the
premiums actually collected by such company within each calendar quarter by
reason of the issuance of such policies on risks located within the corporate
limits of the city, on those classes of business which such company is
authorized to transact, less all premiums returned to policy holders.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not include:
      (1)   Premiums received for insuring employers against liability of
personal injuries to their employees, or death caused thereby, under the
provisions of the Workers' Compensation Act, or premiums received on policies
of group health insurance provided for state employees under KRS 18A.225(2), or
premiums received on health insurance as defined by §
116.01 or paid to any state employee benefit fund created pursuant to KRS
Chapter 18A;
      (2)   Premiums for health insurance policies paid by individuals or
premiums for policies issued through Kentucky Access;
      (3)   Health insurance policies issued to individuals;
      (4)   Policies for high deductible health plans as defined by 26 U.S.C. §
223(c)(2);
      (5)   Premiums paid to insurers of municipal bonds, leases or other debt
instruments issued by or on behalf of a city, county, charter county
government, urban county government, consolidated local government, special
district, nonprofit corporation, or other political subdivision of the
Commonwealth. However, this exemption does not apply if the debt instruments
are issued for profit or on behalf of a for-profit or private organization.
('77 Code, § 14-35(d)) (Ord. 328-l984, passed 9-5-84; Am. Ord. 335-l984, passed
10-18-84; Am. Ord. 16-12, passed 10-3-12)
§ 116.05 DUE DATE.
   All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be due 30 days after the end
of each calendar quarter. License fees which are not paid on or before the due
date shall bear interest at the rate as defined by KRS 131.010(6) and KRS
131.183.
('77 Code, § 14-35(f)) (Ord. 328-1984, passed 9-5-84; Am. Ord. 335-1984, passed
10-18-84)
§ 116.06 WRITTEN BREAKDOWN OF COLLECTIONS.
   Every insurance company subject to the license fees imposed by this chapter
shall annually, by March 31, furnish the city with a written breakdown of all
collections in the preceding calendar year for the following categories of
insurance:
   (A)   Automobile.
   (B)   Casualty.
   (C)   Fire and allied perils.
   (D)   Inland marine.
   (E)   Life.
('77 Code, § 14-35(e)) (Ord. 328-1984, passed 9-5-84; Am. Ord.
335-1984, passed 10-18-84)
CHAPTER 117: PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Bond
   
117.03   Register to be kept; daily reports
   
117.04   Receipt to be given for each article; sale of article
   
117.05   Maximum interest, resale price
   
117.06   Receipt to be given for payment of loan
   
117.07   Prohibited activities
   
117.08   Enforcement
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "PAWNBROKER." Any person who loans money on deposit of personal property;
deals in the purchase of personal property on condition of selling the property
back again at a stipulated price; makes a public display at his place of
business of the sign generally used by pawnbrokers to denote their business; or
who publicly exhibits a sign advertising money to loan on personal property or
deposit.
(KRS 226.010)
§ 117.02 BOND.
   Every person to whom a city license is granted to carry on the business of a
pawnbroker shall annually enter into bond to the city, with good and sufficient
surety to be approved by City Council, in the penal sum of $1000. This bond
shall be conditioned that he will observe the provisions of this chapter and
all ordinances and laws in force in the city not inconsistent with this
chapter.
(KRS 226.020)
§ 117.03 REGISTER TO BE KEPT; DAILY REPORTS.
   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall keep a register of all loans and purchases of
all articles by the pawnbroker from the general public. The register shall:
      (1)   Be reported to an online, internet based transaction recording
service accessible to law enforcement agencies;
      (2)   Show the dates and the amounts of all loans or purchases by the
pawnbroker from the general public, and the names and: (i) a driver’s license
number; (ii) another state or federally issued picture identification card
number; or (iii) if the identification specified in (i) and (ii) is not
available, a Social Security number may be accepted; of all persons who have
left any property that has been pawned or sold;
      (3)   At all times be available to the inspection of any law enforcement
officer of the city when in the discharge of his or her official duty; and
         (a)   Make;
         (b)   Model;
         (c)   Color;
         (d)   Size;
         (e)   Manufacturer;
         (f)   Vintage; and
         (g)   Distinguishing marks or characteristics.
      (4)   When secondhand merchandise is sold to a pawnbroker, the
merchandise shall be held for a minimum of 12 days before being resold.
      (5)   Prior to the release of property to a representative of law
enforcement, the law enforcement representative shall provide to the pawnbroker
a case report or other documentation that the item has been reported as stolen.
(KRS 226.040)
   (B)   Every pawnbroker shall, by 11:00 a.m. each day, make available to the
Chief of Police a true and correct written report of all goods received by him,
whether by pawn or purchase, during the 24 hours preceding each report. The
report shall describe the goods as accurately as practicable. The Chief of
Police shall furnish blanks for these reports. (KRS 226.070)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.04 RECEIPT TO BE GIVEN FOR EACH ARTICLE; SALE OF ARTICLE.
   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall give a plain written or printed ticket for the
loan to the person negotiating or selling, and a plain written or printed
receipt of the articles that have been purchased or upon which money is loaned,
having on each a copy of the entries required by §
117.03(A) to be kept in his register. He shall not make any charge for the
ticket or receipt.
   (B)   A pawnbroker may sell any article pawned after the expiration of 90
days from the maturity of the loan. However, not less than ten days before
making the sale, the pawnbroker shall give notice to the person by whom the
article was pawned by mail addressed to the post office address of that person
as shown on the pawnbroker's register, notifying such person that, unless he
redeems the article within ten days from the date of mailing of the notice, the
article will be sold.
(KRS 226.050)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.05 MAXIMUM INTEREST, RESALE PRICE.
   Any pawnbroker as defined in §
117.01, may, in loaning money on deposit of personal property, charge, contract
for, or receive interest at a rate not exceeding 2% per month on the unpaid
principal balance of the loan, and may charge, contract for, and receive a
reasonable fee, not to exceed one-fifth of the value of the loan per month, for
investigating the title, storing and insuring the property, closing the loan,
making daily reports to local law enforcement officers if required by §
117.03, and for other expenses, losses, and incidental costs associated with
servicing such loans. Further, this fee, when made and collected, shall not be
deemed as interest for any purpose of law. No pawnbroker shall directly or
indirectly charge, receive, or contract for any interest or consideration
greater than that allowed by this section.
(KRS 226.080)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.06 RECEIPT TO BE GIVEN FOR PAYMENT OF LOAN.
   Every pawnbroker, upon receiving any payment of money from a borrower, shall
give to that person a plain and complete receipt for such payment, specifying
separately the amount applied to principal and the amount applied to interest.
In a case where the pawnbroker has purchased personal property under an
agreement to sell it back at a stipulated price, the pawnbroker shall, on
receiving any payment of money from the person from whom the property was
purchased, give that person a receipt stating the original purchase price, the
stipulated resale price, and the amount received.
(KRS 226.090)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.07 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No pawnbroker shall receive, by way of either pledge or pawn, any article
whatever from a minor at any time nor from any person between 8:00 p.m. and 7:
00 a.m.
(KRS 226.030)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter unless
otherwise provided by KRS 226.100. However, county police, for the purpose of
locating stolen goods, may carry out the provisions of KRS 226.060 within the
city.
(KRS 226.100)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any pawnbroker or pawnbroker's clerk who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter for which no penalty is otherwise provided shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $500, and his license may be forfeited to the city. (KRS
226.990(1))
   (B)   Any pawnbroker who violates any of the provisions of §
112.03(B) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $20
nor more than $100. (KRS 226.990(3))
CHAPTER 118: CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
Section
   
118.01   Permit required for charitable solicitations
   
118.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Peddlers not to obstruct streets, see §
91.34
§ 118.01 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS.
   Any person, agent, or employee of such person, engaged in the solicitation
of money or other things of value for a charitable purpose, must first procure
a permit from the City Council for such purpose. The person must make
application to the City Council stating the object and purpose of the charity,
the method by which money or other things of value are to be solicited and
collected, and the specified time in which such solicitation is to take place.
This section, however, shall not apply to solicitations of funds from members
of the same fraternal or charitable organization.
('77 Code, § 9-5) (Ord. 19-1968, passed 3-4-68)
Penalty, see § 118.99
Statutory reference:
   Charitable Solicitations, see KRS Chapter 367
§ 118.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be fined not more than $500. Each day's violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
CHAPTER 119: PRECIOUS STONES AND METALS DEALERS
Section
   
119.01   Daily register; contents; copy to Chief of Police
   
119.02   Articles to be retained in original condition; inspection
   
119.03   Photograph of seller or exchanger required
   
119.04   Transactions with minors prohibited
   
119.05   Exemption
 
   
119.99   Penalty
§ 119.01 DAILY REGISTER; CONTENTS; COPY TO CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of all persons dealing in the purchase or
exchange of secondhand or antique jewelry, coins, watches, diamonds or other
precious stones, cutlery, old gold, siver, platinum, or other precious metals,
or any other secondhand manufactured articles, composed wholly or in part of
gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals to keep a daily register of
every article purchased or exchanged by them in the course of their business
and the persons from whom such articles were acquired. The register shall
contain as minute a description of each article as is possible, including any
identification numbers and the manufacturer's name, as well as the name, age,
sex, race, address, driver's license number, social security number, general
description of the individual or individuals selling or exchanging the
articles, and their signatures. ('77 Code, § 9-66)
   (B)   All persons engaged in business as described in division (A) above,
shall furnish to the Chief of Police upon request at the police office by 11:00
a.m., a copy of the register for all transactions which took place during the
preceding day. ('77 Code, § 9-67)
(Ord. 233-1981, passed 3-25-81)
Penalty, see § 119.99
§ 119.02 ARTICLES TO BE RETAINED IN ORIGINAL CONDITION; INSPECTION.
   All persons engaged in business as described in §
119.01 shall retain each and every article received by them in the same state
or condition in which it was received, and all articles received during any one
day's transaction shall be kept separately and shall not be comingled with
articles received during any other day's transactions. Furthermore, all
articles shall be made available for examination within the city to members of
the Police Department, and the Sheriff's Department, state police, county
police, or other law enforcement official, state or federal, for a period of
five consecutive days after their receipt, before such articles are resold or
exchanged, unless written permission is obtained from the Chief of Police.
('77 Code, § 9-68) (Ord. 233-1981, passed 3-25-81)
Penalty, see § 119.99
§ 119.03 PHOTOGRAPH OF SELLER OR EXCHANGER REQUIRED.
   No person engaged in business as described in §
119.01 shall purchase or exchange secondhand or antique jewelry, coins,
watches, diamonds or other precious stones, cutlery, or old gold, silver,
platinum, or other precious metals, or other secondhand manufactured articles
composed wholly or in part of gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals
unless the person first obtains a photograph of the seller or exchanger of the
above enumerated items. The photograph is to be identified in such a way that
person or persons shown in the photograph can be identified with each entry of
the register identified in §
119.01. The photograph and register shall be maintained for a period of one
year after the date on which the transaction occurred.
('77 Code, § 9-69) (Ord. 233-1981, passed 3-25-81)
Penalty, see § 119.99
§ 119.04 TRANSACTIONS WITH MINORS PROHIBITED.
   No person engaged in business as described in §
119.01 shall purchase or exchange secondhand or antique jewelry, coins,
watches, diamonds or other precious stones, cutlery, or old gold, silver,
platinum, or other precious metals, or any other secondhand manufactured
articles composed wholly or in part of gold, silver, platinum, or other
precious metals from any person less than 18 years of age.
('77 Code, § 9-70) (Ord. 233-1981, passed 3-25-81)
Penalty, see § 119.99
§ 119.05 EXEMPTION.
   Nothing contained herein shall require compliance of §§
119.01 through
119.04 by a person engaging in business within the city who possesses a current
business license from the city and is accepting returns for cash, credit, or
replacement of any item originally purchased from the person.
('77 Code, § 9-71) (Ord. 233-1981, passed 3-25-81)
§ 119.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of any of the duties, requirements, or prohibitions contained in
§§
119.01 through
119.04 shall be punishable as a Class A misdemeanor as defined by the Kentucky
Revised Statutes.
('77 Code, § 9-72) (Ord. 233-1981, passed 3-25-81)
CHAPTER 120: HOTELS, MOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES
Section
   
120.01   Definitions
   
120.02   Registration requirements
   
120.03   Additional requirements/restrictions
 
   
120.99   Enforcement and penalty
§ 120.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “ESTABLISHMENT.” A hotel or motel where sleeping accommodations are made
available for pay to the public for lodging on a temporary, short-term (30
consecutive days or less) basis (referred to herein as "establishment").
   “GUEST.” A patron or lodger of an establishment.
   “HOTEL/MOTEL.” An establishment primarily engaged in providing short-term
lodging in facilities known as hotels, motor hotels, resort hotels, and motels.
The establishments in this industry may offer food and beverage services,
recreational services, conference rooms, convention services, laundry services,
parking, and other services (NAICS-721110)").
   “HOUSING VOUCHER.” A voucher, certificate or coupon for lodging issued
individually or jointly by any agency or authority of the following:
      (1)   The federal government;
      (2)   The Commonwealth of Kentucky;
      (3)   A county;
      (4)   A municipality; and/or
      (5)   A non-profit organization that issues vouchers, certificates or
coupons for lodging to individuals or families.
   “PREMISES.” A lot, parcel or plot of land associated with an establishment,
including all buildings or structures located thereon.
   “PROPRIETOR.” The owner, manager, operator, desk clerk or other employee
whose duty it is to register patrons of the establishment.
(Ord. 04-2025, passed 6-4-25)
§ 120.02 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Every proprietor and/or other person who controls or operates an
establishment shall keep and maintain a register of guests which shall include
the true name and address of each guest, the room and/or letter number occupied
by such guest and the beginning and ending dates and time of arrival and
departure of occupancy for each guest. The registering guest shall verify his
or her true name at the time of registration by presenting valid identification
(ID must have not expired) such as driver's license, non-driver's state issued
identification card, a Real ID, or passport. No guest shall be allowed to
register without presenting valid identification. No person shall be received
as a guest who refuse to register as required. Each registration shall include
and/or be subject to the following requirements:
   (A)   The registration of every person staying in the room must be
registered.
   (B)   Minors who accompany adults must have their name and address listed on
the register.
   (C)   No portion of the registry shall be altered or erased.
   (D)   The registry shall identify the rate charged and amount collected for
rental of the room assigned to each guest.
   (E)   The registry shall identify the method of payment for each room
(including but not limited to vouchers).
   (F)   A copy of the state or federal photo ID provided for the registry -
the type of written instrument of identification presented by the guest to
verify his/her name and address, and the number of the identification. A
photocopy of the instrument of identification is sufficient to satisfy this
requirement.
   (G)   It shall be an offense to permit any guest or employee to remain as a
guest or employee who commits any crime on the property.
   (H)   Before renting or otherwise making available any room or accommodation
to any guest the proprietor of the establishment shall require each guest to
sign the register.
   (I)   Every proprietor and/or other person owning, conducting, or operating
an establishment is hereby required to report immediately the registration of
any minor, under the age of 18 years, unaccompanied by his or her parent or
guardian to the Fort Wright Police Department. The report shall contain the
name, age, and place of residence of the minor.
   (J)   No proprietor and/or other person owning, conducting, or operating an
establishment shall knowingly permit any fugitive from justice to stay in any
hotel or motel.
   (K)   Each guest who arrives by motor vehicle (unless Uber, Lyft, taxi) must
register the license number and the state issuing such license, the year,
color, make, and model number shall also be recorded in the register.
   (L)   Every proprietor and/or other person owning, conducting, or operating
an establishment shall retain the register, including all information required
for three full calendar years following the close of the establishment's fiscal
year and it must be open for inspection at any time the establishment is open
for business upon the request of any member of the Fort Wright Police or Fire/
EMS Department.
(Ord. 04-2025, passed 6-4-25) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.03 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS/RESTRICTIONS.
   The following requirements and restrictions shall apply to the operation of
all hotel and motel establishments:
   (A)   Any proprietor and/or other person owning, conducting, or operating an
establishment shall cause each and every room, apartment or suite which is
rented to guests to be numbered or lettered in a plain and conspicuous manner
by some approved system of numbering or lettering, in such manner that no two
rooms shall have the same number or letter, and so that the numbers or letters
shall increase or decrease sequentially. More than one numbering system may be
used when required by design of the building. Changes in room number or letter
sequences shall be indicated by appropriate signage.
   (B)   Any proprietor and/or other person owning, conducting, or operating an
establishment shall cause to be posted, in a conspicuous place in both the
office of the establishment and each room, a notice of the establishment's room
rates and check out times.
   (C)   No proprietor and/or other person owning, conducting, or operating an
establishment shall rent or let, or caused to be rented or let, any room of the
establishment on an hourly basis; rent or let, or caused to be rented or let,
any room of the establishment for a period of fewer than 12 hours; nor rent or
let, or cause to be rented or let, any room of the establishment more than
twice in any 24 hour period commencing at 12:01 a.m. It shall be unlawful to
offer a discount or rebate for early checkout from a room within 24 hours.
   (D)   (1)   Any and all establishments may only offer sleeping
accommodations for pay to the public strictly on a temporary basis (30
consecutive days or less). No rooms in any establishment shall be offered,
rented or let on a permanent basis (in excess of 30 consecutive days).
Management, housekeepers, maintenance and employees are prohibited from living
in any room at any establishment.
      (2)   No proprietor or establishment shall engage in any actions intended
to circumvent the short-term 30-day guest lodging restrictions set forth in
this chapter (including but not limited to requiring a guest to switch rooms,
temporarily check out, receiving complimentary stays to avoid consecutive days
stayed and/or continuous payment or any other actions that result in a direct
or indirect circumvention of the 30-day restrictions).
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to register at any establishment
under the name of any other person or a fictitious name, or to give or sign, or
cause to be signed, upon the register of any such establishment any assumed,
false or fictitious name, or any name other than the true and correct name of
the person so registering or so giving or signing or causing his name to be
signed. It shall also be unlawful for any proprietor and/or other person
owning, conducting, or operating an establishment, to allow any person to give
or sign, or cause to be signed, upon the register of any such establishment any
assumed, false or fictitious name, or any name other than the true and correct
name of the person so registering or so giving or signing or causing his name
to be signed.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any proprietor and/or other person owning,
conducting, or operating an establishment to knowingly receive any person as a
guest or to permit any person to remain as a guest or employee who falls within
the following classifications:
      (1)   A prostitute; or
      (2)   Any person who solicits or arranges for illegal acts.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any proprietor and/or other person owning,
conducting, or operating an establishment to refuse or obstruct admittance or
offer resistance to any peace officer into the hallways, lobby, office,
restrooms, kitchen or storage, except such room as may be actually occupied by
a person as a private room, which such peace officer would otherwise have a
right to enter under the law.
   (H)   Any proprietor and/or other person owning, conducting, or operating an
establishment shall cause to be posted, in a conspicuous place, the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. 04-2025, passed 6-4-25) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.99 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.
   Pursuant to and consistent with KRS 83A.065(1)-(8), inclusive, enforcement
and penalties shall be as follows:
   (A)   Criminal. Whoever violates this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B
Misdemeanor.
   (B)   Civil.
      (1)   Pursuant to and consistent with KRS 83A.065(4), any person who
violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a citation issued
by any law enforcement officer. Violations shall be deemed a civil offense.
      (2)   The civil fine for non-compliance shall be as follows:
         (a)   Fine in an amount of no less than $100 per day and no more than
$500 per day.
         (b)   Each day of non-compliance will constitute the imposition of per
day fine for each day's violation, up to the following maximums:
            1.   On the first violation, the maximum total fine shall be
$1,000.
            2.   On the second violation that occurs within 12 months of the
first violation, the maximum total fine for each person cited is $3,000.
            3.   On the third violation that occurs within 12 months of the
first violation, the maximum total fine shall be $5,000.
         (c)   Any of the civil fines set forth herein shall be doubled in the
event of a violation of §
120.03(D)(2) above.
(Ord. 04-2025, passed 6-4-25)
CHAPTER 121: USED PERSONAL PROPERTY REGULATIONS
Section
   
121.01   Definitions
   
121.02   License required
 
   
121.99   Penalty
§ 121.01 DEFINITIONS.
      For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “PERSONAL PROPERTY.” is defined as any personal property that does not
require a title for transfer.
   “USED PERSONAL PROPERTY VENDOR” Any person or entity that purchases used or
previously owned personal property for the purpose of resale to the public,
makes a public display at its place of business of the merchandise, advertises
that it purchases and resells used or previously owned personal property.
(Ord. 8-07, passed 11-7-07)
§ 121.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person or entity who engages in the purchase and resale of
untitled personal property as defined in this section as a Used Personal
Property Vendor must obtain a license with the city and disclose the nature of
its business.
   (B)   They are required to obtain verified identification of the vendor and
keep a written record or log by date of the name and address of the vendor
including the identification information, social security number, drivers
license number or state identification number and date of birth and the item
purchased, including serial numbers. This information will be kept on site and
will be subject to inspection by any law enforcement officer without the need
for a subpoena.
(Ord. 8-07, passed 11-7-07)
§ 121.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter is a Class A Misdemeanor, with up to $500.00 in
fines and up to a year in jail for each violation.
(Ord. 8-07, passed 11-7-07)
CHAPTER 122: JOB DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES
Section
   
122.01   Definitions
   
122.02   Establishment of incentives
   
122.03   Collection options
§ 122.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “AGREEMENT.” Any agreement made pursuant to this chapter between the city
and an approved company with respect to an economic development project.
   “APPLICANT.” A business whose employees are primarily engaged in, or will be
engaged in, professional, administrative or technical occupations, or a
manufacturer, which business or manufacturer is located, or proposes to locate
its business, in the city, and which commits by agreement to maintain existing
jobs in the event that the business has a reasonable probability of relocating
outside the city, or create a minimum number of new jobs and annual payroll
within the city as hereinafter provided. An applicant shall not include
sexually oriented businesses or businesses that are primarily engaged in the
sale of alcoholic beverages.
   “APPROVED COMPANY.” An applicant the Mayor deems to have qualified for an
incentive.
   “APPROVED COMPANY'S EMPLOYEES.” The full- or part-time employees of an
approved company who perform services within the city and are subject to the
city's occupational license fee as set forth in
Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances.
   “COMMENCEMENT DATE.” The date that the incentive is first available to the
approved company as provided in the agreement.
   “INCENTIVE.” At the Mayor's discretion, the incentive may be a reduction of
1% to 50% of the occupational license fees paid by the approved company's
employees. Alternatively, if the approved company is withholding and paying the
city the full amount of the occupational license fee from the approved
company's employees pursuant to §
122.03(A)(2), then the incentive may be a refund of between 1 % and 50% of the
occupational license fee. The city will refund the incentive to the approved
company at the end of the incentive year, subject to the limitations of §
122.03 below. As well, upon agreement by the city and approved company, the
incentive may be paid to any TIF district established by the city. The
incentive will not extend for a period longer than ten years.
   “INCENTIVE YEAR.” The 12-month period beginning on the commencement date,
and each 12-month period thereafter during the term for which the incentive is
available to the approved company.
(Ord. 02-14, passed 3-5-14)
§ 122.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF INCENTIVES.
   The following shall apply to the establishment of incentives:
   (A)   To the extent any applicant creates or retains a minimum of 25 jobs
(“jobs”), and creates or retains a minimum annual payroll of $2,500,000 that is
subject to the city's occupational license fee (“payroll”) within any given
year, as provided in the agreement, the applicant shall qualify for an
incentive. The incentive will continue for the authorized term of five to ten
years, as applicable, provided that the approved company maintains or exceeds
the jobs and payroll requirement during any particular successive year, and
otherwise is in compliance with the terms of the agreement.
   (B)   In order to be eligible to receive an incentive, an applicant must
first submit a signed application to the Mayor, on a form prescribed by the
Mayor. Further, the applicant shall provide any additional information
reasonably requested to enable the Mayor to evaluate the application. Upon
acceptance, the Mayor will provide the applicant written approval of the
application that will include the terms and conditions of the agreement as the
Mayor deems appropriate to ensure that the city receives the full value of any
benefits to be gained, including, without limitation, provisions requiring
continuing operation within the city for a period beyond the incentive period,
provisions for reimbursement of incentives and potential penalties not to
exceed 50% of the incentives offered in the event of default by the approved
company, and appropriate conditions precedent to the triggering of incentives
to ensure the city receives the full revenue and job benefits deemed
appropriate, within the limits set forth in division (A).
   (C)   If the approved company does not comply with the agreement by failing
to create jobs and/or payroll within any particular year during the term of the
agreement, then the approved company shall not receive the incentive for that
year.
(Ord. 02-14, passed 3-5-14)
§ 122.03 COLLECTION OPTIONS.
   The collection options will apply as follows:
   (A)   In the case of an incentive, upon agreement with the city, through its
Mayor, the approved company shall:
      (1)   Reduce the occupational tax paid by the approved company's
employees pursuant to the incentive granted by the city; or
      (2)   Withhold and remit to the city the full amount of the occupational
license tax from the approved company's employees, consistent with all
applicable laws and ordinances, and receive a reimbursement from the city of
the incentive in the form of a refund at the end of each incentive year.
Alternatively, upon agreement of the city and the approved company, the
incentive may be paid to any TIF district established by the city.
   (B)   Should the approved company elect an incentive as provided in division
(A)(1):
      (1)   The approved company shall be authorized to reduce the assessment,
consistent with the terms of division (A)(1), from each paycheck of each
approved company employee; and
      (2)   Each employee so assessed shall be entitled to a credit against the
city occupational tax thereof equal to the job development assessment fee
withheld from his or her wages during the calendar year.
   (C)   Should the approved company elect to collect its incentive from the
city by withholding and remitting to the city the full amount of the
occupational license fee from its employees, as provided in division (A)(2),
the city, upon satisfaction that the approved company has met all of the terms
and requirements of the agreement, shall then remit the incentive to the
approved company within 90 days after the end of each incentive year.
   (D)   Any approved company receiving an incentive shall make its payroll
book and records available to the city at such reasonable times as the city
shall request, and shall file with the city documentation respecting any
employee assessment as the city may require.
(Ord. 02-14, passed 3-5-14)
CHAPTER 123: REGULATION OF SHOPPING CARTS
Section
   
123.01   Definitions
   
123.02   Abandoning carts prohibited
   
123.03   Carts to be confined to business premises
   
123.04   Identification of carts
   
123.05   Impounding abandoned carts; redemption by owner
   
123.06   Destruction of impounded carts
 
   
123.99   Violation and penalties
§ 123.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "CART." Any rolling or non-rolling container or basket made of wire,, metal,
wood or other material commonly used in supermarkets, self-service stores or
markets for transporting merchandise or foodstuffs within the establishments
and from the business establishment to a motor vehicle or other building.
   "BUSINESS PREMISES." The buildings, parking areas, and storage areas used in
connection with the owner's business.
(Ord. 11-2015, passed 7-1-15)
§ 123.02 ABANDONING CARTS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall leave or abandon, on any public street, sidewalk or any
other public place in the city, any cart from any business establishment,
market or food-dispensing establishment.
(Ord. 11-2015, passed 7-1-15)
§ 123.03 CARTS TO BE CONFINED TO BUSINESS PREMISES.
   It shall be the responsibility of every store, supermarket or business
establishment in the city owning carts to keep them or see that they are kept
within the confines of the owner's business premises.
(Ord. 11-2015, passed 7-1-15)
§ 123.04 IDENTIFICATION OF CARTS.
   Any store, supermarket or business establishment which is the owner of any
cart which is maintained and supplied by the owner for use by customers at the
owner's business premises in the city is required to have permanently attached
to each cart which it owns an identification tag which sets forth the name of
the store, supermarket or business establishment.
   (A)   The Police Department shall remove or cause to be removed any cart
found abandoned in any public place. Such cart shall be impounded at any city-
owned storage facility available for such purpose.
   (B)   The Police Department shall notify the owner of the cart by ordinary
mail within three days of such impoundment.
   (C)   The owner may reclaim the cart for $100.00 within 60 days of sending
the notice of impounding.
(Ord. 11-2015, passed 7-1-15)
§ 123.06 DESTRUCTION OF IMPOUNDED CARTS.
   (A)   If any impounded carts are not redeemed within 60 days of sending the
notice of impounding, the Chief of Police may dismantle, destroy, sell or
dispose of the unclaimed carts in any manner.
   (B)   Any public sale or other disposition of the carts shall be without
liability on the part of the city to the owner of the carts or any other person
legally entitled to or having an interest therein.
(Ord. 11-2015, passed 7-1-15)
§ 123.99 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any store, supermarket or business establishment in found violation of
§
123.04 shall be fined $5.00. Each cart to which a proper identification tag has
not been affixed shall be deemed to be a separate offense and each day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense with respect to each
cart.
   (B)   Any person in violation of §
123.02 shall be fined $100.00. Each cart found off the owner's business
premises shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
   (C)   Any store, supermarket or business establishment in violation of §
123.03 shall be fined $100.00. Each cart found off the owner's business
premises shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
(Ord. 11-2015, passed 7-1-15)
CHAPTER 124: MEDICAL CANNABIS BUSINESSES
Section
   
124.01   Licensing requirements
   
124.02   License fees
§ 124.01 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   Pursuant to KRS 218B.130, the city establishes the following licensing
requirements to any person or entity wishing to operate medical cannabis
businesses within the city:
   (A)   The licensing process for the operation of medical cannabis businesses
within the city shall be administered by the City Administrative Officer.
   (B)   Any person or entity wishing to operate medical cannabis businesses
within the city shall file with the City Administrative Officer an application
on forms provided by the city, which shall be verified and which shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   The name, age, email address, phone number, address and residence
of each applicant and if there is more than one and they are partners, the
partnership, names and their addresses; if the applicant is a corporation, the
application shall contain the name and address of the corporate officers, the
board of directors, any stockholder that owns more than 50% of the stock and
the name and address of the agent for service of process.
      (2)   The proposed legal name of the cannabis business.
      (3)   Identification of each type of proposed medicinal cannabis business
operating at that location (cultivator, dispensary, producer, processor, safety
compliance facility).
      (4)   The name and address of each person interested or to become
interested in the business for which the license is being sought, together with
the nature of that interest, and if the applicant is a corporation, the names,
addresses and agents of each officer, director and managerial employee and the
name of the state under the law of which such corporate applicant is
incorporated.
      (5)   The street and number of the premises to be licensed, whether or
not the applicant is the owner of such premises or what interest he or she has
therein and the name and address of any other person, either as principal or
associate, who is interested with applicant either in the premises or in the
business to be licensed.
      (6)   A list (with sufficient evidence to confirm) of measures taken by
the applicant to ensure the security and protection of the facility (and its
contents) and persons working within the facility during and after business
hours.
      (7)   A statement that the applicant will, in good faith, abide by every
statute, federal or state, and the ordinances of the city relating to medicinal
cannabis that may or shall be in force pertaining thereto.
      (8)   An affidavit confirming that the applicant complies and shall
continue to comply with all aspects of the applicable building codes, fire
codes, and all other applicable state and local laws or regulations.
      (9)   An affidavit confirming that no prospective board member who
managed or served on the board was convicted, fined, censured, or had a
registration or license suspended or revoked in any administrative or judicial
proceedings.
      (10)   An affidavit confinning that no principal officer, board member,
agent, volunteer, or employee has been convicted of a disqualifying felony
offense; or is younger than 21 years of age and that no employee, board member,
or owner, in part or in whole, is a medicinal cannabis practitioner.
      (11)   A copy of their state-issued license for the same purpose and
location as evidenced in the application. No person shall cultivate, process,
produce, possess, test, transfer, transport, or sell medicinal cannabis or
otherwise operate a cannabis business without first obtaining a license from
the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
   (C)   If the City Administrative Officer is satisfied, in his or her sole
discretion, that the license should be granted, a license shall be issued to
the applicant. All licenses issued shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the licensee.
      (2)   The type of license.
      (3)   A description by street and number of the licensed premises.
      (4)   The name and address of the owner of the building in which the
licensed premises are located.
      (5)   A statement in substance that the license shall not be a property
or vested right and that it may be revoked or suspended at any time pursuant to
law.
      (6)   The name and address of the owner of the building in which the
licensed premises are located.
      (7)   License expiration date.
   (D)   All medicinal cannabis business licenses and renewals shall expire
upon the earlier of:
      (1)   December 31 following the most recent application or renewal;
      (2)   The revocation of any licenses or permits issued by the
Commonwealth of Kentucky authorizing the entity to operate the medicinal
cannabis business.
   (E)   All applications filed for a license pursuant to this section shall be
accompanied by a certified check in the amount of the cost of the license
applied therefore, as set forth in §
124.02 below. If the application for the license shall be rejected, the check
shall be immediately returned to the applicant.
(Ord. 02-2025, passed 3-5-25)
§ 124.02 LICENSE FEES.
   Pursuant to KRS 218B.130, there shall be imposed, assessed and collected by
the city, initial and annual license fees for the operation of medical cannabis
businesses within the city in an amount equal to 10% of those fees assessed by
the Commonwealth of Kentucky for each specific type of medical cannabis
business operated within the city, as outlined in Exhibit A of Ordinance 02-
2025 and made a part hereof.
(Ord. 02-2025, passed 3-5-25)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
      
131.   FAMILY OFFENSES
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
      
134.   GAMBLING OFFENSES
      
135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND JUSTICE
      
136.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
      
137.   SEXUAL OFFENSES
      
138.   INCHOATE OFFENSES
      
139.   GENERAL PENALTY FOR TITLE XIII
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
EDITOR'S NOTE:
   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes which prohibit the most common offenses against persons. These
citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement officers
in citing offenders under state law. It is not the intention of the
municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of
ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by reference.
OFFENSE KRS SECTION PENALTY CLASS
ASSAULT
   First degree            508.010   B felony
   Second degree         508.020   C felony
   Third degree            508.025   D felony
   Fourth degree         508.030   A misdemeanor
   Under emotional disturbance   508.040   B misdemeanor or D felony
CRIMINAL ABUSE
   First degree            508.100   C felony, unless the
                        victim is under 12 years
                        old in which case it is a
                        Class B felony
   Second degree         508.110   D felony
   Third degree            508.120   A misdemeanor
CRIMINAL COERCION         509.080   A misdemeanor
CUSTODIAL INTERFERENCE      509.070   D felony
KIDNAPING               509.040   A or B felony; capital offense
MANSLAUGHTER
   First degree            507.030   B felony
   Second degree         507.040   C felony
MENACING               508.050   B misdemeanor
MURDER               507.020   Capital offense
RECKLESS HOMICIDE         507.050   D felony
STALKING
   First degree            508.140   D felony
   Second degree         508.150   A misdemeanor
TERRORISTIC THREATENING      508.080   A misdemeanor
UNLAWFUL IMPRISONMENT
   First degree            509.020   D felony
   Second degree         509.030   A misdemeanor
WANTON ENDANGERMENT
   First degree            508.060   D felony
   Second degree         508.070   A misdemeanor
CHAPTER 131: FAMILY OFFENSES
EDITOR'S NOTE:
   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes which prohibit the most common family offenses. These citations are
intended only as convenient references for enforcement officers in citing
offenders under state law. It is not the intention of the municipality to
incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of ordinances, and such
provisions are specifically not incorporated by reference.
OFFENSE KRS SECTION PENALTY CLASS
BIGAMY               530.010   D felony
CONCEALING BIRTH OF INFANT   530.030   A misdemeanor
INCEST               530.020   C felony
INCOMPETENT PERSON,
ENDANGERING WELFARE OF      530.080   A misdemeanor
MINORS
   Abandonment of         530.040   D felony
   Endangering welfare of      530.060   A misdemeanor
   Unlawful transaction with
    First degree         530.064   A, B, or C felony
    Second degree         530.065   D felony
    Third degree         530.070   A misdemeanor
NONSUPPORT            530.050   A misdemeanor
NONSUPPORT, FLAGRANT      530.050   D felony
Penalty, see Ch. 139
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
EDITOR'S NOTE:
   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes which prohibit the most common offenses against property. These
citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement officers
in citing offenders under state law. It is not the intention of the
municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of
ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by reference.
OFFENSE KRS SECTION PENALTY CLASS
ARSON
   Defrauding insurer      513.060   D felony
   First degree         513.020   A felony
   Second degree      513.030   B felony
   Third degree         513.040   D felony
BURGLARY
   First degree         511.020   B felony*
   *Unless the offense occurs during a declared emergency as defined by KRS
39A.020 arising from a natural or man-made disaster, within the area covered by
the emergency declaration, and within the area impacted by the disaster, in
which case it is a Class A felony.
   Second degree      511.030   C felony*
   *Unless the offense occurs during a declared emergency as defined by KRS
39A.020 arising from a natural or man-made disaster, within the area covered by
the emergency declaration, and within the area impacted by the disaster, in
which case it is a Class B felony.
   Third degree         511.040   D felony*
   *Unless the offense occurs during a declared emergency as defined by KRS
39A.020 arising from a natural or man-made disaster, within the area covered by
the emergency declaration, and within the area impacted by the disaster, in
which case it is a Class C felony.
   Possession of burglar's tools   511.050   A misdemeanor
CRIMINAL MISCHIEF
   First degree         512.020   D felony*
   *Unless the offense occurs during a declared emergency as defined by KRS
39A.020 arising from a natural or man-made disaster, within the area covered by
the emergency declaration, and within the area impacted by the disaster, in
which case it is a Class C felony.
   Second degree      512.030   A misdemeanor*
   *Unless the offense occurs during a declared emergency as defined by KRS
39A.020 arising from a natural or man-made disaster, within the area covered by
the emergency declaration, and within the area impacted by the disaster, in
which case it is a Class D felony.
CRIMINAL TRESPASS
   First degree         511.060   A misdemeanor*
   *Unless the offense occurs during a declared emergency as defined by KRS
39A.020 arising from a natural or man-made disaster, within the area covered by
the emergency declaration, and within the area impacted by the disaster, in
which case it is a Class D felony.
   Second degree      511.070   B misdemeanor*
   *Unless the offense occurs during a declared emergency as defined by KRS
39A.020 arising from a natural or man-made disaster, within the area covered by
the emergency declaration, and within the area impacted by the disaster, in
which case it is a Class A misdemeanor.
   Third degree         511.080   Violation*
   *Unless the offense occurs during a declared emergency as defined by KRS
39A.020 arising from a natural or man-made disaster, within the area covered by
the emergency declaration, and within the area impacted by the disaster, in
which case it is a Class B misdemeanor.
FORGERY AND RELATED OFFENSES
   Criminal simulation      516.110   A misdemeanor
   Forgery
    First degree      516.020   C felony
    Second degree      516.030   D felony
    Third degree      516.040   A misdemeanor
   Possession of forged instrument
    First degree      516.050   C felony
    Second degree      516.060   D felony
    Third degree      516.070   A misdemeanor
   Possession of forgery device   516.090   D felony
   Using slugs
    First degree      516.120   D felony
    Second degree      516.130   B misdemeanor
LITTERING, CRIMINAL      512.070   A misdemeanor
NOXIOUS SUBSTANCES
   Criminal possession of   512.060   B misdemeanor
   Criminal use of      512.050   B misdemeanor
POSTING ADVERTISEMENTS   512.080   Violation
UNLAWFULLY
ROBBERY
   First degree         515.020   B felony*
   *Unless the offense occurs during a declared emergency as defined by KRS
39A.020 arising from a natural or man-made disaster, within the area covered by
the emergency declaration, and within the area impacted by the disaster, in
which case it is a Class A felony.
   Second degree      515.030   C felony*
   *Unless the offense occurs during a declared emergency as defined by KRS
39A.020 arising from a natural or man-made disaster, within the area covered by
the emergency declaration, and within the area impacted by the disaster, in
which case it is a Class B felony.
THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES
   Device for theft of telephone services   514.065   A misdemeanor or D felony
   Obscuring identity of machine   514.120   A misdemeanor or D felony
   Possession of stolen mail       514.150   D felony
   Receiving stolen property      514.110   A misdemeanor or A, B, or D felony*
   *Unless the offense occurs during a declared emergency as defined by KRS
39A.020 arising from a natural or man-made disaster, within the area covered by
the emergency declaration, and within the area impacted by the disaster, in
which case it shall be charged one level higher than the level otherwise
specified in KRS 514.110.
   Theft by deception         514.040   A misdemeanor or D felony*
   *Unless the offense occurs during a declared emergency as defined by KRS
39A.020 arising from a natural or man-made disaster, within the area covered by
the emergency declaration, and within the area impacted by the disaster, in
which case it shall be charged one level higher than the level otherwise
specified in KRS 514.040.
   Theft by extortion         514.080   A misdemeanor or D felony
   Theft by failure to make disposition   514.070   A misdemeanor or D felony
   Theft by unlawful taking or disposition   514.030   A misdemeanor or A, B,
or D felony*
   *Unless the offense occurs during a declared emergency as defined by KRS
39A.020 arising from a natural or man-made disaster, within the area covered by
the emergency declaration, and within the area impacted by the disaster, in
which case it shall be charged one level higher than the level otherwise
specified in KRS 514.030.
   Theft of labor            514.090   A misdemeanor or D felony
   Theft of mail matter         514.140   D felony
   Theft of property         514.050   A misdemeanor or D felony
   Theft of services         514.060   A misdemeanor or D felony
   Unauthorized use of vehicle   514.100   A misdemeanor or D felony
Penalty, see Ch. 139
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
EDITOR'S NOTE:
   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes which prohibit the most common offenses against public morals. These
citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement officers
in citing offenders under state law. It is not the intention of the
municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of
ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by reference.
OFFENSE KRS SECTION PENALTY CLASS
PORNOGRAPHY
   Advertising obscene material   531.050   B misdemeanor
   Distribution
    Distribution of obscene matter   531.020   A or B misdemeanor
    Distribution to minor      531.030   A misdemeanor or D felony
    Using minors to distribute   531.040   A misdemeanor or D felony
   Portrayal of sexual performance by minor
    Advertising material      531.360   A misdemeanor
    containing
    Distributing matter         531.340   D felony
    containing
    Promoting sale of matter      531.350   A misdemeanor; C or D felony
    containing
    Using minors to distribute   531.370   C or D felony
    such matter
   Promoting sale of obscenity   531.060   A or B misdemeanor; D felony
   Sexual performance by minor
    Promotion of         531.320   A, B, or C felony
    Use of minor         531.310   A, B, or C felony
PROSTITUTION OFFENSES
   Loitering for prostitution      529.080   Violation or B misdemeanor
    purposes
   Permitting prostitution      529.070   B misdemeanor
   Promoting prostitution
    Second degree         529.040   D felony
    Third degree         529.050   A misdemeanor
   Prostitution            529.020   B misdemeanor
Penalty, see Ch. 139
CHAPTER 134: GAMBLING OFFENSES
EDITOR'S NOTE:
   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes which prohibit the most common gambling offenses. These citations are
intended only as convenient references for enforcement officers in citing
offenders under state law. It is not the intention of the municipality to
incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of ordinances, and such
provisions are specifically not incorporated by reference.
OFFENSE KRS SECTION PENALTY CLASS
CONSPIRACY TO PROMOTE       528.040   D felony
GAMBLING
HORSE RACES, MESSENGER       528.110   A misdemeanor
BETTING PROHIBITED
PARI-MUTUEL WAGERING      558.120   A misdemeanor
PERMITTING GAMBLING         528.070   B misdemeanor
POSSESSION OF GAMBLING
DEVICE               528.080   A misdemeanor
POSSESSION OF GAMBLING RECORDS
   First degree            528.050   D felony
   Second degree         528.060   A misdemeanor
PROMOTING GAMBLING
   First degree            528.020   D felony
   Second degree         528.030   A misdemeanor
Penalty, see Ch. 139
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC
ADMINISTRATION AND JUSTICE
EDITOR'S NOTE:
   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes which prohibit the most common offenses against public administration
and justice. These citations are intended only as convenient references for
enforcement officers in citing offenders under state law. It is not the
intention of the municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this
code of ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by
reference.
OFFENSE KRS SECTION PENALTY CLASS
BRIBERY AND RELATED OFFENSES
   Bribery of public servant      521.020   C felony
   Receiving unlawful compensation   521.040   A misdemeanor
   Soliciting unlawful compensation   521.030   B misdemeanor
ESCAPE AND RELATED OFFENSES
   Bail jumping
    First degree         520.070   D felony
    Second degree         520.080   A misdemeanor
   Escape
    First degree         520.020   C felony
    Second degree         520.030   D felony
    Third degree         520.040   B misdemeanor
   Hindering prosecution or apprehension
    First degree         520.120   D felony
    Second degree         520.130   A misdemeanor
   Promoting contraband
    First degree         520.050   D felony
    Second degree         520.060   A misdemeanor
   Resisting arrest         520.090   A misdemeanor
   Resisting order to stop motor   520.100   A misdemeanor
    vehicle
JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION,
INTERFERENCE WITH
   Bribe receiving by juror      524.070   D felony
   Bribe receiving by witness      524.030   D felony
   Bribing a juror         524.060   D felony
   Bribing a witness         524.020   D felony
   Harassing a witness         524.045   A misdemeanor
   Intimidating a judicial officer   524.120   D felony
   Intimidating a juror         524.080   D felony
   Intimidating a witness      524.040   D felony
   Jury tampering         524.090   A misdemeanor
   Retaliating against a witness   524.055   D felony
   Simulating legal process      524.110   B misdemeanor
   Tampering with physical evidence   524.100   D felony
   Tampering with a witness      524.050   A misdemeanor
   Unlawful practice of law      524.130   A misdemeanor for the first
                        offense; D felony for a second
                         or subsequent offense
PERJURY AND RELATED OFFENSES
   False swearing         523.040   B misdemeanor
   Perjury
    First degree         523.020   D felony
    Second degree         523.030   A misdemeanor
   Unsworn falsification to      23.100   B misdemeanor
    authorities
PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, OBSTRUCTION OF
   Compounding a crime      519.030   A misdemeanor
   Falsely reporting an incident   519.040   A misdemeanor
   Impersonating a public servant   519.050   A misdemeanor
   Obstructing governmental      519.020   A misdemeanor
    operations
   Tampering with public records   519.060   D felony
PUBLIC OFFICE, ABUSE OF
   Misuse of confidential information      522.040   D felony
   Official misconduct
    First degree         522.020   A misdemeanor
    Second degree         522.030   B misdemeanor
Penalty, see Ch. 139
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
Section
   
136.01   Projectile-shooting instruments
   
136.02   Statutory offenses
   
136.03   Camping prohibited on public access parking lots
   
136.99   Penalty
§ 136.01 PROJECTILE-SHOOTING INSTRUMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge any firearm or airgun loaded with bullets,
shot, slugs or other hard substances, anywhere within the city, except as
otherwise provided in this section. ('77 Code, § 9- 2) (Ord. 12(LH), passed 2-
22-38; Am. Ord. 160(LH), passed 6-12-62)
   (B)   It shall be lawful and not a violation of this section to discharge
shotguns or similar weapons for the sole purpose of trapshooting or skeet-
shooting, provided that the owner of the property where the trapshooting or
skeet-shooting takes places shall have previously obtained from the Chief of
Police a permit to conduct a trapshoot or skeet-shoot. The permits may be
issued by the Chief of Police only to the owner of the real estate where the
event is to take place, and the permits shall be valid only for a period of one
day’s duration.
   (C)   It shall be lawful and not a violation of this section for a person to
discharge an airgun loaded with round projectiles made of metal, hard plastic,
or paintballs, including BBs, airsoft pellets, or paintballs, provided that:
      (1)   The discharged projectile does not enter any adjoining property,
without the express written permission of the adjoining property owner;
      (2)   The discharged projectile is not fired at, and does not strike, any
person without that person’s permission, or any cat or dog or other pet;
      (3)   Any discharge by a minor is supervised by an adult; and
      (4)   No discharge shall occur such that any projectile is fired onto,
over, or from any public street, right-of-way, or public property.
   (D)   Division (A) of this section shall not apply to any peace officer who
discharges a firearm in connection with the performance of his or her duties as
a peace officer, nor shall this section apply to a person using self-defense or
other lawful justification as provided in KRS Ch. 503.
   (E)   This section is subject to Section 225a of the Kentucky Constitution.
('77 Code, § 9-4) (Ord. 160(LH), passed 6-12-62; Am. Ord. 14-14A, passed 10-1-
14; Am. Ord. 04-2018, passed 5-2-18)
Penalty, see § 136.99
§ 136.02 STATUTORY OFFENSES.
EDITOR'S NOTE:
   This section contains references to those sections of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes which prohibit the most common offenses against public order. These
citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement officers
in citing offenders under state law. It is not the intention of the
municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of
ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by reference.
OFFENSE KRS SECTION PENALTY CLASS
ABUSE OF CORPSE         525.120   A misdemeanor or D felony
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
   First degree            525.125   D felony
   Second degree         525.130   A misdemeanor
DESECRATION OF VENERATED OBJECTS
   First degree            525.110   D felony
   Second degree         525.110   A misdemeanor
DISORDERLY CONDUCT         525.060   B misdemeanor
DISRUPTING MEETINGS OR      525.150   B misdemeanor
PROCESSIONS
EAVESDROPPING AND RELATED OFFENSES
   Divulging illegally obtained      526.060   A misdemeanor
    information
   Eavesdropping         526.020   D felony
   Installing eavesdropping device   526.030   D felony
   Possessing eavesdropping device   526.040   A misdemeanor
   Tampering with private      526.050   A misdemeanor
    communications
FAILURE TO DISPERSE         525.160   B misdemeanor
HARASSING COMMUNICATIONS   525.080   B misdemeanor
HARASSMENT            525.070   Violation or B misdemeanor
INCITING TO RIOT            525.040   A misdemeanor
LOITERING               525.090   Violation
OBSTRUCTING HIGHWAY OR PUBLIC   525.140   B misdemeanor
PASSAGE
PUBLIC INTOXICATION         525.100   B misdemeanor
RIOT
   First degree            525.020   D felony
   Second degree         525.030   A misdemeanor
UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY         525.050   B misdemeanor
VIOLATING GRAVES         525.115   A misdemeanor or D felony
Penalty, see § 136.99
§ 136.03 CAMPING PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC ACCESS PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      “CAMP” or “CAMPING.” Those activities normally associated with the terms,
including but not limited to, overnight sleeping or other general housekeeping
activities conducted in an open-air location, whether or not such activities
are conducted in or around a recreational vehicle, camper shell, travel
trailer, tent or other similar temporary shelter, car, truck, SUV or other
vehicle.
   (B)   Camping prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, occupy campers, RV's,
tents, or other camping paraphernalia, including vehicles , trucks , vans in
any public or private parking lot or public access lots, improved or unimproved
within the city limits of the city.
      (2)   Any such person who parks a RV, camper, camper shell, travel
trailer, or vehicle, truck, or SUV for more than four (4) continuous hours in a
public access lot or other public location within the city will be presumed to
be camping and is in violation of this section.
(Ord. 2-08, passed 2-6-08)
Penalty, see § 136.99
§ 136.99 PENALTY.
   (A)      Whoever violates §
136.01 shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense.
   (B)      See
Chapter 139 for descriptions of statutory penalties for those statutory
offenses listed in §
136.02 above.
   (C)   A violation of this non-moving violation in §
136.03 shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each
offense.
(Ord. 2-08, passed 2-6-08)
CHAPTER 137: SEXUAL OFFENSES
EDITOR'S NOTE:
   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes which prohibit the most common sexual offenses. These citations are
intended only as convenient references for enforcement officers in citing
offenders under state law. It is not the intention of the municipality to
incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of ordinances, and such
provisions are specifically not incorporated by reference.
OFFENSE     KRS SECTION PENALTY CLASS
INDECENT EXPOSURE         510.150   B misdemeanor
RAPE
   First degree            510.040   A or B felony
   Second degree         510.050   C felony
   Third degree            510.060   D felony
SEXUAL ABUSE
   First degree            510.110   D felony
   Second degree         510.120   A misdemeanor
   Third degree            510.130   B misdemeanor
SEXUAL MISCONDUCT         510.140   A misdemeanor
SODOMY
   First degree            510.070   A or B felony
   Second degree         510.080   C felony
   Third degree            510.090   D felony
   Fourth degree         510.100   A misdemeanor
Penalty, see Ch. 139
CHAPTER 138: INCHOATE OFFENSES
EDITOR'S NOTE:
   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes which prohibit the most common inchoate offenses. These citations are
intended only as convenient references for enforcement officers in citing
offenders under state law. It is not the intention of the municipality to
incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of ordinances, and such
provisions are specifically not incorporated by reference.
OFFENSE KRS SECTION PENALTY CLASS
CRIMINAL ATTEMPT      506.010   A or B misdemeanor; B or C felony
CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY      506.040   A or B misdemeanor; A, B, C or D felony
CRIMINAL FACILITATION      506.080   A or B misdemeanor; D felony
CRIMINAL SOLICITATION   506.030   A or B misdemeanor; B or C felony
CRIMINAL SYNDICATE      506.120   B felony
Penalty, see Ch. 139
CHAPTER 139: GENERAL PENALTY FOR TITLE XIII
EDITOR'S NOTE:
   This chapter is included for informational purposes only. The provisions of
this chapter are specifically not incorporated by reference.
Section
   
139.01   Fines for misdemeanors and violations
   
139.02   Sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor
   
139.03   Fines for felonies
   
139.04   Sentence of imprisonment for felony
§ 139.01 FINES FOR MISDEMEANORS AND VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Fines and imprisonment for misdemeanors shall not be mutually
exclusive. In any case where imprisonment is authorized a fine may be levied in
addition to the imprisonment or a fine may be levied as an alternative to
imprisonment. Similarly, a fine may be levied in lieu of imprisonment. Whether
or not the fine is to be levied as the sole penalty or as an additional or
alternative penalty shall be in the discretion of the judge or jury as the case
may be. If the trial is by jury then the jury shall have the discretion. This
rule shall apply in all cases where a fine is not the exclusive penalty
authorized by law.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided for an offense defined outside this
title, a person who has been convicted of any offense other than a felony may
be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount not to exceed:
      (1)   For a Class A misdemeanor, $500; or
      (2)   For a Class B misdemeanor, $250; or
      (3)   For a violation, $250.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a corporation.
(KRS 534.040)
§ 139.02 SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   A sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall be a definite term and
shall be fixed within the following maximum limitations:
   (A)   For a Class A misdemeanor, the term shall not exceed 12 months; and
   (B)   For a Class B misdemeanor, the term shall not exceed 90 days.
(KRS 532.090)
§ 139.03 FINES FOR FELONIES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided for an offense defined outside this
title, a person who has been convicted of any felony and granted a sentence of
probation or conditional discharge may be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount
not to exceed $10,000 or double his gain from commission of the offense,
whichever is the greater.
   (B)   In determining the amount and method of paying a fine for commission
of a felony, the court shall consider, among others, the following factors:
      (1)   The defendant's ability to pay the amount of the fine;
      (2)   The hardship likely to be imposed on the defendant's dependents by
the amount of the fine and the time and method of paying it;
      (3)   The impact the amount of the fine will have on the defendant's
ability to make reparation or restitution to the victim; and
      (4)   The amount of the defendant's gain, if any, derived from the
commission of the offense.
   (C)   When a defendant is convicted of two or more felonies committed
through a single act and is sentenced to fines pursuant to division (A) above,
the aggregate amount of such fines shall not exceed $10,000 or double the
amount of the defendant's gain from commission of the offenses, whichever is
the greater.
   (D)   This section does not apply to a corporation.
(KRS 534.030)
§ 139.04 SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT FOR FELONY.
   (A)   A sentence of imprisonment for a felony shall be an indeterminate
sentence, the maximum of which shall be fixed within the limits provided by
division (B) below, and subject to modification by the trial judge pursuant to
KRS 532.070.
   (B)    The authorized maximum terms of imprisonment for felonies are:
      (1)   For a Class A felony, not less than 20 years nor more than life
imprisonment;
      (2)   For a Class B felony, not less than 10 years nor more than 20
years;
      (3)   For a Class C felony, not less than 5 years nor more than 10 years;
and
      (4)   For a Class D felony, not less than one year nor more than 5 years.
   (C)   The actual time of release within the maximum established by division
(A) above, or as modified pursuant to KRS 532.070, shall be determined under
procedures established elsewhere by law.
(KRS 532.060)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   PLANNING
      
152.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
153.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Adoption of Kentucky Building Code; Standards of Safety
   
150.02   Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code
   
150.03   Metal sheds or outbuildings
   
150.04   Standard specifications for street and drainage construction
   
150.05   Adoption of the 2002 Kentucky Residential Code
Permits
   
150.15   Fees to be paid prior to issuance of permits
   
150.16   Building and zoning fee schedule
Electricians
   
150.20   Definitions
   
150.21   State Building Code to set minimum standards
   
150.22   Northern Kentucky Electric Authority
   
150.23   License requirements
   
150.24   Electric wiring permit
   
150.25   Agreement of reciprocity authorized
Administration and Enforcement
   
150.30   Building Inspector
   
150.31   Alternate inspector
   
150.32   Civil liability of city employees
   
150.33   Local Appeals Board
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 ADOPTION OF KENTUCKY BUILDING CODE; STANDARDS OF SAFETY.
   The Kentucky Building Code, as contained in Chapter 7, Title 815 of the
Kentucky Administrative Regulations; the Kentucky Plumbing Code, as contained
in Chapter 20, Title 815 of the Kentucky Administrative Regulations; the
Kentucky Standards of Safety, as contained in Chapter 10, Title 815 of the
Kentucky Administrative Regulations; together with any amendments, are hereby
adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this code of ordinances. Copies
of the above codes and any amendments thereto shall be placed on file in the
office of the City Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection
during normal business hours. The city extends the Kentucky Building Code to
single and two family dwellings. The CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code may
be selected by the builder at the time of submission of the plans as an
alternate to the requirements of the Kentucky Building Code.
(Am. Ord. 458-1992, passed 4-1-92)
§ 150.02 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the City Clerk, being marked and designated as the 2021 International Property
Maintenance Code as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and
is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the city for the control
of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said 2021
International Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part thereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division (B).
   (B)   The following sections of the Property Maintenance Code are hereby
revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1. Insert: The City of Fort Wright, Kentucky.
      (2)   Section 103.1. Insert: Fort Wright Public Works Department.
      (3)   Section 302.4. Insert: ten (10) inches.
      (4)   Section 304.14. Insert: January 1st to December 31st.
      (5)   Section 602.3. Insert: January 1st to December 31st.
      (6)   Section 602.4. Insert: January 1st to December 31st.
(Ord. 13-02, passed 10-9-02; Am. Ord. 17-09, passed 1-4-10; Am. Ord. 08-2022,
passed 10-5-22)
§ 150.03 METAL SHEDS OR OUTBUILDINGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of unanchored
metal sheds or outbuildings in the city, and it shall be unlawful for the
owner, occupant, or person in custody of any metal shed or outbuilding to
permit the same to remain unanchored.
   (B)   Whenever the Building Inspector, Fire Chief, Chief of Police or Health
Officer shall be of the opinion that a metal shed or outbuilding is unanchored,
he shall file a written statement to this effect with the City Clerk. The Clerk
shall thereupon cause written notice to be served upon the owner thereof and
upon the occupant thereof, if any, by registered mail or personal service. The
notice shall state that the metal shed or outbuilding has been declared to be
unanchored, that the shed or outbuilding must be removed or remedied by
anchoring same in a concrete pad or by demolishing it, and that the condition
must be remedied at once.
   (C)   If the person receiving the notice has not complied therewith within
ten days from the time when the notice is served, then the Building Inspector
may proceed to remedy the condition or demolish or remove the building.
('77 Code, § 6-18.1) (Ord. 133-1976, passed 8-13-76)
Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.04 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR STREET AND DRAINAGE CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 82.400, Appendix A, B, C, and D, as attached to
Ordinance 360-1986 and incorporated herein, are adopted as required street and
drainage specifications for improvement to be offered for acceptance by the
city for maintenance purposes.
   (B)   Pursuant to those specifications, the developer or contractor is
required to employ at his expense an independent geotechnical engineer to
perform all inspection and testing as required by the adopted specifications.
      (1)   The geotechnical engineer is required to verify all the inspections
and testing results directly to the city.
      (2)   The geotechnical engineer must be recognized by the city as a
qualified geotechnical engineer. For recognition by the city, application must
be made by the geotechnical engineer to the city. The city will determine
recognition based on the credentials and past work record of the applicant.
   (C)   All sanitation sewers shall be installed in conformity with
specifications and standards of the Campbell-Kenton County Sanitation District
#l.
   (D)   The engineer of any sanitary or storm sewers in the city shall verify
to the city:
      (1)   That the sanitary sewer and storm sewer system has been constructed
in accordance with the Campbell-Kenton County specifications and standards;
      (2)   That it has been laid and constructed in accordance with the
construction drawings; and
      (3)   That the sewer has been pressure-tested and meets all testing
criteria.
   (E)   In the alternative, the city will consider acceptance of improvements
for maintenance with the following bonding requirements:
      (1)   Streets. Streets shall be bonded for at least a three-year period
at a value to be determined at one-half of the construction costs of the
street. The bond shall continue during the contruction period of land abutting
or accessed by the street, and continue for an additional three-year period
after the last construction on the street is constructed.
      (2)   Sewers. Sanitary and storm sewer systems shall be bonded for at
least a three-year period after construction at a value to be determined at
one-half the construction costs of the system. The bond shall continue and
remain in effect for a period to include three years from the last tap-in
connections, with commencement of use of the connection on the system.
(Ord. 360-1986, passed 8-6-86)
§ 150.05 ADOPTION OF THE 2002 KENTUCKY RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority of KRS 198B, certain documents, three copies
of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk and the Northern Kentucky
Area Planning Commission, being marked and designated as the 2002 Kentucky
Residential Code, Chapters 1 through 43, as published by the International Code
Council, Inc. 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, Virginia, are hereby
adopted as the code of the city for regulating the design, construction,
quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one- and two-family
dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories in height in the city and
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such 2002
Kentucky Residential Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this section.
   (B)   Revisions and amendments. The 2002 Kentucky Residential Code is hereby
amended as follows, with the words and numbers being added indicated by a
single solid line beneath them, and the words and numbers being deleted
indicated by a single broken line through them, as required by KRS 83A.060(3):
   Section R101.1: City of Fort Wright.
(Ord. 3-05, passed 3-9-05)
PERMITS
§ 150.15 FEES TO BE PAID PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   No permit as required by the building code adopted under this chapter shall
be issued until the fee prescribed in §
150.16 shall have been paid. No amendment to a permit shall be approved until
the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the
building or structure, shall have been paid.
('77 Code, § 6-19(a)) (Ord. 46-1969, passed 11-14-69; Am. Ord. 186-1979, passed
3-9-79)
§ 150.16 BUILDING AND ZONING FEE SCHEDULE.
   The city, pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance, hereby establishes, for the
necessary zoning and building permit applications, alteration, demolition and
occupancy permits, and for zoning review and appeal, the following schedule of
fees:
   (A)   Zoning permit applications.
      (1)   All uses, whether new construction or additions to existing
construction - $20.00 plus $0.01 per square foot.
      (2)   Change in use when the zoning classification and building
dimensions are not changed - $20.00.
      (3)   Signs and other accessory uses (excluding fences and parking as
regulated by divisions (4) and (5) below) - $20.00 per sign.
      (4)   Fences - $20.00.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading or unloading area when developed
separately and not included in division (A) above - $20.00 plus $0.50 per
parking space and loading/unloading space.
   (B)   Certificate of occupancy permit.
      (1)   For certification of lawful nonconforming uses and structures -
$75.00.
      (2)   For change in use - no fee (fee included as part of zoning permit).
      (3)   For new construction - no fee (fee included as part of building and
zoning permits).
   (C)   Move and set permit. Shall be as required by the zoning permit and
building permit, and in addition a transport permit shall also be required -
$50.00.
   (D)   Demolition permit. The application fee for the demolition of a
building or structure shall be as follows:
      (1)   Single- and two-family dwellings - $50.00.
      (2)   Multi-family dwellings, commercial, residential and other
nonresidential uses (such as churches, schools) - $100.00.
   (E)   Board of Adjustment hearing. (Conditional use permits, dimensional
variances, changes from one nonconforming use to another appeals) - $100. The
applicant must also prepay the recording fee to the Kenton County Clerk's
office in the event the application is for a variance. The applicant shall be
responsible for all expenses related to the processing and review of the
application or appeal. In addition to the fee of $100, the applicant must
prepay $500 to the city as a bond to cover the expense of the application or
appeal. If the cost is less than $500, then the balance will be refunded. If
the cost exceeds $500, the Board may withhold a favorable decision to the
applicant until the costs are paid in full. The City Zoning Administrator shall
have discretion to accept a bond less than $500, if, in his opinion the
expenses to the city will not exceed the amount required to be deposited.
   (F)   Amendments to the city's zoning ordinance. The fee for an amendment to
the city's zoning ordinance shall be as follows (this is in addition to the
fees that are required by the Planning Commission):
      (1)   Text amendments - $50.00.
      (2)   Map amendment (excluding a development plan) - $50.00.
      (3)   Map amendment, including submission of a development plan - $50.00
plus cost of review of development plan according to divisions (A) and (B)
above.
   (G)   Building permit applications.
      (1)   All uses (new construction, additions, and change of use) - $25.00
plus $0.09 per square foot of gross floor area. Gross floor area shall be
measured to outside faces of exterior walls and shall be inclusive of living
areas, garages, basements, storage areas, sales and display areas, and the
like.
      (2)   All uses (remodeling): Where any structural modifications are made
to the building, changes to the electrical, plumbing, heating, or other
mechanical systems are made or where the cost of remodeling, expended in a 12-
month period, exceeds 50% of the current assessed value - $25.00 plus $0.05 per
gross square feet of area remodeled.
      (3)   Minimum building permit application fee - $25.00.
      (4)   No building permit application fee shall be required by the
following types of construction (all such construction shall be covered by the
zoning permit application fee, as per division (A) above) -
         (a)   Fences and signs.
         (b)   Patio construction without roofs and side walls.
         (c)   Accessory uses such as swimming pools, tennis courts, driveways,
parking areas, and the like.
   (H)   Fees not returnable. Fees required in any of the foregoing regulations
or in any parts of the city's zoning ordinance shall not be returnable for any
cause, regardless of outcome of decision on any application. No fee or any part
thereof shall be refunded once an application has been advertised for public
hearing, where applicable.
(Ord. 287-1983, passed 2-2-83; Am. Ord. 361-1986, passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord. 398-
1989, passed 2-1-89; Am. Ord. 497-1994, passed 10-19-94; Am. Ord. 1-01, passed
1-10-01)
ELECTRICIANS
§ 150.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "ELECTRICAL." Pertains to the installation of wires and conduits for the
purpose of transmitting electricity, and the installation of fixtures and
equipment in connection therewith.
   "ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR." Any individual, partnership or corporation that
engages in the business of or employs others for the construction, alteration
or repair of any electrical wiring used for the purpose of furnishing heat,
light or power.
   "ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR." Any person certified by the Commissioner of Housing,
Buildings and Construction pursuant to KRS 227.489 who, for compensation,
inspects the construction and installation of electrical conductors, fittings,
devices and fixtures of light, heat or power service equipment to ascertain
compliance with the National Electrical Code incorporated in the Uniform State
Building Code promulgated pursuant to KRS 198B.050 or the Standards of Safety
of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
   "ELECTRICIAN." Any person who is employed by an electrical contractor and is
engaged in the construction, alteration or repair of any electrical wiring used
for the purpose of furnishing heat, light or power.
(Ord. 440-1991, passed 2-9-91)
§ 150.21 STATE BUILDING CODE TO SET MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   The Uniform State Building Code as is established by the Board of Housing,
Buildings and Construction of the State of Kentucky, is hereby adopted in full
by this subchapter, and the same shall have the effect as if it were written
fully herein, as a minimum standard for the construction, alteration and repair
of any electrical wiring done within the effective area of this subchapter.
These standards shall also be used by the Electrical Inspector in making his
inspections.
(Ord. 440-1991, passed 2-9-91)
§ 150.22 NORTHERN KENTUCKY ELECTRIC AUTHORITY.
   The formerly established Northern Kentucky Electric Authority, the Examining
and Appeal Board consisting of seven members as authorized in KRS 227.450 to
227.500, shall:
   (A)   Administer electrical contractor's examinations which have been
selected and approved by the Department of Housing, Buildings and Construction
and administer electrician examinations;
   (B)   Have the power to issue, renew, suspend and revoke electrical
contractor and electrician licenses;
   (C)   Have the power to require electrical contractors and electricians to
pay reasonable for examinations, initial licenses and renewals;
   (D)   Accept an electrical contractor examination certificate issued by the
Department of Housing, Buildings and Construction as evidence that an applicant
has met the examination requirements;
   (E)   Have the power to require all electrical contractors and electricians
to conform to reasonable standards prior to engaging in their occupation;
   (F)   Compile and submit to the Department of Housing, Buildings and
Construction all disciplinary actions taken against licensed electrical
contractors on a quarterly basis;
   (G)   Have all other powers authorized for a "local examining board" by KRS
227.450 et seq.
(Ord. 440-1991, passed 2-6-91)
§ 150.23 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing,
altering or repairing, within the limits of the city, any electrical wiring,
devices or equipment unless such individual is the holder of the electrical
contractor's license or employed by a licensed electrical contractor and a
holder of an electrician's license. Application for such license must be made
in writing to the city, stating the name, experience and qualifications of
applicant. Upon said applicant's complying with the requirements of this
subchapter and passing an examination approved by the Northern Kentucky
Electric Authority, a license shall be granted to the individual applying for
the same.
(Ord. 440-1991, passed 2-6-91)
Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.24 ELECTRIC WIRING PERMIT.
   (A)   Electrical permits shall be obtained prior to the installation,
addition, alteration, repair, relocation, or removal of electrical wiring,
unless an exception is granted by the city.
   (B)   The cost of the permit for electrical installation, additions,
alterations, repair, relocation, or removal shall be $20.
   (C)   All electrical permits shall be obtained from the City of Fort Wright
Building Department.
(Ord. 445-1991, passed - -91)
Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.25 AGREEMENTS OF RECIPROCITY AUTHORIZED.
   There is hereby established an agreement of reciprocity between this city
and any other city and county in which there exists legislation basically
containing the provisions of this subchapter and the Mayor is hereby authorized
to execute such interlocal agreement(s) with any city or county.
(Ord. 440-1991, passed 2-6-91)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.30 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The administrative agent who has responsibility for enforcement of
building regulations within the city under this chapter and other provisions of
this code shall be known as the Building Inspector. ('77 Code, § 6-l) (Ord.
120-1975, passed 8-8-75)
   (B)   The office of Building Inspector is hereby created and the executive
official in charge shall be known as the Building Inspector.
('77 Code, § 6-27)
   (C)   The Building Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor. His
appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service.
During temporary absence or disability of the Building Inspector, the Mayor
shall designate an acting Building Inspector. ('77 Code, § 6-28)
   (D)   To be eligible to appointment to the office of Building Inspector, the
candidate for the position shall have had experience as an architect,
structural engineer, building inspector or superintendent of building
construction. He shall meet the requirements for certification of Kentucky
Building Code inspectors as detailed in 815 KAR 7:070. He shall be in good
health, physically capable of making the necessary examinations and
inspections. He shall not have any interest whatever, directly or indirectly,
in the sale or manufacture of any material, process, or device entering into or
used in or in connection with building construction, alterations, removal, and
demolition. ('77 Code, § 6-29)
   (E)   The Building Inspector shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   The Building Inspector shall devote his time to the duties of his
office. He shall receive applications required by this chapter, issue permits,
and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall examine premises for which
permits have been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the
provisions of law are complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely.
He shall enforce all provisions of the Kentucky Building Code. He shall, when
requested by proper authority, or when the public interest so requires, make
investigations in connection with matters referred to in the Kentucky Building
Code and render written reports on the same. To enforce compliance with law, to
remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during
construction, or to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and
structures, he shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
      (2)   Inspections required under the provisions of the Kentucky Building
Code shall be made by the Building Inspector or his duly appointed assistant.
The Building Inspector may accept reports of inspectors of recognized
inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications and
reliability. No certificate called for by any provision of the Kentucky
Building Code shall be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing
and certified to by a responsible officer of such service.
      (3)   The Building Inspector shall keep comprehensive records of
applications, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made,
of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. He shall retain on file
copies of required plans and all documents relating to building work so long as
any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence.
      (4)   All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and
sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from
the office of the Building Inspector without his written consent.
      (5)   The Building Inspector shall make written reports to his immediate
superior once each month, or more often if requested, including statements of
permits and certificates issued, and orders promulgated.
('77 Code, § 6-30)
   (F)   The Building Inspector, in the discharge of his official duties, and
upon proper identification, shall have the authority to enter any building,
structure, or premises at any reasonable hour. ('77 Code, § 6-31)
   (G)   The Building Inspector may request and shall receive so far as may be
necessary, in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of
other officials of the city. ('77 Code, § 6-32)
(Ord. 46-1969, passed 11-14-69
§ 150.31 ALTERNATE INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The alternate for the Building Inspector may be any of the following:
      (1)   Department of Housing, Buildings, and Construction, located in
Frankfort, Kentucky;
      (2)   Kenton County Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator; or
      (3)   Northern Kentucky Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (B)   The alternate for the Zoning Administrator may be any of the
following:
      (1)   Kenton County Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator;
      (2)   Northern Kentucky Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (C)   An alternate shall be appointed by the Building Inspector-Zoning
Administrator to serve in every case in which a conflict of interest exists
between the individual or business entity and the Building Inspector-Zoning
Administrator; and the alternate shall be notified of its appointment as
Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator in the regular course of business,
but said notification shall be in writing.
   (D)   In the event the person or business entity or any affected citizen
disagrees with the alternate chosen by the Building Inspector-Zoning
Administrator for either or both alternate positions, they shall have the right
to appeal the decision in writing to the Mayor. In that event the Mayor's
confirmation or choice of an alternate shall be final.
('77 Code, § 6-2) (Ord. 295-1983, passed 8-3-83)
§ 150.32 CIVIL LIABILITY OF CITY EMPLOYEES.
   The Building Inspector or any employee charged with the enforcement of this
chapter, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of his
duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally and he is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons
or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission
in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against the Building Inspector
or employee, because of such act or omission performed by him in the
enforcement of any provisions of this chapter, shall be defended by the Legal
Department of the city until final termination of the proceedings.
('77 Code, § 6-20) (Ord. 46-1969, passed 11-14-69)
§ 150.33 LOCAL APPEALS BOARD.
   (A)      There is established a Local Appeals Board consisting of five
technically qualified persons with professional experience related to the
building industry, to hear appeals from the decisions of the Building
Inspector. The Board shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
City Council. At least three members of the Appeals Board shall not be employed
by the local government hearing the appeal.
   (B)      Any party to a decision by the Building Inspector may appeal that
decision to the Appeals Board. Upon receipt of an appeal from a qualified
party, the Appeals Board shall convene a hearing to consider the appeal within
15 days of receipt. All parties to the appeal shall be notified of the time and
place of the hearing by letter mailed by certified mail no later than ten days
prior to the date of the hearing. The Appeals Board shall render a decision
within five working days after the hearing.
   (C)   The Appeals Board may uphold, amend, or reverse the decision of the
Building Inspector, and there shall be no appeal from the decision of the
Appeals Board other than by appeal to the department. Appeals to the department
shall include citation of those provisions of the uniform state building code
which are at issue, and an explanation of why the decision of the Appeals Board
or the Building Inspector relative to those provisions is being contested.
(KRS 198B.070(1), (3), (4)) ('77 Code, § 6-36) (Ord. 175-1978, passed 11-10-78;
Am. Ord. 203-1980, passed 2-8-80)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)      Any person who violates any provision of the state codes adopted in
§ 150.01 shall be subject to the following penalties:
      (1)   Violators of the Uniform State Building Code or the Uniform State
Residential Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than
$10 nor more than $1000 for each offense. (KRS 198B.990(1))
      (2)   Violators of the State Standards of Safety shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1000, imprisonment for
not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. (KRS 227.990(1))
      (3)   Violators of the State Plumbing Code shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100, imprisonment for not
more than 90 days, or both, for each offense. (KRS 318.990)
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of §§ 150.20
through 150.25 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in any
court of competent jurisdiction, shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than
$250 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, to be so fined and
imprisoned in the discretion of the court for each offense. Each day that said
person, firm or corporation violates said §§ 150.20 - 150.25 or any provision
thereof may be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 440-1991, passed 2-6-91)
   (C)      Whoever violates any other provision of this chapter shall be fined
not more than $500 for each offense.
CHAPTER 151: PLANNING
Section
   
151.01   Adoption of Statement of Goals and Objectives and Comprehensive Plan
   
151.02   Agreement to form and operate a joint planning unit
§ 151.01 ADOPTION OF STATEMENT OF GOALS AND OBJECTIVES AND COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   (A)   The city hereby adopts by reference the Statement of Goals and
Objectives which was reviewed and adopted by the Kenton County and Municipal
Planning and Zoning Commission on March 16, 1978.
   (B)   The city hereby adopts by reference that portion of the Kenton County
Comprehensive Plan, adopted by the Kenton County and Municipal Planning and
Zoning Commission on January 7, 1982, as it applies to the city, as the city
comprehensive plan.
   (C)   The Statement of Goals and Objectives and the city comprehensive plan
shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city at 1661 Park
Road, Ft. Wright.
(Ord. 269-1982, passed - -82; Am. Ord., passed - -85)
§ 151.02 AGREEMENT TO FORM AND OPERATE A JOINT PLANNING UNIT.
Editor's note:
   The city is a party to an agreement between Kenton County and various
municipalities within Kenton County to form and operate a joint planning unit.
The agreement was executed - -66.
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
   
152.01   Adoption of regulations
   
152.02   Amendments
§ 152.01 ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS.
   Except for the amendments, modifications, and changes as set forth in this
chapter, the City Council hereby adopts by reference the subdivision
regulations of the county, as previously approved by the Kenton County and
Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission, and further adopts by reference any
and all amendments or changes thereto that may from time to time be enacted and
approved by the Kenton County and Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission.
('77 Code, § 13-l) (Ord. 40-1969, passed 4-ll-69)
§ 152.02 AMENDMENTS.
   The following changes are hereby made in the subdivision regulations as
adopted by the county in order that they may properly conform to the municipal
operations of the city:
   (A)   The words "city engineer" shall be substituted for the words "county
engineer."
   (B)   The words "city council" shall be substituted for the words "fiscal
court."
   (C)   The words "City of Ft. Wright" shall be substituted for the words
"Kenton County."
   (D)   The words "planning and zoning commission" shall be substituted for
the words "Covington-Kenton County Board of Adjustments."
   (E)   The words "City of Ft. Wright Board of Adjustment" shall be
substituted for the words "Board of Adjustments."
   (F)   The words "Kenton County and Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission"
shall be substituted for the words "Covington-Kenton Planning and Zoning
Commission."
   (G)   The words "City of Ft. Wright" shall be substituted for the words
"unincorporated area of Kenton County."
   (H)   Section 2.03 entitled "Authority" is deleted and in substitution
therefor, the following is inserted: "These subdivision regulations are adopted
under the authority of Kentucky Revised Statutes."
   (I)   Section 3 entitled "Definitions," Item "N" is amended so that it shall
read as follows: "Major arterial street - an existing street or proposed street
which is designated as a major arterial street on the major street plan as
adopted by the Kenton County and Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission;
Minor street - an existing or proposed street which is designated as a minor
street on the major street plan as adopted by the Kenton County and Municipal
Planning and Zoning Commission."
   (J)   Section 5.10 entitled "Alleys," subsection "a" entitled "Residential
Areas" is amended so that it is changed from "alleys shall be discouraged in
residential districts" to read "alleys shall be prohibited in residential
districts."
   (K)   Subsection "a" of Section 5.13 entitled "Lots" is deleted, and, in
substitution therefor, the following is included: "a. Size, lot arrangement and
design shall be such that lots will provide satisfactory sites for building and
shall be properly related to topography and to existing probable future
requirements. To this end, minimum lot size shall conform to or exceed the
requirements of the zoning district in which they are located."
      (1)   The following shall be added to the existing county subdivision
regulations as Section 4.13 and shall be entitled "Fees": "In addition to the
fees payable to the Kenton County and Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission,
the following fees shall be paid to the City of Ft. Wright upon filing of a
subdivision plat. Said fees are for the purpose of covering city costs in the
review of plats and inspection of improvements: a. Preliminary plat. The fee
shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) per each lot; b.
Final plat. The fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) plus two dollars ($2.00)
per each lot. Such fee shall include inspection of improvements involved in
such final plat."
   (M)   "All streets shall have a minimum street width of twenty-five (25)
feet, except those streets not permanently dead-ended or constituting a through
street which shall have a minimum street width of twenty-eight (28) feet."
('77 Code, § 13-2) (Ord. 40-1969, passed 4-ll-69; Am. Ord. 69-1971, passed 11-
12-71)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
   
153.01   Adoption of zoning regulations
   
153.02   Board of Adjustment
Cross-reference:
   Building and zoning permits fee schedule, see §
150.16
   Zoning map changes, see
T.S.O. IV
§ 153.01 ADOPTION OF ZONING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The city, pursuant to KRS Chapter 100, hereby approves and adopts a
new zoning ordinance, which includes a new text and a new official zoning map
for the city, and which new zoning ordinance shall supersede, amend, and fully
restate the prior zoning ordinance repealed hereby. The new zoning ordinance is
attached to Ord. 08-2024 as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference.
   (B) The official zoning ordinance of the city shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the city at 409 Kyles Lane, Fort Wright, Kentucky
41011.
(Ord. 08-2024, passed 9-4-24)
§ 153.02 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)      KRS Chapter 100. ('77 Code, § 2-17)
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members to be appointed
by the Mayor with the approval of City Council. The members of the Board shall
serve for a term of four years, in accordance with KRS 100.217(4). The Board of
Adjustment shall have all of the powers, duties, and responsibilities and be
subject to all the requirements and limitations set forth in KRS Chapter 100
and other applicable statutes. ('77 Code, § 2-18) (Ord. 182-1979, passed 1-12-
79)
   (C)   The members of the Board of Adjustment shall conduct their proceedings
in accordance with KRS Ch. 100. ('77 Code, § 2-19)
(Ord. 110-1975, passed 1-10-75)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I. BOND ISSUES
      
II. CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
      
III. VACATIONS
      
IV. ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
V. ANNEXATIONS
TABLE I. BOND ISSUES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
311-1983 - -83       Authorizing the issuance of $7,100,000 of Industrial
                     Building Revenue Bonds, Series 1983
371-1986 - -86       Authorizing the issuance of $1,000,000 Industrial Building
                     Revenue Bonds, Series 1986
                     Authorizing the issuance of $1.2 million of Public Project
419-1990 2-7-90      Revenue Bonds, (Public Properties Corporation), Series A
                     1990.
                     Authorizing the issuance of $6,500,000 in aggregate
466-1992 12-10-92    principal amount of Industrial Building Revenue Refunding
                     Bonds, series 1992.
                    
 
TABLE II. CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date     Description
No.  Passed
375- 6-3-87   Approving participation in an interlocal cooperation agreement for self-
1987          insurance.
387- 6-1-88   Approving participation in the Kentucky Municipal Risk Managment
1988          Association (KMARMA) general insurance trust.
442- 2-6-91   Authorizing participation in the "Kentucky League of Cities Investment
1991          Pool Plus".
535- 11-20-96 Accepting the bid of the Union Light, Heat and Power Company as the
96            highest and best bidder of the sale of franchise.
536- 11-20-96 Accepting the bid of the Union Light, Heat and Power Company as the
96            highest and best bidder of the sale of franchise.
556- 10-1-97  Authorizing the execution of a second amendment to the interlocal
97            agreement establishing the Telecommunications Board of Norther Kentucky.
2-03 1-8-03   Authorizing the construction and renovation of a municipal building and
              the purchase of certain fire fighting equipment.
4-05 3-9-05   Authorizing an interlocal agreement for unified “one stop shop” codes
              administration.
2-07 2-7-07   Authorizing an interlocal agreement with Kenton County for a joint Code
              Enforcement Board.
3-08 3-5-08   Approving an interlocal agreement between the cities of Fort Mitchell and
              Fort Wright regarding the improvements to Amsterdam Road.
7-09 3-4-09   Approving a first supplemental lease agreement with the Bank of Kentucky,
              Inc.
9-09 7-1-09   Authorizing an advanced life support agreement with TransCare of
              Kentucky, Inc.
09-  12-7-11  Approving a second supplemental lease agreement with the Bank of
11            Kentucky, Inc.
              Approving an interlocal cooperation agreement between the City of Fort
              Wright, the Kenton County Fiscal Court, and the cities of Bromley,
02-           Covington, Crescent Springs, Crestview Hills, Edgewood, Elsmere,
12   3-7-12   Erlanger, Fairview, Fort Mitchell, Independence, Kenton Vale, Lakeside
              Park, Ludlow, Park Hills, Taylor Mill, Ryland Heights and Villa Hills
              relating to the enforcement of state laws and local ordinances for the
              regulation of animals.
              Establishing a development area for economic development purposes within
17-  1-8-14   the city to be known as the Dixie Highway-Kyles Lane Development Area;
13            approving a local participation agreement between the city, Kenton County
              and the Northern Kentucky Planning Commission.
01-           Awarding a non-exclusive, five-year telecommunications franchise to
2020 3-18-20  MCIMetro Access Transmission Services Corp., d/b/a Verizon Access
              Transmission Services, with option to renew upon mutual agreement.
              Adopting an amended interlocal agreement between the Kenton County Fiscal
07-           Court and the cities of Bromley, Crescent Springs, Crestview Hills,
2021 6-16-21  Edgewood, Elsmere, Fort Wright, Independence, Kenton Vale, Lakeside Park,
              Ludlow, Park Hills, Ryland Heights, Taylor Mill and Villa Hills for code
              enforcement in Kenton County, KY.
              Establishing a non-exclusive franchise for the use of the public streets,
09-  9-6-     alleys and other public grounds of the city for the transmission and
2023 23    distribution of both natural gas and electricity through and for
              consumption within the city.
10-  9-6-     Issuing a competitive, non-exclusive franchise for a combined term of ten
2023 23    years to, and authorizing the execution of a franchise agreement with,
              Spectrum Mid-America, LLC.
              Accepting the bid of Duke Energy Kentucky, Inc. for a twenty-year non-
10-  8-21-24  exclusive franchise for the use of public streets, alleys and other
2024          public grounds of the city for the transmission and distribution of both
              natural gas and electricity through and for consumption within the city.
13-  12-4-24  Awarding a non-exclusive, five-year telecommunications franchise to Level
2024          3 Telecom of Kentucky, LLC, with option to renew upon mutual agreement.
              Confirming the renewal of a non-exclusive, five-year telecommunications
03-  3-5-25   franchise to MCImetro Access Transmission Services Corp., and Lila
2025          Verizon Access Transmission Services, with option to renew upon mutual
              agreement.
             
 
TABLE III. VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. No. Date    Description
314-1983 - -83   Closing a portion of St. Agnes Circle.
403-1989 4-5-89  Closing a portion of Reynolds Road in the Meyeridge
                 Subdivision.
                 Closing Sycamore Drive, Maple Avenue, and a storm drainage
582-99   4-28-99 easement in the Sycamore Hill Subdivision and Sycamore Drive,
                 Berry Terrace, and Maple Avenue in the First Addition to
                 Sycamore Hill Subdivision.
8-03     7-9-03  Closing a public street known as Reynolds Road.
10-11    1-11-12 Closing a public alley on the north side of Kennedy Road
                 between Rosa and Lake Streets.
01-2025  2-19-25 Closing a portion of Williamscreek Way.
                
 
TABLE IV. ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Rezoning the approximately 36-acre area located between
363-1986 8-13-86     Dixie Highway and I-75, extending northeast from Citizens
                     National Bank, from PO-2 (Professional Office Building-2)
                     to PO-l (Professional Office Building-1)
                     Rezoning the area of approximately 1.8 acres located at
                     the southwest corner of the intersection of Kyles Lane
373-1987 4-l-87      with Madison Pike (S.R. 17) from HC (Highway Commercial)
                     and R-lC (Single-Family Residential) to NC (Neighborhood
                     Commercial), contingent upon certain conditions
                     Rezoning an approximately 23-acre area located on the west
                     side of Old Madison Pike, approximately 800 feet southwest
376-1987 6-3-87      of the intersection of Old Madison Pike and Madison Pike
                     (S.R. 17), from R-RE and R-lD (Single-Family Residential
                     zones) to I-l (Industrial), contingent upon certain
                     conditions
396-1988 12-10-88    Rezoning the following areas:
                     (1)An approximate one-acre area located approximately 450
                     feet south of Dixie Highway and approximately 1,400 feet
                   northeast of Kyles Lane from NC (Neighborhood Commercial
                     Zone) to PO-1 (Professional Office Building Zone) (Area
                     1).
                     (2)An approximate 1.6 acre located approximately 800 feet
                   south of Dixie Highway and approximately 1,600 feet
                     northeast of Kyles Lane from R-1FF (a Single- and Two-
                     Family Residential Zone) to PO-1 (Area 2).
                     (3)An approximately .5-acre area located approximately
                   1,100 feet south of Dixie Highway and approximately 1,600
                     feet northeast of Kyles Lane from R-1FF to PO-1 (Area 3).
                     Rezoning an approximate 1-acre area located approximately
410-1989 10-4-89     1,000 feet south of Dixie Highway between Kyles Lane and
                     Saint Josephs Lane, approximately 1,700 feet east of Kyles
                     Lane, from PO to PO-1 (Area B).
                     Rezoning an approximate 11-acre area located along the
                     north side of Dixie Highway between Old State Road and
411-1989 10-4-89     Saint James Avenue, approximately 500 feet of Old State
                     Road, from R-1D as regulated by the Kenton County Zoning
                     Ordinance to R-1D.
                     Rezoning an approximate 12.5 - acre area located along the
                     south side of Highland Pike and the east side of Kyles
                     Lane (S.R. 1072), approximately 800 feet east and 300 feet
423-1990 - - 90      south of the intersection of Kyles Lane (S.R. 1072) with
                     Highland from R-1C (a detached single-family residential
                     zone) to R-1G-RCD (a detached single-family residential
                     zone with a residential cluster development overlay zone),
                     with conditions.
                     Rezoning seven acres, more or less, located along Old
                     Kentucky State Route 17, beginning with the center line of
                     Madison Pike (Old Kentucky State Route 17), where it
                     intersects with the west lot line of Maurice Station
                     Subdivision, lot #1; thence following the center line of
                     Madison Pike (Old Kentucky State Route 17) west to a point
424-1990 3-22-90     where it meets the southern city limits of Fort Wright (a
                     point commonly known as Chisel Bridge); thence following
                     the Fort Wright boundary east to the point where it
                     intersects with the southwest corner of Maurice Station
                     Subdivision, lot #1 to the beginning point from R-1D (a
                     detached single family residential zone) to I-1 (an
                     industrial one zone).
                     Rezoning an approximate 2.5-acre area located across
                     Highland Pike, along the southeast side of Madison Pike
438-1991 2-6-91      (S.R. 17) between Orphanage Road and Kyles Lane,
                     approximately 1,200 feet northeast of Orphanage Road, from
                     IP (an industrial park zone) to HC (a highway commercial
                     zone), with conditions.
459-1992 4-16-92     Amending Ordinance No. 438-1990 granting a zone change
                     subject to conditions.
463-1992 10-7-92     Amending Ordinance Nos. 438-1990 and 459-1992 granting a
                     zone change subject to conditions.
                     Rezoning an approximately eleven (11) acre site located on
470-1993 4-7-93      Orphanage Road from R-IC and MHP-RIF to HC subject to
                     conditions.
                     Rezoning an approximate 3,400 square feet area located
476-1993 9-1-9       southeast of Madison Pike and northeast of Highland Pike
                     from IP to HC subject to conditions.
                     Rezoning an approximate 4.1-acre site located along the
477-1993 7-21-93     south side of Orphanage Road between Madison Pike and
                     Horsebranch Road from R-1C to HC subject to conditions.
482-1993 10-6-93     Amending the conditions of Ord. 477-1993 which rezoned a
                     4.1-acre tract from R-1C to HC.
                     Rezoning an approximate 2.3-acre tract and an approximate
                     .2-acre tract located south of Orphanage Road between
483-1993 10-20-93    Madison Pike and Horsebranch Road from R-1C to HC, and
                     amending the development plan for an approximate 2-acre
                     area located along the south side of Orphanage Road.
487-1994 1-26-94     Rezoning the following tract:
                     (1)An approximate 68-acre area located at the intersection
                   of Madison Pike with Orphanage Road from R-1C, HC, IP and
                     I-1 to HOC;
                   (2)An approximate .2-acre area located west of Madison
                     Pike and north of Orphanage Road from HC I-1;
                     (3)An approximate 39-acre area located at the intersection
                   of Madison Pike with Highland Avenue from R-Re, R-1D, HC,
                     IP, and I-1 to CC;
                     (4)An approximate 3-acre area located northeast of
                   Highland Pike and northwest of Madison Pike, from R-Re to
                     I-1;
                   (5)An approximate 6-acre area located northwest of Madison
                     Pike and to the rear of subsection (6) (P) OP;
                   (6)An approximate 19-acre area located along the northwest
                     side of Madison Pike from R-1C to R-1C (P) OP;
                     (7)An approximate .5-acre area located along the southwest
                   side of Kyles Lane between Madison Pike and Highland
                     Avenue from R-1C to R-1C (P) NC;
                     (8)An approximate 27-acre area located along the southeast
                   side of Madison Pike, extending from the intersection with
                     Kyles Lane, to the proposed KY 16/KY 17 connector road
                     from R-3, NC, and I-1 to IP.
                     4-1-98Rezoning an approximate 11.7 acre area located along
565-1998            the east side of Madison Pike, across from Dudley Pike,
                     from I-2 to HOC.
                     Rezoning an approximate 13.4 acre area located along
572-98   6-3-98      Lakeview Drive and Electric Drive southeast of Madison
                     Pike, from IP to R-ID (P) IP.
                     Rezoning the southeast portion of Area A, an approximate
                     20.9 acre area located approximately 500 feet north of
                     Orphanage Road and approximately 1,200 feet west of
576-98   10-7-98     Madison Pike, from R-1C to HOC; and rezoning Area B, an
                     approximate 46.7 acre area located at the southwest corner
                     of the intersection of Madison Pike with Highland Pike,
                     from R-1C, CC, and HOC to NSC.
                     Rezoning an approximate 6 acre area owned by Ashley
586-99   8-11-99     Development located at the northwest and southwest corners
                     of the intersection of Highland Pike with Reeves Drive
                     from R-2 to R-1C.
                     Rezoning an approximate 9 acre area located along the
590-99   9-8-99      southwest side of highland Pike, between Reeves Drive and
                     Madison Pike, approximately 700 feet southwest of Reeves
                     Drive, from R-2 to R-1C.
                     Rezoning an approximate 4 acre area located along the
4-03     1-22-03     northwest side of Madison Pike between Highland Pike and
                     Kyles Lane, approximately 200 feet southwest of Kyles
                     Lane, from R-1D(P)OP, R-1C(P)OP, and R-1D to OP.
                     Rezoning an approximate 21.6 acre area located at the
17-03    12-10-03    northwest corner of the intersection of Orphanage Road
                     with Madison Pike from R-1C, CC and HOC to CC.
                     Rezoning an approximate 1.1 acre area located on the west
                     side of Sleepy Hollow Road between Dixie Highway and
2-06     1-11-06     Amsterdam Road, approximately 900 feet north of Dixie
                     Highway from R-2 (a Two Family and Multi Family Zone) to
                     R-1EE (a Single Family and two family residential zone).
                     Rezoning an approximate 40 acre area located along the
                     west side of Old Madison Pike, approximately 0.25 miles
                     south of Helen Ruth Drive, and approximately 0.5 miles
5-06     3-7-06      north of Warren Street, from R-1D and R-1D(P)IP (a Single
                     Family Residential Zone Phased to an Industrial Zone) and
                     R-RE (A Residential Rural Estate Zone) to R-ID (RCD) (a
                     Single Family Residential Zone with a Residential Cluster
                     Overlay Zone).
                     Rezoning an approximate 200 acre area located along both
                     sides of Madison Pike (KY 17) between Kyles Lane and I-275
                     from IP and I-1 (Industrial Zones), CC, NC (Commercial
12-06    6-7-06      Zones), OP (an Office Park Zone), R-RE (A Residential
                     Rural Estate Zone), and R-1C(P)NC, R-1D(P)(IP) (Single
                     Family Residential Zones with Phased Commercial Office,
                     and Industrial Zones) to TCFD (Town Center Form District)
                     Zone.
                     Rezoning an approximate 2 acre area located along the west
14-06    8-2-06      side of Madison Pike approximately 500 Feet South of
                     Dudley Pike, from IP (an Industrial Park Zone) to HC (a
                     Highway Commercial Zone).
                     Rezoning an approximate 1.5 acre area located on the North
                     Side of I-71/75, approximately 550 feet east of Wright
9-07     12-5-07     Summit Parkway from PO-1 and PO-3 (Professional Office
                     Zones) to R-1FF (A single family and two-family
                     residential zone with a maximum density of 7.3 to 9.7
                     dwelling units per net acre).
                     Rezoning an approximate 0.8 acre area located on the
                     Northwest corner of Highland Pike and Kyles Lane from R-
2-09     2-4-09      1CC to R-1FF (A single family and two-family residential
                     zone with a maximum density of 7.3 to 9.7 dwelling units
                     per net acre.
                     Rezoning an approximate 533 acre area located on the
6-09     4-1-09      southeast corner of Kyles Lane and Dixie Highway from PO-
                     1 (a Professional Office Zone) and LHS (a Limited Highway
                     Service Zone) to CC (A Community Commercial Zone).
                     Rezoning an approximate 200 acre area located along both
                     sides of Madison Pike (KY 17) between Kyles Lane from TCFD
                     (Town Center Form District) Zone to I-1 (Industrial Zones,
12-09    7-15-09     CC, NC (Commercial Zones), OP (an Office Park Zone), R-RE
                     (a Residential Rural Estate Zone), and R-1C (P)NC, R-1D
                     (P)IP (Single Family Residential Zones with Phased
                     Commercial, Office, and Industrial zones).
                     Approving a proposed Stage I Development Plan for an area
                     of approximately 1.2 acres located approximately 350 feet
01-11    1-19-11     west of Madison Pike, between Highland Pike and Kyles
                     Lane, approximately 350 feet north of Highland Pike,
                     currently zoned CC (Community Commercial).
                     Approving a proposed Stage I Development Plan for an area
                     of approximately 3.8 acres located on the south side of
4-11     5-4-11      Orphanage Road, between Horsebranch Road an Valley Plaza
                     Drive, approximately 2,000 feet east of Horsebranch Road,
                     currently zoned HOC (Highway Oriented Commercial).
                     Approving a proposed Stage I Development Plan for an area
16-13    12-4-13     of approximately 0.909 acre located at 3396 Madison Pike,
                     currently zoned CC (Community Commercial).
                     Rezoning an approximate 4.0 acre site located on the west
                     side of Dixie Highway, between Barrington Road and Sleepy
13-14    10-1-14     Hollow Road, approximately 600 feet north of Barrington
                     Road, from R-2 (a density of ten dwelling units per acre)
                     and LHS (a limited highway service zone) to CC (Community
                     Commercial Zone)
                     Approving a proposed Stage I Development Plan for an
                     approximate 1.9 acre area located at the west side of
1-15     3-3-15      Madison Pike, between Orphanage Road and Highland Pike,
                     approximately 300 feet of Orphanage Road, currently zoned
                     HOC (Highway Oriented Commercial Zone) and NSC
                     (Neighborhood Shopping Center).
                     Approving a proposed Stage I Development Plan for an
07-2015  6-3-15      approximately .85 acres of area located at 3394 Madison
                     Pike, currently zoned CC (Community Commercial Zone).
                     Rezoning an approximate 12- acre area located on the
05-16    7-6-16      northeast corner of Sleepy Hollow Road and Dixie Highway
                     from R-1D (a single-family zone) and R-2 (a multi- family
                     zone) to INST (Institutional Zone).
                     Rezoning an approximate 1.5- acre area located on the east
                     side of Madison Pike, located between Highland Pike to the
10-16    12-7-16     south and Lakeview Drive to the north, approximately 500
                     north of Highland Pike, from IP (Industrial Park) to CC
                     (Community Commercial).
                     Approving the proposed Stage I Development Plan for an
                     approximate 3.47 acre area on the east side of Old Madison
5-17     4-5-17      Pike, between Madison Pike (KY17) to the north, and
                     Williams Creek Way to the south, approximately 1,000 feet
                     south of Madison Pike, which is currently zoned IP
                     (Industrial Park).
                     Rezoning an approximate 6.21 acre area located on the
                     northeast corner of the intersection of Kentucky Route 17
06-2017  5-3-17      and Howard Litzler Drive, from R-1G (Residential One-G)
                     with a RCD (Residential Cluster Development Overlay) to an
                     IP (Industrial Park Zone).
                     Approving the Stage I Development Plan for an approximate
11-2018  9-19-18     0.55 acre area located on the southwest corner of the
                     intersection of George Huser Drive with Dixie Highway,
                     currently zoned CC (Community Commercial).
                     Approving the amended Stage I Development Plan for
01-2019  3-6-19      approximately 5.8 acres located on the north side of
                     Viewpoint Drive, approximately 500 feet west of
                     Valleyplaza Parkway, currently zoned HOC (C-PUD).
                    
 
TABLE V. ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Annexing certain property beginning at a point in the
405-1989 9-6-89      southerly right-of-way line of Dixie Highway, said point
                     also being the northwest corner of the Sisters of Notre
                     Dame property.
                     Annexing certain property beginning at the point of
409-1989 - 89        intersection of the centerline of St. James Avenue
                     extended, and the north right-of-way line of Old State
                     Road.
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to
Kentucky Revised Statutes
References to
1977 Code
References to
Ordinances
REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES
KRS Section Code Section
KRS Section             Code Section
Section 43, Ky. Const.  32.48
Section 157, Ky. Const. 33.03
Section 165, Ky. Const. 38.12
Section 181, Ky. Const. 110.01
                        31.01,
                        31.36,
Section 228, Ky. Const. 31.37,
                        31.38,
                        35.12
Section 246, Ky. Const. 31.02
6.050                   32.48
6.955 - 6.975           33.04
Ch. 13A                 93.02
Ch. 13B                 93.05
Ch. 18A                 116.04
18A.225(2)              116.04
Ch. 31                  34.16
39A.020                 Ch. 132
41.240(4)               33.05
42.450 - 42.495         33.04
Ch. 45A                 34.16
Ch. 56                  34.16
                        33.07,
Ch. 58                  35.65,
                        35.66
58.180                  33.07
58.1801 et seq.         33.07
Ch. 61                  32.21
61.080                  38.12
61.090                  38.12
61.168                  34.16
61.169                  34.16
61.252                  38.11
61.805(2)               34.01
61.810                  38.13,
                        38.89
61.815                  38.13
61.823(2) - (4)         91.15
61.870 - 61.882         31.36
                        34.05,
61.870 - 61.884         34.17,
                        38.93
61.870                  34.01
61.870(1)(h)            34.01
61.870(10)(a) - (f)     34.05
61.872(1)               34.05
61.872(2)               34.05
61.872(3)               34.05
61.872(4)               34.06
61.872(5)               34.07
61.872(6)               34.08
61.874(1) - (3)         34.12
61.874(1)               34.05
61.874(2)(b)            34.05
61.874(3)               34.13
61.874(4)               34.05,
                        34.13
61.874(5)               34.05,
                        34.14
61.874(6)               34.05,
                        34.15
61.876                  34.05
61.876(4)               34.05
61.878                  34.01,
                        34.16
61.878(1)               34.16
61.880                  34.09
61.880(1)               34.16
61.882                  34.09,
                        35.53
61.884                  34.11
62.020                  31.01
65.003                  38.03
65.067                  31.01
65.120                  Ch. 72
65.7041 - 65.7083       35.65
65.8801 et seq.         92.02
                        35.51,
65.8801 - 65.8839       35.60,
                        35.64
65.8801 - 65.8839(1)    92.04 ,
                        92.23
65.8801 - 65.8840       92.04 ,
                        92.23
65.8802(2)(b)           110.99
65.8811                 35.50
65.8811(1)(a)           35.50
65.8811(1)(b)           35.50
65.8836                 35.61
65.8840(1)              92.02
65.8840(6)              92.01
65.8840(8)              92.10,
                        92.27
65.8840(9)              92.27
65.8840(10)             92.10
67.750 - 67.795         110.25
67.753                  110.27
67.753(2)               110.27
67.753(3)               110.27
67.753(4)               110.27
82.082                  38.03,
                        110.01
82.400                  150.04
83A.010(5)              10.02
83A.010(6)              10.02
83A.010(7)              10.02
83A.010(8)              10.02
83A.010(10)             10.02
83A.030(1)              30.02
83A.040                 31.20
83A.040(1)              31.21
83A.040(2)              31.21
83A.040 (2)(c)          31.21
83A.040 (2)(d)          31.21
83A.040 (3)             31.21
83A.040(4)              32.01
83A.040(5)              32.02
83A.040(6)              31.21,
                        32.02
83A.040(7)              31.21,
                        32.02
83A.040(8)              31.21, 32,02
83A.040(9)              31.03
83A.045(2)(b)1.         31.20
83A.050                 31.20
83A.060(1)              32.35
83A.060(2)              32.36
83A.060(3)              32.37,
                        150.05
83A.060(4)              32.38
83A.060(5)              32.40
83A.060(6)              32.22
83A.060(7)              32.38
83A.060(8)              32.41,
                        32.42
83A.060(9)              32.43
83A.060(10)             32.44
83A.060(11)             32.45
83A.060(12)             32.46
83A.060(13)             32.46
83A.060(14)             32.47
83A.060(15)             32.48
83A.065                 10.02,
                        93.99
83A.065(1)-(8)          120.99
83A.065(4)              120.99
83A.070                 31.02
83A.075                 31.02
                        31.35,
83A.080                 31.37,
                        38.04
83A.080(2)              31.03
83A.080(3)              31.20
83A.080(4)              31.20
83A.085                 31.36
83A.090                 10.18,
                        31.37
                        10.18,
83A.130                 31.21,
                        113.05
83A.130(1)              30.01
83A.130(2)              30.02
83A.130(3)              31.21
83A.130(4)              31.21
83A.130(5)              32.20
83A.130(6)              32.39
83A.130(7)              31.21
83A.130(8)              31.21
83A.130(9)              31.21
83A.130(10)             31.21
83A.130(11)             32.03,
                        32.21
83A.130(12)             32.03, (C)
83A.130(13)             32.03
83A.175                 32.02
83A.175(2) - (7)        31.20
91A.010(6)              33.01
91A.010(7)              33.01
91A.010(8)              10.02
91A.020                 33.02
91A.030                 33.03
91A.040                 33.04
91A.050                 33.04
91A.060                 33.05
91A.200                 33.11
91A.210                 33.10
91A.220                 33.11
91A.230                 33.12
91A.240                 33.13
91A.250                 33.14
91A.260                 33.15
91A.270                 33.16
91A.280                 33.17
91A.290                 33.18
92.280                  110.01
92.281                  110.01
Ch. 96                  71.26
97.010 - 97.050         97.15
Ch. 100                 153.01,
                        153.02
100.217(4)              153.02
Ch. 107                 33.11
Chs. 116 - 121          31.20
Ch. 118                 31.20
121.180                 31.20
131.010(6)              116.05
131.183                 116.05
132.285                 37.01
134.800 et seq.         37.02
134.810                 37.02
Ch. 136                 37.20
136.270(3)              37.02
136.270(4)              114.02
Ch. 154                 34.16
174.100                 91.15
174.100(1)              91.16 ,
                        91.17
174.100(2)              91.17
174.100(3)              91.18
174.100(4)              91.19
174.100(5)              91.20
186.560                 71.25
189.020                 71.27
189.285                 73.02
189.287                 73.01
189.290                 71.25
189.330(8)              71.02
189.338                 70.15
189.394                 71.05
189.450(5)              72.03
189.450(6)              72.03
189.580                 71.15
189.700                 71.40
189.725                 72.08
189.930                 71.26
189.990(1)              70.99
189.993(8)              71.26
Ch. 198B                150.05
198B.050                150.20
198B.070(1)             150.33
198B.070(3)             150.33
198B.070(4)             150.33
198B.990(1)             150.99
Ch. 217                 92.20
Ch. 218A                92.20
218B.130                124.01,
                        124.02
224.1.010(30)(a)        92.02
226.010                 117.01
226.020                 117.02
226.030                 117.07
226.040                 117.03
226.050                 117.04
226.060                 117.08
226.070                 117.03
226.080                 117.05
226.090                 117.06
226.100                 117.08
226.990(1)              117.99
226.990(3)              117.99
227.300                 92.03
227.320                 92.03
227.450 - 227.500       150.22
227.450 et seq.         150.22
227.489                 150.20
227.550(11)             92.02
227.700 - 227.750       93.01,
                        93.05
227.700                 93.01
227.702                 93.01 -
                        93.03
227.702(1)              93.03
227.704                 93.01
227.706                 93.01
227.708                 93.01
227.710                 93.02
227.715                 93.02
227.715(7) - (9)        93.03
227.720                 93.04
227.730                 93.04
227.740                 93.04
227.750                 93.05
227.990(1)              150.99
227.990(4)              93.99
Chs. 241 - 244          112.02
241.010(28)             112.01
241.010(41)             112.01
241.010(59)             112.01
241.010(81)             112.01
241.160                 112.38
241.190                 112.38
Ch. 242                 112.01
Ch. 243                 112.17
243.500                 112.99
243.520                 112.38
Ch. 244                 112.17
244.290                 112.50
244.480                 112.50
257.100                 90.06
Ch. 258                 90.15
                        33.07,
Ch. 273                 35.65,
                        35.66
273.161 et seq.         33.07
273.171                 33.07
Ch. 281                 72.21
318.990                 150.99
Ch. 367                 118.01
411.500 - 411.570       Ch. 92
                        32.43,
Ch. 424                 33.04,
                        33.14,
                        33.15
424.190(2)              33.04
424.220                 33.04
436.600                 90.04,
                        90.99
446.010(1)              10.02
446.010(2)              10.02
446.010(9)              10.02
446.010(10)             10.02
446.010(12)             10.02
446.010(13)             10.02
446.010(14)             10.02
446.010(15)             10.02
446.010(17)             10.02
446.010(18)             10.02
446.010(23)             10.02
446.010(25)             10.02
446.010(26)             10.02
446.010(27)             10.02
446.010(28)             10.02
446.010(30)             10.02
446.010(31)             10.02
446.010(33)             10.02
446.010(37)             10.02
446.010(39)             10.02
446.010(43)             10.02
446.010(46)             10.02
446.010(47)             10.02
446.010(50)             10.02
446.010(55)             10.02
446.020(1)              10.03
446.020(2)              10.03
446.030                 10.04
446.050                 10.05
446.060                 10.06
446.080(1)              10.03
446.080(3)              10.03
446.080(4)              10.03
446.090                 10.07
446.100                 10.08
446.110                 10.09
446.140                 10.01
Ch. 503                 136.01
506.010                 Ch. 138
506.030                 Ch. 138
506.040                 Ch. 138
506.080                 Ch. 138
506.120                 Ch. 138
507.020                 Ch. 130
507.030                 Ch. 130
507.040                 Ch. 130
507.050                 Ch. 130
508.010                 Ch. 130
508.020                 Ch. 130
508.025                 Ch. 130
508.030                 Ch. 130
508.040                 Ch. 130
508.050                 Ch. 130
508.060                 Ch. 130
508.070                 Ch. 130
508.080                 Ch. 130
508.100                 Ch. 130
508.110                 Ch. 130
508.120                 Ch. 130
509.020                 Ch. 130
509.030                 Ch. 130
509.040                 Ch. 130
509.070                 Ch. 130
509.080                 Ch. 130
510.040                 Ch. 137
510.050                 Ch. 137
510.060                 Ch. 137
510.070                 Ch. 137
510.080                 Ch. 137
510.090                 Ch. 137
510.100                 Ch. 137
510.110                 Ch. 137
510.120                 Ch. 137
510.130                 Ch. 137
510.140                 Ch. 137
510.150                 Ch. 137
511.020                 Ch. 132
511.030                 Ch. 132
511.040                 Ch. 132
511.050                 Ch. 132
511.060                 Ch. 132
511.070                 Ch. 132
511.080                 Ch. 132
512.020                 Ch. 132
512.030                 Ch. 132
512.050                 Ch. 132
512.060                 Ch. 132
512.070                 Ch. 132
512.080                 Ch. 132
513.020                 Ch. 132
513.030                 Ch. 132
513.040                 Ch. 132
513.060                 Ch. 132
514.030                 Ch. 132
514.040                 Ch. 132
514.050                 Ch. 132
514.060                 Ch. 132
514.065                 Ch. 132
514.070                 Ch. 132
514.080                 Ch. 132
514.090                 Ch. 132
514.100                 Ch. 132
514.110                 Ch. 132
514.120                 Ch. 132
514.140                 Ch. 132
514.150                 Ch. 132
515.020                 Ch. 132
515.030                 Ch. 132
516.020                 Ch. 132
516.030                 Ch. 132
516.040                 Ch. 132
516.050                 Ch. 132
516.060                 Ch. 132
516.070                 Ch. 132
516.090                 Ch. 132
516.110                 Ch. 132
516.120                 Ch. 132
516.130                 Ch. 132
519.020                 Ch. 135
519.030                 Ch. 135
519.040                 Ch. 135
519.050                 Ch. 135
519.060                 Ch. 135
520.020                 Ch. 135
520.030                 Ch. 135
520.040                 Ch. 135
520.050                 Ch. 135
520.060                 Ch. 135
520.070                 Ch. 135
520.080                 Ch. 135
520.090                 Ch. 135
520.100                 Ch. 135
520.120                 Ch. 135
520.130                 Ch. 135
521.020                 Ch. 135
521.030                 Ch. 135
521.040                 Ch. 135
522.020                 Ch. 135
522.030                 Ch. 135
522.040                 Ch. 135
523.020                 Ch. 135
523.030                 Ch. 135
523.040                 Ch. 135
523.100                 Ch. 135
524.020                 Ch. 135
524.030                 Ch. 135
524.040                 Ch. 135
524.045                 Ch. 135
524.050                 Ch. 135
524.060                 Ch. 135
524.070                 Ch. 135
524.080                 Ch. 135
524.090                 Ch. 135
524.100                 Ch. 135
524.110                 Ch. 135
524.120                 Ch. 135
524.130                 Ch. 135
525.020                 136.02
525.030                 136.02
525.040                 136.02
525.050                 136.02
525.060                 136.02
525.070                 136.02
525.080                 136.02
525.090                 136.02
525.100                 136.02
525.110                 136.02
525.120                 136.02
525.125                 90.03,
                        136.02
                        90.03,
525.130                 90.99,
                        136.02
525.140                 136.02
525.150                 136.02
525.160                 136.02
526.020                 136.02
526.030                 136.02
526.040                 136.02
526.050                 136.02
526.060                 136.02
528.020                 Ch. 134
528.030                 Ch. 134
528.040                 Ch. 134
528.050                 Ch. 134
528.060                 Ch. 134
528.070                 Ch. 134
528.080                 Ch. 134
528.110                 Ch. 134
528.120                 Ch. 134
529.020                 Ch. 133
529.040                 Ch. 133
529.050                 Ch. 133
529.070                 Ch. 133
529.080                 Ch. 133
530.010                 Ch. 131
530.020                 Ch. 131
530.030                 Ch. 131
530.040                 Ch. 131
530.050                 Ch. 131
530.060                 Ch. 131
530.064                 Ch. 131
530.065                 Ch. 131
530.070                 Ch. 131
530.080                 Ch. 131
531.020                 Ch. 133
531.030                 Ch. 133
531.040                 Ch. 133
531.050                 Ch. 133
531.060                 Ch. 133
531.310                 Ch. 133
531.320                 Ch. 133
531.340                 Ch. 133
531.350                 Ch. 133
531.360                 Ch. 133
531.370                 Ch. 133
532.060                 139.04
532.070                 139.04
                        10.02,
532.090                 93.99,
                        139.02
532.090(1)              92.99,
                        110.99
534.030                 139.03
534.040                 139.01
534.040(2)              93.99
534.040(2)(a)           10.02
534.040(2)(c)           10.02,
                        71.06
534.050(2)(a)           92.99,
                        110.99
                        
 
REFERENCES TO 1977 CODE
1977 CODE SECTION CODE SECTION
1977 CODE SECTION CODE SECTION
2-1               11.01
2-2               30.02(B)
2-3               32.21(A), (B)
2-5               33.06
2-7               31.37
2-7.1             31.36(A), (B)
2-17              153.02(A)
2-18              153.02(B)
2-19              153.02(C)
3-1               112.01
3-2               112.02
3-3               31.37(C),
                  112.03
3-15              112.15
3-16              112.16(A)
3-17              112.16(C)
3-18              112.17
3-19              112.18(A) - (E)
3-20              112.19
3-21              112.20(A)
3-22              112.21
3-23              112.22
3-24              112.23
3-25              112.20(B)
3-26              112.25
3-27              112.24
4-16              113.15
4-17              113.16
4-31              113.35
4-32              113.36
4-33              113.37
4-34              113.38(A)
4-35              113.39
4-36              113.38(B)
4-37              113.40
4-38              113.41
4-39              113.42
4-40              113.43
4-51              113.01
4-52              113.02
4-53              113.04
4-54              113.03
4-55              113.05
5-2               90.15
5-16              90.15
5-17              90.16
5-18              90.17
5-19              90.19
5-20              90.20
5-21              90.21
5-22              90.22
6-l               150.30(A)
6-2               150.31
6-18.l            150.03
6-19(a)           150.15
6-20              150.32
6-27              150.30(B)
6-28              150.30(C)
6-29              150.30(D)
6-30              150.30(E)
6-31              150.30(F)
6-32              150.30(G)
6-36              150.33
7-2               93.23
7-3               93.22
8-2               51.01
8-3               51.02
8-4               51.03
8-5               51.04
8-6               51.05
8-7               51.06
8-8               51.07
8-9               51.08
9-2               136.01(A)
9-3               136.01(B)
9-4               136.01(C)
9-5               118.01
9-66              119.01(A)
9-67              119.01(B)
9-68              119.02
9-69              119.03
9-70              119.04
9-71              119.05
9-72              119.99
10-16             35.10
10-18             35.12(B)
10-19             35.13
10-20             35.14(A)
10-22             35.14(B)
10-23             35.14(C)
10-24             35.14(D)
10-26             35.14(E)
10-27             35.15(A)
10-28             35.15(B)
10-29             35.15(C)
10-30             35.15(D)
12-2              91.34
12-4              91.02
12-17             91.45(A), (B)
12-18             91.46
12-19             91.47
12-20             91.45(C)
12-21             91.48
12-22             91.49
12-23             91.50
12-24             91.51
13-1              152.01
13-2              152.02
14-1              37.01
14-35(a)          116.02
14-35(b)          116.01
14-35(c)          116.03
14-35(d)          116.04
14-35(e)          116.06
14-35(f)          116.05
15-11             72.03,
                  72.98
15-21             72.13
15-22             72.14
15-23             72.20,
                  72.22
16-16             50.01
16-17             50.02
16-18             50.15
16-19             50.16
16-29             50.32
16-30             50.33
16-31             50.34(B)
16-32             50.34(A)
16-33             50.35
16-34             50.36
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
ORD. NO. DATE CODE SECTION
ORD. NO. DATE     CODE SECTION
194(LH)  5-11-64  93.23
210(LH)  6-18-65  91.47
                  112.02,
19-1968  3-4-68   112.24,
                  112.25,
                  118.01
21-1968  8-5-68   30.02(B)
                  50.01,
                  50.02,
22-1968  8-5-68   50.15,
                  50.16,
                  50.32 -
                  50.36
40-1969  4-11-69  152.01,
                  152.02
                  150.15,
46-1969  11-14-69 150.30,
                  150.32
57-1969  12-31-69 11.01
69-1971  11-12-71 152.02
81-1973  1-12-73  112.18(A) - (E)
83-1973  4-13-73  51.01 -
                  51.08
93-1974  1-11-74  32.21(A), (B)
104-1974 6-14-74  72.14
110-1975 l-10-75  153.02
119-1975 8-8-75   33.06
120-1975 8-8-75   150.30(A)
122-1975 8-8-75   113.15,
                  113.16
123-1975 8-8-75   31.37(C),
                  112.03
                  112.01,
                  112.15 -
125-1975 10-10-75 112.17,
                  112.19 -
                  112.23
126-1975 11-14-75 50.02
133-1976 8-13-76  150.03
                  35.10,
143-1977 10-14-77 35.12(B),
                  35.13 -
                  35.15
148-1977 12-8-77  30.02(B)
162-1978 5-5-78   72.03,
                  72.98
                  112.01,
167-1978 7-14-78  112.18(A) - (E),
                  112.21
168-1978 7-14-78  112.21
175-1978 11-10-78 150.33
176-1978 11-10-78 50.02
182-1979 1-12-79  153.02(B)
186-1979 3-9-79   150.15
188-1979 6-8-79   30.02(B)
19l-1979 6-8-79   112.21
203-1980 2-8-80   150.33
233-1981 3-25-81  Ch. 119
238-1981 5-27-81  31.37
245-1981 8-26-81  113.35 -
                  113.43
246-1981 8-26-81  113.01 -
                  113.05
255-1981 10-28-81 93.22
269-1982 - -      151.01
270-1982 9-1-82   50.46 -
                  50.48
271-1982 9-1-82   31.36(A), (B)
                  90.15 -
280-1982 11-22-82 90.17,
                  90.19 -
                  90.22
286-1982 12-1-82  37.01
287-1983 2-2-83   150.16
289-1983 - -83    32.20(B)
295-1983 8-3-83   150.31
311-1983 - -83    T.S.O. I
314-1983 - -83    T.S.O. III
317-1984 2-1-84   32.21(A), (B)
318-1984 4-4-84   113.41
328-1984 9-5-84   Ch. 116
335-1984 10-18-84 Ch. 116
                  93.30 -
-1985    - -85    93.36,
                  93.99(C)
348-1985 10-2-85  36.01
349-1985 10-7-85  37.02
350-1985 10-7-85  51.09
351-1985 12-4-85  Ch. 114
352-1985 1-8-86   Ch. 115
353-1985 1-8-86   112.35 -
                  112.38
360-1986 8-6-86   150.04
361-1986 8-6-86   150.16
362-1986 8-6-86   94.02,
                  94.99
363-1986 8-13-86  T.S.O. IV
371-1986 - -86    T.S.O. I
373-1987 4-1-87   T.S.O. IV
375-1987 6-3-87   T.S.O. II
376-1987 6-3-87   T.S.O. IV
378-1987 7-1-87   Adopting Ordinance
380-1987 9-5-87   36.01
387-1988 6-1-88   T.S.O. II
388-1988 6-1-88   33.07
391-1988 9-7-88   37.02(B)
392-1988 9-7-88   51.09
393-1988 12-10-88 31.20
396-1988 12-10-88 T.S.O. IV
398-1989 2-1-89   150.16(F)
403-1989 4-5-89   T.S.O. III
405-1989 9-6-89   T.S.O. V
406-1989 9-6-89   70.99
407-1989 10-4-89  51.09
408-1989 10-4-89  37.02(B)
409-1989 - -89    T.S.O. V
410-1989 10-4-89  T.S.O. IV
411-1989 10-4-89  T.S.O. IV
419-1990 2-7-90   T.S.O. I
423-1990 - - 90   T.S.O. IV
424-1990 3-22-90  T.S.O. IV
426-1990 - - 90   Ch. 110
431-1990 6-28-90  90.16 -
                  90.22
433-1990 10-3-90  37.02
434-1990 10-3-90  51.09
436-1991 1-2-91   32.21
438-1991 2-6-91   T.S.O. IV
                  150.20 -
440-1991 2-6-91   150.23,
                  150.25,
                  150.99
441-1991 2-6-91   32.21
442-1991 2-6-91   T.S.O. II
445-1991 - - 91   150.24
453-1991 10-17-91 51.09
454-1992 2-5-92   Ch. 92
456-1991 4-1-92   112.26,
                  112.35
458-1992 4-1-92   150.01
459-1992 4-16-92  T.S.O. IV
461-1992 10-7-92  37.02
462-1992 10-7-92  51.09
463-1992 10-7-92  T.S.O. IV
464-1992 10-7-92  95.01 -
                  95.05
466-1992 12-10-92 T.S.O. I
470-1993 4-7-93   T.S.O. IV
471-1993 4-7-93   93.22,
                  93.99(D)
476-1993 9-1-93   T.S.O. IV
477-1993 7-21-93  T.S.O. IV
480-1993 9-15-93  37.02
481-1993 9-15-93  51.09
482-1993 10-6-93  T.S.O. IV
483-1993 10-20-93 T.S.O. IV
487-1994 1-26-94  T.S.O. IV
489-1994 5-4-94   32.21
490-1994 6-1-94   70.99(A) - (B)
491-1994 5-4-94   90.30 -
                  90.33
495-1994 10-5-94  37.02(D)
496-1994 10-5-94  37.02
497-1994 10-19-94 150.16(G)
                  38.03,
                  38.04,
                  38.10,
                  38.11,
                  38.14 -
                  38.17,
                  38.21,
498-1994 11-16-94 38.40 -
                  38.45,
                  38.60,
                  38.80 -
                  38.82,
                  38.84,
                  38.87 -
                  38.93,
                  38.99
501-95   6-7-95   50.48
505-95   6-21-95  Ch. 96
509-95   9-9-95   Ch. 110
511-95   9-14-95  Adopting Ordinance
512-95   9-14-95  51.09
515-95   10-4-95  50.48
522-96   2-2-96   Ch. 114
525-96   4-17-96  96.02
526-1996 5-1-96   112.36,
                  112.37
529-96   9-18-96  37.02(B)
531-1996 9-4-96   37.20
534-1996 11-6-96  153.01
535-96   11-20-96 T.S.O. II
536-96   11-20-96 T.S.O. II
544-97   3-5-97   Adopting Ordinance
545-1997 1-15-97  38.41,
                  38.42
554-97   3-5-97   Adopting Ordinance
548-97   3-18-97  33.30,
                  33.31
553-97   9-3-97   37.02
556-97   10-1-97  T.S.O. II
557-97   10-1-97  51.09
563-98   2-4-98   95.01,
                  95.03
565-98   4-1-98   T.S.O. IV
572-98   6-3-98   T.S.O. IV
573-98   9-2-98   51.09
574-98   9-2-98   Adopting Ordinance
575-98   9-2-98   37.02
576-98   10-7-98  T.S.O. IV
579-99   1-19-99  32.31
                  90.01,
                  90.07,
                  90.15 -
                  90.19,
581-99   4-14-99  90.21,
                  90.30,
                  90.31,
                  90.33,
                  90.99
582-99   4-28-99  T.S.O. III
586-99   8-11-99  T.S.O. IV
587-99   8-25-99  32.21
588-99   9-8-99   37.02
589-99   9-8-99   51.09
590-99   9-8-99   T.S.O. IV
1-00     1-12-00  Ch. 74, Sch. I
2-00     1-26-00  72.03(J)
5-00     3-22-00  31.39
9-88     8-9-00   Ch. 75, Sch. I
12-00    9-13-00  37.02
13-00    9-13-00  51.09
1-01     1-10-01  150.16(E)
2-01     1-24-01  96.02
3-01     4-11-01  31.39
4-01     5-23-01  71.05
10-01    8-22-01  Ch. 74, Sch. I
11-01    10-24-01 Adopting Ordinance
12-01    11-14-01 Ch. 74, Sch. I
13-01    11-28-01 153.01
2-02     3-27-02  96.02
12-02    8-28-02  115.04
13-02    10-9-02  150.02
1-03     1-8-03   91.60 -
                  91.65
2-03     1-8-03   T.S.O. II
3-03     1-22-03  Ch. 75, Sch. II
4-03     1-22-03  T.S.O. IV
5-03     1-22-03  32.21
8-03     7-9-03   T.S.O. III
9-03     7-9-03   97.15,
                  97.16
17-03    12-10-03 T.S.O. IV
                  120.01 -
1-04     1-14-04  120.03,
                  120.99
                  111.01 -
2-04     1-14-04  111.08,
                  111.99
4-05     3-9-05   T.S.O. II
                  97.01 -
5-04     7-14-04  97.06,
                  97.99
11-04    12-8-04  112.50 -
                  112.52
1-05     3-9-05   32.21
3-05     3-9-05   150.05
8-05     6-1-05   153.01
9-05     6-1-05   112.50
1-06     1-11-06  Adopting Ordinance
2-06     1-11-06  T.S.O. IV
5-06     3-7-06   T.S.O. IV
12-06    6-7-06   T.S.O. IV
14-06    8-2-06   T.S.O. IV
15-06    9-8-06   37.02
16-06    9-8-06   51.09
1-07     2-7-07   35.50 -
                  35.53
2-07     2-7-07   T.S.O. II
5-07     9-5-07   51.09
6-07     9-5-07   37.02
                  121.01,
8-07     11-07-07 121.02,
                  121.99
9-07     12-5-07  T.S.O. IV
                  110.01,
                  110.02,
                  110.10 -
10-07    12-5-07  110.16,
                  110.25 -
                  110.31,
                  110.99
2-08     2-6-08   136.03
3-08     3-5-08   T.S.O. II
4-08     3-5-08   32.21
11-08    9-9-08   37.02
12-08    9-9-08   51.09
14-08    12-3-08  110.10
1-09     2-4-09   Ch. 75, Sch. I
2-09     2-4-09   T.S.O. IV
3-09     3-4-09   Ch. 75, Sch. I
5-09     3-4-09   96.02
6-09     4-1-09   T.S.O. IV
7-09     3-4-09   T.S.O. II
9-09     7-1-09   T.S.O. II
12-09    7-15-09  T.S.O. IV
13-2009  8-5-09   70.99
14-09    9-2-09   37.02
15-09    9-2-09   51.09
17-09    1-4-10   150.02
04-10    9-1-10   37.02
05-10    9-1-10   51.09
01-11    1-19-11  T.S.O. IV
4-11     5-4-11   T.S.O. IV
05-11    9-7-11   37.02
6-11     9-7-11   51.09
                  92.20 -
07-11    11-2-11  92.27,
                  92.99
09-11    12-7-11  T.S.O. II
10-11    1-11-12  T.S.O. III
02-12    3-7-12   T.S.O. II
03-12    3-7-12   Adopting Ordinance
12-12    9-5-12   37.02
13-12    9-5-12   51.09
15-12    10-3-12  110.26
16-12    10-3-12  116.03,
                  116.04
                  112.01,
                  112.15 -
1-13     3-6-13   112.17,
                  112.19 -
                  112.23
2-13     4-3-13   37.02
3-13     9-5-13   51.09
09-13    9-4-13   37.02
10-13    9-4-13   51.09
13-13    10-2-13  Ch. 75, Sch. I
14-13    10-2-13  Ch. 75, Sch. I
16-13    12-4-13  T.S.O. IV
17-13    1-8-14   T.S.O. II
18-13    12-18-13 35.65,
                  35.66
02-14    3-5-14   122.01 -
                  122.03
                  112.01,
03-14    3-5-14   112.16,
                  112.21
06-14    6-4-14   92.23,
                  92.99
                  91.03,
08-14    7-16-14  91.45,
                  91.46,
                  91.49
11-14    9-3-14   37.02
12-14    9-3-14   51.09
13-14    10-1-14  T.S.O. IV
14-14A   10-1-14  136.01
15-14    1-7-15   112.50
1-15     3-3-15   T.S.O. IV
03-15    3-3-15   Adopting Ordinance
4-2015   5-6-15   37.02
06-2015  5-6-15   35.11
07-2015  6-3-15   T.S.O. IV
10-2015  6-3-15   35.70 -
                  35.73
                  123.01 -
11-2015  7-1-15   123.06,
                  123.99
12-2015  9-2-15   37.02
13-2015  9-2-15   51.09
                  92.01 -
                  92.05 ,
15-2015  1-20-16  92.09 ,
                  92.10 ,
                  92.99
05-16    7-6-16   T.S.O. IV
07-2016  9-21-16  37.02
08-2016  - - -    51.09
10-16    12-7-16  T.S.O. IV
                  112.18,
11-2016  - - -    112.20,
                  112.21,
                  112.50
12-2016  - - -    35.50 -
                  35.64
                  92.01 -
                  92.05 ,
                  92.10 ,
13-2016  - - -    92.20 ,
                  92.23 ,
                  92.27 ,
                  92.99
1-2017   2-1-17   72.35
2-2017   3-1-17   Ch. 74, Sch. I
3-2017   3-1-17   91.01
4-2017   3-1-17   91.35
5-17     4-5-17   T.S.O. IV
06-2017  5-3-17   T.S.O. IV
12-2017  10-11-17 51.09
13-2017  10-11-17 37.02
03-2018  3-7-18   95.01   
                  95.06
04-2018  5-2-18   136.01
11-2018  9-19-18  T.S.O. IV
12-2018  10-17-18 51.09
13-2018  10-17-18 37.02
14-2018  12-5-18  96.02
01-2019  3-6-19   T.S.O. IV
05-19    6-19-19  51.09
09-19    10-16-19 37.02
01-2020  3-18-20  T.S.O. II
04-2020  10-21-20 37.02
05-2020  10-21-20 51.09
03-2021  5-5-21   71.06
04-2021  5-19-21  110.26
07-2021  6-16-21  T.S.O. II
08-2021  9-1-21   32.21
10-2021  9-1-21   35.11
11-2021  10-6-21  51.09
12-2021  10-6-21  37.02
13-2021  10-6-21  37.02
                  70.01,
                  71.05,
                  72.03,
01-2022  2-2-22   72.10,
                  Ch. 74, Schs. I,
                  II,
                  Ch. 75, Sch. I
                  92.02  -
07-2022  10-5-22  92.05 ,
                  92.23
08-2022  10-5-22  150.02
09-2022  10-5-22  Ch. 74, Sch. III
10-2022  10-5-22  37.02
12-2022  12-21-22 37.02
01-2023  2-1-23   Ch. 75, Sch. I
03-2023  5-3-23   92.03
04-2023  6-21-23  96.02
09-2023  9-6-23   T.S.O. II
10-2023  9-6-22   T.S.O. II
11-2023  10-4-23  37.02
12-2023  11-4-23  51.09
01-2024  3-6-24   110.17
02-2024  3-6-24   112.99
08-2024  9-4-24   153.01
                  38.01 -
                  38.04,
                  38.10 -
                  38.26,
09-2024  8-21-24  38.40 -
                  38.45,
                  38.60,
                  38.80 -
                  38.93,
                  38.99
10-2024  8-21-24  T.S.O. II
                  70.01,
                  71,05,
                  72.03,
12-2024  11-6-24  72.10, Ch. 74, Schs.
                  I -
                  III,
                  Ch. 75, Sch. I
13-2024  12-4-24  T.S.O. II
01-2025  2-19-25  T.S.O. III
02-2025  3-5-25   124.01,
                  124.02
03-2025  3-5-25   T.S.O. II
                  120.01 -
04-2025  6-4-25   120.03,
                  120.99
05-2025  6-4-25   31.02
                 
